[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lam)  [Next](dan) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Ezekiel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came about in the thirtieth year, in
the fourth month, on the fifth day of the month, while I was by the
river Chebar among those who had been made prisoners, that the heavens
were made open and I saw visions of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> On the fifth day of the month, in the fifth
year after King Jehoiachin had been made a prisoner,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The word of the Lord came to me, Ezekiel
the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldaeans by the river
Chebar; and the hand of the Lord was on me there.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And, looking, I saw a storm-wind coming out
of the north, a great cloud with flames of fire coming after one
another, and a bright light shining round about it and in the heart of
it was something coloured like electrum.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And in the heart of it were the forms of
four living beings. And this was what they were like; they had the form
of a man.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And every one had four faces, and every one
of them had four wings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And their feet were straight feet; and the
under sides of their feet were like the feet of oxen; and they were
shining like polished brass.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And they had the hands of a man under their
wings; the four of them had faces on their four sides.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> They went without turning, every one went
straight forward.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> As for the form of their faces, they had
the face of a man, and the four of them had the face of a lion on the
right side, and the four of them had the face of an ox on the left side,
and the four of them had the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And their wings were separate at the top;
two of the wings of every one were joined one to another, and two were
covering their bodies.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Every one of them went straight forward;
wherever the spirit was to go they went; they went on without turning.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And between the living beings it was like
burning coals of fire, as if flames were going one after the other
between the living beings; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire
went thunder-flames.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the living beings went out and came
back as quickly as a thunder-flame.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Now while I was looking at the four
living beings, I saw one wheel on the earth, by the side of the living
beings, for the four of them.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The form of the wheels and their work was
like a beryl; the four of them had the same form and design, and they
were like a wheel inside a wheel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The four of them went straight forward
without turning to one side.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I saw that they had edges, and their
edges, even of the four, were full of eyes round about.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when the living beings went on, the
wheels went by their side; and when the living beings were lifted up
from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wherever the spirit was to go they went;
and the wheels were lifted up by their side: for the spirit of the
living beings was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> When these went on, the others went; and
when these came to rest, the others came to rest; and when these were
lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up by their side: for
the spirit of the living beings was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And over the heads of the living beings
there was the form of an arch, looking like ice, stretched out over
their heads on high.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Under the arch their wings were straight,
one stretched out to another: every one had two wings covering their
bodies on this side and two covering their bodies on that side.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And when they went, the sound of their
wings was like the sound of great waters to my ears, like the voice of
the Ruler of all, a sound like the rushing of an army: when they came to
rest they let down their wings.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And there was a voice from the top of the
arch which was over their heads: when they came to rest they let down
their wings.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And on the top of the arch which was over
their heads was the form of a king's seat, like a sapphire stone; and on
the form of the seat was the form of a man seated on it on high.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And I saw it coloured like electrum, with
the look of fire in it and round it, going up from what seemed to be the
middle of his body; and going down from what seemed to be the middle of
his body I saw what was like fire, and there was a bright light shining
round him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Like the bow in the cloud on a day of
rain, so was the light shining round him. And this is what the glory of
the Lord was like. And when I saw it I went down on my face, and the
voice of one talking came to my ears.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And he said to me, Son of man, get up on
your feet, so that I may say words to you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And at his words the spirit came into me
and put me on my feet; and his voice came to my ears.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And he said to me, Son of man, I am sending
you to the children of Israel, to an uncontrolled nation which has gone
against me: they and their fathers have been sinners against me even to
this very day.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the children are hard and
stiff-hearted; I am sending you to them: and you are to say to them,
These are the words of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And they, if they give ear to you or if
they do not give ear (for they are an uncontrolled people), will see
that there has been a prophet among them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And you, son of man, have no fear of them
or of their words, even if sharp thorns are round you and you are living
among scorpions: have no fear of their words and do not be overcome by
their looks, for they are an uncontrolled people.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And you are to give them my words, if they
give ear to you or if they do not: for they are uncontrolled.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But you, son of man, give ear to what I say
to you, and do not be uncontrolled like that uncontrolled people: let
your mouth be open and take what I give you.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And looking, I saw a hand stretched out to
me, and I saw the roll of a book in it;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he put it open before me, and it had
writing on the front and on the back; words of grief and sorrow and
trouble were recorded in it.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he said to me, Son of man, take this
roll for your food, and go and say my words to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And, on my opening my mouth, he made me
take the roll as food.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he said to me, Son of man, let your
stomach make a meal of it and let your inside be full of this roll which
I am giving you. Then I took it, and it was sweet as honey in my mouth.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he said to me, Son of man, go now to
the children of Israel, and say my words to them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For you are not sent to a people whose talk
is strange and whose language is hard, but to the children of Israel;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Not to a number of peoples whose talk is
strange and whose language is hard and whose words are not clear to you.
Truly, if I sent you to them they would give ear to you.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the children of Israel will not give
ear to you; for they have no mind to give ear to me: for all the
children of Israel have a hard brow and a stiff heart.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> See, I have made your face hard against
their faces, and your brow hard against their brows.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Like a diamond harder than rock I have made
your brow: have no fear of them and do not be overcome by their looks,
for they are an uncontrolled people.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, take into
your heart all my words which I am about to say to you, and let your
ears be open to them.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And go now to those who have been taken
away as prisoners, to the children of your people, and say to them, This
is what the Lord has said; if they give ear or if they do not.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Then I was lifted up by the wind, and at
my back the sound of a great rushing came to my ears when the glory of
the Lord was lifted up from his place.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And there was the sound of the wings of
the living beings touching one another, and the sound of the wheels at
their side, the sound of a great rushing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the wind, lifting me up, took me
away: and I went in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of the Lord was
strong on me.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Then I came to those who had been taken
away as prisoners, who were at Telabib by the river Chebar, and I was
seated among them full of wonder for seven days.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And at the end of seven days, the word of
the Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Son of man, I have made you a watchman
for the children of Israel: so give ear to the word of my mouth, and
give them word from me of their danger.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> When I say to the evil-doer, Death will
certainly be your fate; and you give him no word of it and say nothing
to make clear to the evil-doer the danger of his evil way, so that he
may be safe; that same evil man will come to death in his evil-doing;
but I will make you responsible for his blood.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But if you give the evil-doer word of his
danger, and he is not turned from his sin or from his evil way, death
will overtake him in his evil-doing; but your life will be safe.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Again, when an upright man, turning away
from his righteousness, does evil, and I put a cause of falling in his
way, death will overtake him: because you have given him no word of his
danger, death will overtake him in his evil-doing, and there will be no
memory of the upright acts which he has done; but I will make you
responsible for his blood.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But if you say to the upright man that he
is not to do evil, he will certainly keep his life because he took note
of your word; and your life will be safe.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the hand of the Lord was on me there;
and he said, Get up and go out into the valley and there I will have
talk with you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then I got up and went out into the
valley; and I saw the glory of the Lord resting there as I had seen it
by the river Chebar; and I went down on my face.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then the spirit came into me and put me
on my feet; and he had talk with me and said to me, Go and keep yourself
shut up inside your house.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But see, O son of man, I will put bands
on you, prisoning you in them, and you will not go out among them:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And I will make your tongue fixed to the
roof of your mouth, so that you have no voice and may not make protests
to them: for they are an uncontrolled people.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> But when I have talk with you I will make
your mouth open, and you are to say to them, This is what the Lord has
said: Let the hearer give ear; and as for him who will not, let him keep
his ears shut: for they are an uncontrolled people.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And you, son of man, take a back and put it
before you and on it make a picture of a town, even Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And make an attack on it, shutting it in,
building strong places against it, and making high an earthwork against
it; and put up tents against it, placing engines all round it for
smashing down its walls.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And take a flat iron plate, and put it for
a wall of iron between you and the town: and let your face be turned to
it, and it will be shut in and you will make an attack on it. This will
be a sign to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then, stretching yourself out on your left
side, take the sin of the children of Israel on yourself: for as long as
you are stretched out, so long will the sin of the children of Israel be
on you.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For I have had the years of their sin
measured for you by a number of days, even three hundred and ninety
days: and you will take on yourself the sin of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And when these days are ended, turning on
your right side, you are to take on yourself the sin of the children of
Judah: forty days, a day for a year, I have had it fixed for you.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And let your face be turned to where
Jerusalem is shut in, with your arm uncovered, and be a prophet against
it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And see, I will put bands on you; and you
will be stretched out without turning from one side to the other till
the days of your attack are ended.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And take for yourself wheat and barley and
different sorts of grain, and put them in one vessel and make bread for
yourself from them; all the days when you are stretched on your side it
will be your food.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And you are to take your food by weight,
twenty shekels a day: you are to take it at regular times.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And you are to take water by measure, the
sixth part of a hin: you are to take it at regular times.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And let your food be barley cakes,
cooking it before their eyes with the waste which comes out of a man.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And the Lord said, Even so the children
of Israel will have unclean bread for their food among the nations where
I am driving them.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then I said, Ah, Lord! see, my soul has
never been unclean, and I have never taken as my food anything which has
come to a natural death or has been broken by beasts, from the time when
I was young even till now; no disgusting flesh has ever come into my
mouth.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then he said to me, See, I have given you
cow's waste in place of man's waste, and you will make your bread ready
on it.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he said to me, Son of man, see, I
will take away from Jerusalem her necessary bread: they will take their
bread by weight and with care, measuring out their drinking-water with
fear and wonder:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> So that they may be in need of bread and
water and be wondering at one another, wasting away in their sin.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And you, son of man, take a sharp sword,
using it like a haircutter's blade, and making it go over your head and
the hair of your chin: and take scales for separating the hair by
weight.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> You are to have a third part burned with
fire inside the town, when the days of the attack are ended; and a third
part you are to take and give blows with the sword round about it; and
give a third part for the wind to take away, and let loose a sword after
them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And take from them a small number of hairs,
folding them in your skirts.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And again take some of these and put them
in the fire, burning them up in the fire; and say to all the children of
Israel,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> This is what the Lord has said: This is
Jerusalem: I have put her among the nations, and countries are round her
on every side;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And she has gone against my orders by doing
evil more than the nations, and against my rules more than the countries
round her: for they have given up my orders, and as for my rules, they
have not gone in the way of them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For this cause the Lord has said: Because
you have been more uncontrolled than the nations round about you, and
have not been guided by my rules or kept my orders, but have kept the
orders of the nations round about you;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For this cause the Lord has said: See, I,
even I, am against you; and I will be judging among you before the eyes
of the nations.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And I will do in you what I have not done
and will not do again, because of all your disgusting ways.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For this cause fathers will take their
sons for food among you, and sons will make a meal of their fathers; and
I will be judge among you, and all the rest of you I will send away to
every wind.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> For this cause, by my life, says the
Lord, because you have made my holy place unclean with all your hated
things and all your disgusting ways, you will become disgusting to me;
my eye will have no mercy and I will have no pity.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> A third of you will come to death from
disease, wasting away among you through need of food; a third will be
put to the sword round about you; and a third I will send away to every
wind, letting loose a sword after them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> So my wrath will be complete and my
passion will come to rest on them; and they will be certain that I the
Lord have given the word of decision, when my wrath against them is
complete.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I will make you a waste and a name of
shame among the nations round about you, in the eyes of everyone who
goes by.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And you will be a name of shame and a
cause of bitter words, an example and a wonder to the nations round
about you, when I give effect to my judging among you in wrath and in
passion and in burning protests: I the Lord have said it:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> When I send on you the evil arrows of
disease, causing destruction, which I will send to put an end to you;
and, further, I will take away your necessary food.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And I will send on you need of food and
evil beasts, and they will be a cause of loss to you; and disease and
violent death will go through you; and I will send the sword on you: I
the Lord have said it.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Son of man, let your face be turned to the
mountains of Israel, and be a prophet to them, and say,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> You mountains of Israel, give ear to the
words of the Lord: this is what the Lord has said to the mountains and
the hills, to the waterways and the valleys: See, I, even I, am sending
on you a sword for the destruction of your high places.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And your altars will be made waste, and
your sun-images will be broken: and I will have your dead men placed
before your images.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And I will put the dead bodies of the
children of Israel in front of their images, sending your bones in all
directions about your altars.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In all your living-places the towns will
become broken walls, and the high places made waste; so that your altars
may be broken down and made waste, and your images broken and ended, and
so that your sun-images may be cut down and your works rubbed out.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the dead will be falling down among
you, and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But still, I will keep a small band safe
from the sword among the nations, when you are sent wandering among the
countries.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And those of you who are kept safe will
have me in mind among the nations where they have been taken away as
prisoners, how I sent punishment on their hearts which were untrue to
me, and on their eyes which were turned to their false gods: and they
will be full of hate for themselves because of the evil things which
they have done in all their disgusting ways.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they will be certain that I am the
Lord: not for nothing did I say that I would do this evil to them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> This is what the Lord has said: Give
blows with your hand, stamping with your foot, and say, O sorrow!
because of all the evil and disgusting ways of the children of Israel:
for death will overtake them by the sword and through need of food and
by disease.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He who is far away will come to his death
by disease; he who is near will be put to the sword; he who is shut up
will come to his death through need of food; and I will give full effect
to my passion against them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And you will be certain that I am the
Lord, when their dead men are stretched among their images round about
their altars on every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and
under every branching tree, and under every thick oak-tree, the places
where they made sweet smells to all their images.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And my hand will be stretched out against
them, making the land waste and unpeopled, from the waste land to
Riblah, through all their living-places: and they will be certain that I
am the Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And you, son of man, say, This is what the
Lord has said to the land of Israel: An end has come, the end has come
on the four quarters of the land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Now the end has come on you, and I will
send my wrath on you, judging you for your ways, I will send punishment
on you for all your disgusting acts.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> My eye will not have mercy on you, and I
will have no pity: but I will send the punishment of your ways on you,
and your disgusting works will be among you: and you will be certain
that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> This is what the Lord has said: An evil,
even one evil; see, it is coming.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> An end has come, the end has come; see, it
is coming on you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The crowning time has come on you, O people
of the land: the time has come, the day is near; the day will not be
slow in coming, it will not keep back.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now, in a little time, I will let loose my
passion on you, and give full effect to my wrath against you, judging
you for your ways, and sending punishment on you for all your disgusting
works.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> My eye will not have mercy, and I will have
no pity: I will send on you the punishment of your ways, and your
disgusting works will be among you; and you will see that I am the Lord
who gives punishment.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> See, the day; see, it is coming: the
crowning time has gone out; the twisted way is flowering, pride has put
out buds.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Violent behaviour has been lifted up into
a rod of evil; it will not be slow in coming, it will not keep back.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The time has come, the day is near: let
not him who gives a price for goods be glad, or him who gets the price
have sorrow:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For the trader will not go back to the
things for which he had his price, even while he is still living:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And he who has given a price for goods
will not get them, for my wrath is on all of them.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Outside is the sword, and inside disease
and need of food: he who is in the open country will be put to the
sword; he who is in the town will come to his end through need of food
and disease.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And those of them who get away safely
will go and be in the secret places like the doves of the valleys, all
of them will come to death, every one in his sin.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> All hands will be feeble and all knees
without strength, like water.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And they will put haircloth round them,
and deep fear will be covering them; and shame will be on all faces, and
the hair gone from all their heads.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> They will put out their silver into the
streets, and their gold will be as an unclean thing; their silver and
their gold will not be able to keep them safe in the day of the wrath of
the Lord; they will not get their desire or have food for their need:
because it has been the cause of their falling into sin.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> As for their beautiful ornament, they had
put it on high, and had made the images of their disgusting and hated
things in it: for this cause I have made it an unclean thing to them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I will give it into the hands of men
from strange lands who will take it by force, and to the evil-doers of
the earth to have for themselves; and they will make it unholy.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And my face will be turned away from
them, and they will make my secret place unholy: violent men will go
into it and make it unholy.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Make the chain: for the land is full of
crimes of blood, and the town is full of violent acts.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> For this reason I will send the worst of
the nations and they will take their houses for themselves: I will make
the pride of their strength come to an end; and their holy places will
be made unclean.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Shaking fear is coming; and they will be
looking for peace, and there will be no peace.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Destruction will come on destruction, and
one story after another; and the vision of the prophet will be shamed,
and knowledge of the law will come to an end among the priests, and
wisdom among the old.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The king will give himself up to sorrow,
and the ruler will be clothed with wonder, and the hands of the people
of the land will be troubled: I will give them punishment for their
ways, judging them as it is right for them to be judged; and they will
be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now in the sixth year, in the sixth month,
on the fifth day of the month, when I was in my house and the
responsible men of Judah were seated before me, the hand of the Lord
came on me there.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And looking, I saw a form like fire; from
the middle of his body and down there was fire: and up from the middle
of his body a sort of shining, like electrum.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he put out the form of a hand and took
me by the hair of my head; and the wind, lifting me up between the earth
and the heaven, took me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the way
into the inner door facing to the north; where was the seat of the image
of envy.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And I saw the glory of the Lord there, as
in the vision which I saw in the valley.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, now let
your eyes be lifted up in the direction of the north; and on looking in
the direction of the north, to the north of the doorway of the altar, I
saw this image of envy by the way in.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he said to me, Son of man, do you see
what they are doing? even the very disgusting things which the children
of Israel are doing here, causing me to go far away from my holy place?
but you will see other most disgusting things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he took me to the door of the open
place; and looking, I saw a hole in the wall.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And he said to me, Son of man, make a hole
in the wall: and after making a hole in the wall I saw a door.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he said to me, Go in and see the evil
and disgusting things which they are doing here.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So I went in and saw; and there every
sort of living thing which goes flat on the earth, and unclean beasts,
and all the images of the children of Israel, were pictured round about
on the wall.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And before them seventy of the
responsible men of the children of Israel had taken their places, every
man with a vessel for burning perfumes in his hand, and in the middle of
them was Jaazaniah, the son of Shaphan; and a cloud of smoke went up
from the burning perfume.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he said to me, Son of man, have you
seen what the responsible men of the children of Israel do in the dark,
every man in his room of pictured images? for they say, The Lord does
not see us; the Lord has gone away from the land.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then he said to me, You will see even
more disgusting things which they do.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Then he took me to the door of the way
into the Lord's house looking to the north; and there women were seated
weeping for Tammuz.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then he said to me, Have you seen this, O
son of man? you will see even more disgusting things than these.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And he took me into the inner square of
the Lord's house, and at the door of the Temple of the Lord, between the
covered way and the altar, there were about twenty-five men with their
backs turned to the Temple of the Lord and their faces turned to the
east; and they were worshipping the sun, turning to the east.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then he said to me, Have you seen this, O
son of man? is it a small thing to the children of Judah that they do
the disgusting things which they are doing here? for they have made the
land full of violent behaviour, making me angry again and again: and
see, they put the branch to my nose.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For this reason I will let loose my
wrath: my eye will not have mercy, and I will have no pity.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then crying out in my hearing in a loud
voice, he said, Let the overseers of the town come near, every man
armed.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And six men came from the way of the higher
doorway looking to the north, every man with his axe in his hand: and
one man among them was clothed in linen, with a writer's inkpot at his
side. And they went in and took their places by the brass altar.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the glory of the God of Israel had gone
up from the winged ones on which it was resting, to the doorstep of the
house. And crying out to the man clothed in linen who had the writer's
inkpot at his side,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> The Lord said to him, Go through the town,
through the middle of Jerusalem, and put a mark on the brows of the men
who are sorrowing and crying for all the disgusting things which are
done in it.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And to these he said in my hearing, Go
through the town after him using your axes: do not let your eyes have
mercy, and have no pity:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Give up to destruction old men and young
men and virgins, little children and women: but do not come near any man
who has the mark on him: and make a start at my holy place. So they made
a start with the old men who were before the house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he said to them, Make the house
unclean, make the open places full of dead: go forward and send
destruction on the town.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Now while they were doing so, and I was
untouched, I went down on my face, and crying out, I said, Ah, Lord!
will you give all the rest of Israel to destruction in letting loose
your wrath on Jerusalem?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Then he said to me, The sin of the children
of Israel and Judah is very, very great, and the land is full of blood
and the town full of evil ways: for they say, The Lord has gone away
from the land, and the Lord does not see.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And as for me, my eye will not have
mercy, and I will have no pity, but I will send the punishment of their
ways on their heads.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Then the man clothed in linen, who had
the inkpot at his side, came back and said, I have done what you gave me
orders to do.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then looking, I saw that on the arch
which was over the head of the winged ones there was seen over them what
seemed like a sapphire stone, having the form of a king's seat.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he said to the man clothed in linen,
Go in between the wheels, under the winged ones, and get your two hands
full of burning coals from between the winged ones and send them in a
shower over the town. And he went in before my eyes.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Now the winged ones were stationed on the
right side of the house when the man went in; and the inner square was
full of the cloud.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And the glory of the Lord went up from
the winged ones and came to rest over the doorstep of the house; and the
house was full of the cloud and the open square was full of the shining
of the Lord's glory.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the sound of the wings of the winged
ones was clear even in the outer square, like the voice of the Ruler of
all.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And when he gave orders to the man
clothed in linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from
between the winged ones, then he went in and took his place at the side
of a wheel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And stretching out his hand to the fire
which was between the winged ones, he took some of it and went out.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And I saw the form of a man's hands among
the winged ones under their wings.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And looking, I saw four wheels by the
side of the winged ones, one wheel by the side of a winged one and
another wheel by the side of another: and the wheels were like the
colour of a beryl stone to the eye.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> In form the four of them were all the
same, they seemed like a wheel inside a wheel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> When they were moving, they went on
their four sides without turning; they went after the head in the
direction in which it was looking; they went without turning.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the edges of the four wheels were
full of eyes round about.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> As for the wheels, they were named in
my hearing, the circling wheels.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And every one had four faces: the first
face was the face of a winged one, and the second was the face of a man,
and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the winged ones went up on high:
this is the living being which I saw by the river Chebar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And when the winged ones went, the
wheels went by their side: and when their wings were lifted to take them
up from the earth, the wheels were not turned from their side.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> When they were at rest in their place,
these were at rest; when they were lifted up, these went up with them:
for the spirit of life was in them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then the glory of the Lord went out
from the doorstep of the house, and came to rest over the winged ones.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the winged ones, lifting up their
wings, went up from the earth before my eyes, with the wheels by their
side: and they came to rest at the east doorway of the Lord's house; and
the glory of the God of Israel was over them on high.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> This is the living being which I saw
under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and it was clear to me that
they were the winged ones.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Every one had four faces and every one
had four wings; and hands like a man's hands were under their wings.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> As for the form of their faces, they
were the faces whose form I saw by the river Chebar; when they went,
every one of them went straight forward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the wind, lifting me up, took me to
the east doorway of the Lord's house, looking to the east: and at the
door I saw twenty-five men; and among them I saw Jaazaniah, the son of
Azzur, and Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah, rulers of the people.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, these are
the men who are designing evil, who are teaching evil ways in this town:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Who say, This is not the time for
building houses: this town is the cooking-pot and we are the flesh.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For this cause be a prophet against them,
be a prophet, O son of man.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the spirit of the Lord came on me,
and he said to me, Say, These are the words of the Lord: This is what
you have said, O children of Israel; what comes into your mind is clear
to me.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> You have made great the number of your
dead in this town, you have made its streets full of dead men.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For this reason the Lord has said: Your
dead whom you have put down in its streets, they are the flesh, and this
town is the cooking-pot: but I will make you come out from inside it.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> You have been fearing the sword, and I
will send the sword on you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will make you come out from inside the
town and will give you up into the hands of men from other lands, and
will be judge among you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> You will come to your death by the
sword; and I will be your judge in the land of Israel; and you will be
certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> This town will not be your cooking-pot,
and you will not be the flesh inside it; I will be your judge at the
limit of the land of Israel;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And you will be certain that I am the
Lord: for you have not been guided by my rules or given effect to my
orders, but you have been living by the orders of the nations round
about you.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Now while I was saying these things,
death came to Pelatiah, the son of Benaiah. Then falling down on my face
and crying out with a loud voice, I said, Ah, Lord! will you put an end
to all the rest of Israel?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Son of man, your countrymen, your
relations, and all the children of Israel, all of them, are those to
whom the people of Jerusalem have said, Go far from the Lord; this land
is given to us for a heritage:

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For this reason say, This is what the
Lord has said: Though I have had them moved far off among the nations,
and though I have sent them wandering among the countries, still I have
been a safe place for them for a little time in the countries where they
have come.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Then say, This is what the Lord has
said: I will get you together from the peoples, and make you come out of
the countries where you have been sent in flight, and I will give you
the land of Israel.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they will come there, and take away
all the hated and disgusting things from it.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I will give them a new heart, and I
will put a new spirit in them; and I will take the heart of stone out of
their flesh and give them a heart of flesh:

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> So that they may be guided by my rules
and keep my orders and do them: and they will be to me a people, and I
will be to them a God.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But as for those whose heart goes after
their hated and disgusting things, I will send on their heads the
punishment of their ways, says the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then the wings of the winged ones were
lifted up, and the wheels were by their side; and the glory of the God
of Israel was over them on high.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And the glory of the Lord went up from
inside the town, and came to rest on the mountain on the east side of
the town.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And the wind, lifting me up, took me in
the visions of God into Chaldaea, to those who had been taken away as
prisoners. So the vision which I had seen went away from me.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then I gave an account to those who had
been taken prisoners of all the things which the Lord had made me see.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Son of man, you are living among an
uncontrolled people, who have eyes to see but see not, and ears for
hearing but they do not give ear; for they are an uncontrolled people.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And you, O son of man, by day, before
their eyes, get ready the vessels of one who is taken away, and go away
from your place to another place before their eyes: it may be that they
will see, though they are an uncontrolled people.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> By day, before their eyes, take out your
vessels like those of one who is taken away: and go out in the evening
before their eyes, like those who are taken away as prisoners.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Make a hole in the wall, before their
eyes, and go out through it.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And before their eyes, take your goods on
your back and go out in the dark; go with your face covered: for I have
made you a sign to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And I did as I was ordered: I took out my
vessels by day, like those of one who is taken away, and in the evening
I made a hole through the wall with a tent-pin; and in the dark I went
out, taking my things on my back before their eyes.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And in the morning the word of the Lord
came to me, saying,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Son of man, has not Israel, the
uncontrolled people, said to you, What are you doing?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> You are to say to them, This is what
the Lord has said: This word has to do with the ruler in Jerusalem and
all the children of Israel in it.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Say, I am your sign: as I have done, so
will it be done to them: they will go away as prisoners.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And the ruler who is among them will
take his goods on his back in the dark and go out: he will make a hole
in the wall through which to go out: he will have his face covered so
that he may not be seen.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And my net will be stretched out on
him, and he will be taken in my cords: and I will take him to Babylon to
the land of the Chaldaeans; but he will not see it, and there death will
come to him.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And all his helpers round about him and
all his armies I will send in flight to every wind; and I will let loose
a sword after them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they will be certain that I am the
Lord, when I send them in flight among the nations, driving them out
through the countries.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But a small number of them I will keep
from the sword, from the need of food, and from disease, so that they
may make clear all their disgusting ways among the nations where they
come; and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Son of man, take your food with shaking
fear, and your water with trouble and care;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And say to the people of the land, This
is what the Lord has said about the people of Jerusalem and the land of
Israel: They will take their food with care and their drink with wonder,
so that all the wealth of their land may be taken from it because of the
violent ways of the people living in it.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And the peopled towns will be made
waste, and the land will become a wonder; and you will be certain that I
am the Lord.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Son of man, what is this saying which
you have about the land of Israel, The time is long and every vision
comes to nothing?

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For this cause say to them, This is
what the Lord has said: I have made this saying come to an end, and it
will no longer be used as a common saying in Israel; but say to them,
The days are near, and the effect of every vision.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> For there will be no more false visions
or smooth use of secret arts in Israel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For I am the Lord; I will say the word
and what I say I will do; it will not be put off: for in your days, O
uncontrolled people, I will say the word and do it, says the Lord.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Again the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Son of man, see, the children of Israel
say, The vision which he sees is for the days which are a long way off,
and his words are of times still far away.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Say to them then, This is what the Lord
has said: Not one of my words will be put off any longer, but what I say
I will do, says the Lord.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Son of man, be a prophet against the
prophets of Israel, and say to those prophets whose words are the
invention of their hearts, Give ear to the word of the Lord;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> This is what the Lord has said: A curse
on the foolish prophets who go after the spirit which is in them and
have seen nothing!

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> O Israel, your prophets have been like
jackals in the waste places.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> You have not gone up into the broken
places or made up the wall for the children of Israel to take your place
in the fight in the day of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> They have seen visions without substance
and made use of secret arts, who say, The Lord has said; and the Lord
has not sent them: hoping that the word would have effect.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Have you not seen a vision without
substance and have you not falsely made use of secret arts, when you
say, The Lord has said; though I have said nothing?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> So this is what the Lord has said:
Because your words are without substance and your visions are false,
see, I am against you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And my hand will be against the prophets
who see visions without substance and who make false use of secret arts:
they will not be in the secret of my people, and they will not be
recorded in the list of the children of Israel, and they will not come
into the land of Israel; and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Because, even because they have been
guiding my people into error, saying, Peace; when there is no peace; and
in the building of a division wall they put whitewash on it:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Say to those who put whitewash on it,
There will be an overflowing shower; and you, O ice-drops, will come
raining down; and it will be broken in two by the storm-wind.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And when the wall has come down, will
they not say to you, Where is the whitewash which you put on it?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> For this reason, the Lord has said: I
will have it broken in two by a storm-wind in my passion; and there will
be an overflowing shower in my wrath, and you, O ice-drops, will come
raining angrily down.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> So I will let the wall, which you were
covering with whitewash, be broken down; I will have it levelled to the
earth so that its base is uncovered: it will come down, and destruction
will come on you with it; and it will be clear to you that I am the
Lord.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> So I will let loose my passion on the
wall in full measure, and on those who put whitewash on it; and I will
say to you, Where is the wall, and where are those who put whitewash on
it?

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Even the prophets of Israel who say
words to Jerusalem, who see visions of peace for her when there is no
peace, says the Lord.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And you, son of man, let your face be
turned against the daughters of your people, who are acting the part of
prophets at their pleasure; be a prophet against them, and say,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> This is what the Lord has said: A curse
is on the women who are stitching bands on all arms and putting veils on
the heads of those of every size, so that they may go after souls! Will
you go after the souls of my people and keep yourselves safe from death?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And you have put me to shame among my
people for a little barley and some bits of bread, sending death on
souls for whom there is no cause of death, and keeping those souls
living who have no right to life, by the false words you say to my
people who give ear to what is false.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> For this cause the Lord has said: See,
I am against your bands with which you go after souls, and I will
violently take them off their arms; and I will let loose the souls, even
the souls whom you go after freely.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And I will have your veils violently
parted in two, and will make my people free from your hands, and they
will no longer be in your power for you to go after them; and you will
be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Because with your false words you have
given pain to the heart of the upright man when I had not made him sad;
in order to make strong the hands of the evil-doer so that he may not be
turned from his evil way and get life:

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> For this cause you will see no more
foolish visions or make false use of secret arts: and I will make my
people free from your power; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then certain of the responsible men of
Israel came to me and took their seats before me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Son of man, these men have taken their
false gods into their hearts and put before their faces the sin which is
the cause of their fall: am I to give ear when they come to me for
directions?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For this cause say to them, These are the
words of the Lord: Every man of Israel who has taken his false god into
his heart, and put before his face the sin which is the cause of his
fall, and comes to the prophet; I the Lord will give him an answer by
myself in agreement with the number of his false gods;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> So as to take the children of Israel in
the thoughts of their hearts, because they have become strange to me
through their false gods.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> For this cause say to the children of
Israel, These are the words of the Lord: Come back and give up your
false gods and let your faces be turned from your disgusting things.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> When any one of the men of Israel, or of
those from other lands who are living in Israel, who has become strange
to me, and takes his false gods into his heart, and puts before his face
the sin which is the cause of his fall, comes to the prophet to get
directions from me; I the Lord will give him an answer by myself:

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And my face will be turned against that
man, and I will make him a sign and a common saying, cutting him off
from among my people; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And if the prophet, tricked by deceit,
says anything, it is I the Lord by whom he has been tricked, and I will
put out my hand against him, and he will be cut off from among my people
Israel.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And the punishment of their sin will be
on them: the sin of the prophet will be the same as the sin of him who
goes to him for directions;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> So that the children of Israel may no
longer go wandering away from me, or make themselves unclean with all
their wrongdoing; but they will be my people, and I will be their God,
says the Lord.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Son of man, when a land, sinning
against me, does wrong, and my hand is stretched out against it, and the
support of its bread is broken, and I make it short of food, cutting off
man and beast from it:

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Even if these three men, Noah, Daniel,
and Job, were in it, only themselves would they keep safe by their
righteousness, says the Lord.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Or if I send evil beasts through the
land causing destruction and making it waste, so that no man may go
through because of the beasts:

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Even if these three men were in it, by
my life, says the Lord, they would not keep safe their sons or
daughters, but only themselves, and the land would be made waste.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Or if I send a sword against that land,
and say, Sword, go through the land, cutting off from it man and beast:

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Even if these three men were in it, by
my life, says the Lord, they would not keep safe their sons or
daughters, but only themselves.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Or if I send disease into that land,
letting loose my wrath on it in blood, cutting off from it man and
beast:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Even if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in
it, by my life, says the Lord, they would not keep son or daughter safe;
only themselves would they keep safe through their righteousness.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For this is what the Lord has said: How
much more when I send my four bitter punishments on Jerusalem, the sword
and need of food and evil beasts and disease, cutting off from it man
and beast?

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But truly, there will still be a small
band who will be safe, even sons and daughters: and they will come out
to you, and you will see their ways and their doings: and you will be
comforted about the evil which I have sent on Jerusalem, even about
everything I have sent on it.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> They will give you comfort when you see
their ways and their doings: and you will be certain that not for
nothing have I done all the things I have done in it, says the Lord.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Son of man, what is the vine-tree more
than any branching tree which is among the trees of the woods?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Will its wood be used for any work? do
men make of it a pin for hanging any vessel on?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> See, it is put into the fire for burning:
the fire has made a meal of its two ends and the middle part of it is
burned; is it good for any work?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Truly, before it was cut down, it was not
used for any purpose: how much less, when the fire has made a meal of it
and it is burned, will it be made into anything?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For this cause the Lord has said: Like
the vine-tree among the trees of the woods which I have given to the
fire for burning, so will I give the people of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And my face will be turned against them;
and though they have come out of the fire they will be burned up by it;
and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord when my face is turned
against them.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And I will make the land a waste because
they have done evil, says the Lord.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Son of man, make clear to Jerusalem her
disgusting ways,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And say, This is what the Lord has said
to Jerusalem: Your start and your birth was from the land of the
Canaanite; an Amorite was your father and your mother was a Hittite.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> As for your birth, on the day of your
birth your cord was not cut and you were not washed in water to make you
clean; you were not salted or folded in linen bands.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> No eye had pity on you to do any of these
things to you or to be kind to you; but you were put out into the open
country, because your life was hated at the time of your birth.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And when I went past you and saw you
stretched out in your blood, I said to you, Though you are stretched out
in your blood, have life;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And be increased in number like the buds
of the field; and you were increased and became great, and you came to
the time of love: your breasts were formed and your hair was long; but
you were uncovered and without clothing.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Now when I went past you, looking at you,
I saw that your time was the time of love; and I put my skirts over you,
covering your unclothed body: and I gave you my oath and made an
agreement with you, says the Lord, and you became mine.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then I had you washed with water, washing
away all your blood and rubbing you with oil.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And I had you clothed with needlework,
and put leather shoes on your feet, folding fair linen about you and
covering you with silk.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And I made you fair with ornaments and
put jewels on your hands and a chain on your neck.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And I put a ring in your nose and
ear-rings in your ears and a beautiful crown on your head.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> So you were made beautiful with gold
and silver; and your clothing was of the best linen and silk and
needlework; your food was the best meal and honey and oil: and you were
very beautiful.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> You were so beautiful that the story of
you went out into all nations; you were completely beautiful because of
my glory which I had put on you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But you put your faith in the fact that
you were beautiful, acting like a loose woman because you were widely
talked of, and offering your cheap love to everyone who went by, whoever
it might be.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And you took your robes and made high
places for yourself ornamented with every colour, acting like a loose
woman on them, without shame or fear.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And you took the fair jewels, my silver
and gold which I had given to you, and made for yourself male images,
acting like a loose woman with them;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And you took your robes of needlework
for their clothing, and put my oil and my perfume before them.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And my bread which I gave you, the best
meal and oil and honey which I gave you for your food, you put it before
them for a sweet smell, says the Lord.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And you took your sons and your
daughters whom I had by you, offering even these to them to be their
food. Was your loose behaviour so small a thing,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> That you put my children to death and
gave them up to go through the fire to them?

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And in all your disgusting and false
behaviour you had no memory of your early days, when you were uncovered
and without clothing, stretched out in your blood.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And it came about, after all your
evil-doing, says the Lord,

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> That you made for yourself an arched
room in every open place.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> You put up your high places at the top
of every street, and made the grace of your form a disgusting thing,
opening your feet to everyone who went by, increasing your loose ways.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And you went with the Egyptians, your
neighbours, great of flesh; increasing your loose ways, moving me to
wrath.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Now, then, my hand is stretched out
against you, cutting down your fixed amount, and I have given you up to
the desire of your haters, the daughters of the Philistines who are
shamed by your loose ways.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And you went with the Assyrians,
because of your desire which was without measure; you were acting like a
loose woman with them, and still you had not enough.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And you went on in your loose ways,
even as far as the land of Chaldaea, and still you had not enough.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> How feeble is your heart, says the
Lord, seeing that you do all these things, the work of a loose and
overruling woman;

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> For you have made your arched room at
the top of every street, and your high place in every open place; though
you were not like a loose woman in getting together your payment.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> The untrue wife who takes strange
lovers in place of her husband!

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> They give payment to all loose women:
but you give rewards to your lovers, offering them payment so that they
may come to you on every side for your cheap love.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And in your loose behaviour you are
different from other women, for no one goes after you to make love to
you: and because you give payment and no payment is given to you, in
this you are different from them.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> For this cause, O loose woman, give ear
to the voice of the Lord:

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
your unclean behaviour was let loose and your body uncovered in your
loose ways with your lovers and with your disgusting images, and for the
blood of your children which you gave to them;

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> For this cause I will get together all
your lovers with whom you have taken your pleasure, and all those to
whom you have given your love, with all those who were hated by you; I
will even make them come together against you on every side, and I will
have you uncovered before them so that they may see your shame.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And you will be judged by me as women
are judged who have been untrue to their husbands and have taken life;
and I will let loose against you passion and bitter feeling.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> I will give you into their hands, and
your arched room will be overturned and your high places broken down;
they will take your clothing off you and take away your fair jewels: and
when they have done, you will be uncovered and shamed.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And they will get together a meeting
against you, stoning you with stones and wounding you with their swords.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> And they will have you burned with
fire, sending punishments on you before the eyes of great numbers of
women; and I will put an end to your loose ways, and you will no longer
give payment.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> And the heat of my wrath against you
will have an end, and my bitter feeling will be turned away from you,
and I will be quiet and will be angry no longer.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Because you have not kept in mind the
days when you were young, but have been troubling me with all these
things; for this reason I will make the punishment of your ways come on
your head, says the Lord, because you have done this evil thing in
addition to all your disgusting acts.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> See, in every common saying about you
it will be said, As the mother is, so is her daughter.

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> You are the daughter of your mother
whose soul is turned in disgust from her husband and her children; and
you are the sister of your sisters who were turned in disgust from their
husbands and their children: your mother was a Hittite and your father
an Amorite.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> Your older sister is Samaria, living at
your left hand, she and her daughters: and your younger sister, living
at your right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> Still you have not gone in their ways
or done the disgusting things which they have done; but, as if that was
only a little thing, you have gone deeper in evil than they in all your
ways.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> By my life, says the Lord, Sodom your
sister never did, she or her daughters, what you and your daughters have
done.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Truly, this was the sin of your sister
Sodom: pride, a full measure of food, and the comforts of wealth in
peace, were seen in her and her daughters, and she gave no help to the
poor or to those in need.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> They were full of pride and did what
was disgusting to me: and so I took them away as you have seen.

<span id="an_16:51">16:51</span> And Samaria has not done half your
sins; but you have made the number of your disgusting acts greater than
theirs, making your sisters seem more upright than you by all the
disgusting things which you have done.

<span id="an_16:52">16:52</span> And you yourself will be put to shame,
in that you have given the decision for your sisters; through your sins,
which are more disgusting than theirs, they are more upright than you:
truly, you will be shamed and made low, for you have made your sisters
seem upright.

<span id="an_16:53">16:53</span> And I will let their fate be changed,
the fate of Sodom and her daughters, and the fate of Samaria and her
daughters, and your fate with theirs.

<span id="an_16:54">16:54</span> So that you will be shamed and made low
because of all you have done, when I have mercy on you.

<span id="an_16:55">16:55</span> And your sisters, Sodom and her
daughters, will go back to their first condition, and Samaria and her
daughters will go back to their first condition, and you and your
daughters will go back to your first condition.

<span id="an_16:56">16:56</span> Was not your sister Sodom an oath in
your mouth in the day of your pride,

<span id="an_16:57">16:57</span> Before your shame was uncovered? Now
you have become like her a word of shame to the daughters of Edom and
all who are round about you, the daughters of the Philistines who put
shame on you round about.

<span id="an_16:58">16:58</span> The reward of your evil designs and
your disgusting ways has come on you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_16:59">16:59</span> For this is what the Lord has said: I
will do to you as you have done, you who, putting the oath on one side,
have let the agreement be broken.

<span id="an_16:60">16:60</span> But still I will keep in mind the
agreement made with you in the days when you were young, and I will make
with you an eternal agreement.

<span id="an_16:61">16:61</span> Then at the memory of your ways you
will be overcome with shame, when I take your sisters, the older and the
younger, and give them to you for daughters, but not by your agreement.

<span id="an_16:62">16:62</span> And I will make my agreement with you;
and you will be certain that I am the Lord:

<span id="an_16:63">16:63</span> So that, at the memory of these things,
you may be at a loss, never opening your mouth because of your shame;
when you have my forgiveness for all you have done, says the Lord.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Son of man, give out a dark saying, and
make a comparison for the children of Israel,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And say, This is what the Lord has said:
A great eagle with great wings, full of long feathers of different
colours, came to Lebanon, and took the top of the cedar:

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Biting off the highest of its young
branches, he took it to the land of Canaan, and put it in a town of
traders.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And he took some of the seed of the land,
planting it in fertile earth, placing it by great waters; he put it in
like a willow-tree.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And its growth went on and it became a
vine, low and widely stretching, whose branches were turned to him and
its roots were under him: so it became a vine, putting out branches and
young leaves.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And there was another eagle with great
wings and thick feathers: and now this vine, pushing out its roots to
him, sent out its branches in his direction from the bed where it was
planted, so that he might give it water.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> He had it planted in a good field by
great waters so that it might put out branches and have fruit and be a
strong vine.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Say, This is what the Lord has said: Will
it do well? will he not have its roots pulled up and its branches cut
off, so that all its young leaves may become dry and it may be pulled up
by its roots?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And if it is planted will it do well?
will it not become quite dry at the touch of the east wind, drying up in
the bed where it was planted?

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Say now to this uncontrolled people,
Are these things not clear to you? Say to them, See, the king of Babylon
came to Jerusalem and took its king and its rulers away with him to
Babylon;

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And he took one of the sons of the king
and made an agreement with him; and he put him under an oath, and took
away the great men of the land:

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> So that the kingdom might be made low
with no power of lifting itself up, but might keep his agreement to be
his servants.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But he went against his authority in
sending representatives to Egypt to get from them horses and a great
army. Will he do well? will he be safe who does such things? if the
agreement is broken will he be safe?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> By my life, says the Lord, truly in the
place of the king who made him king, whose oath he put on one side and
let his agreement with him be broken, even in Babylon he will come to
his death.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Pharaoh with his strong army and
great forces will be no help to him in the war, when they put up
earthworks and make strong walls for the cutting off of lives:

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> For he put his oath on one side in
letting the agreement be broken; and though he had given his hand to it,
he did all these things; he will not get away safe.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And so the Lord has said, By my life,
truly, for my oath which he put on one side, and my agreement which has
been broken, I will send punishment on his head.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> My net will be stretched out over him,
and he will be taken in my cords, and I will send him to Babylon, and
there I will be his judge for the wrong which he has done against me.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> All his best fighting-men will be put
to the sword, and the rest will be sent away to every wind: and you will
be certain that I the Lord have said it.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> This is what the Lord has said:
Further, I will take the highest top of the cedar and put it in the
earth; cutting off from the highest of his young branches a soft one, I
will have it planted on a high and great mountain;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> It will be planted on the high mountain
of Israel: it will put out branches and have fruit and be a fair cedar:
under it all birds of every sort will make their living-place, resting
in the shade of its branches.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And it will be clear to all the trees
of the field that I the Lord have made low the high tree and made high
the low tree, drying up the green tree and making the dry tree full of
growth; I the Lord have said it and have done it.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word of the Lord came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Why do you make use of this saying about
the land of Israel, The fathers have been tasting bitter grapes and the
children's teeth are on edge?

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> By my life, says the Lord, you will no
longer have this saying in Israel.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> See, all souls are mine; as the soul of
the father, so the soul of the son is mine: death will be the fate of
the sinner's soul.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> But if a man is upright, living rightly
and doing righteousness,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And has not taken flesh with the blood
for food, or given worship to the images of the children of Israel; if
he has not had connection with his neighbour's wife, or come near to a
woman at the time when she is unclean;

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And has done no wrong to any, but has
given back to the debtor what is his, and has taken no one's goods by
force, and has given food to him who was in need of it, and clothing to
him who was without it;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And has not given his money out at
interest or taken great profits, and, turning his hand from evil-doing,
has kept faith between man and man,

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And has been guided by my rules and has
kept my laws and done them: he is upright, life will certainly be his,
says the Lord.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> If he has a son who is a thief, a taker
of life, who does any of these things,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Who has taken flesh with the blood as
food, and has had connection with his neighbour's wife,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Has done wrong to the poor and to him
who is in need, and taken property by force, and has not given back to
one in his debt what is his, and has given worship to images and has
done disgusting things,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And has given out his money at interest
and taken great profits: he will certainly not go on living: he has done
all these disgusting things: death will certainly be his fate; his blood
will be on him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Now if he has a son who sees all his
father's sins which he has done, and in fear does not do the same:

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Who has not taken the flesh with the
blood for food, or given worship to the images of the children of
Israel, and has not had connection with his neighbour's wife,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Or done wrong to any, or taken anything
from one in his debt, or taken goods by force, but has given food to him
who was in need of it, and clothing to him who was without it;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Who has kept his hand from evil-doing
and has not taken interest or great profits, who has done my orders and
been guided by my rules: he will certainly not be put to death for the
evil-doing of his father; life will certainly be his.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> As for his father, because he was
cruel, took goods by force, and did what is not good among his people,
truly, death will overtake him in his evil-doing.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> But you say, Why does not the son
undergo punishment for the evil-doing of the father? When the son has
done what is ordered and right, and has kept my rules and done them,
life will certainly be his.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> The soul which does sin will be put to
death: the son will not be made responsible for the evil-doing of the
father, or the father for the evil-doing of the son; the righteousness
of the upright will be on himself, and the evil-doing of the evil-doer
on himself.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But if the evil-doer, turning away from
all the sins which he has done, keeps my rules and does what is ordered
and right, life will certainly be his; death will not be his fate.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Not one of the sins which he has done
will be kept in memory against him: in the righteousness which he has
done he will have life.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Have I any pleasure in the death of the
evil-doer? says the Lord: am I not pleased if he is turned from his way
so that he may have life?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> But when the upright man, turning away
from his righteousness, does evil, like all the disgusting things which
the evil man does, will he have life? Not one of his upright acts will
be kept in memory: in the wrong which he has done and in his sin death
will overtake him.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> But you say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. Give ear, now, O children of Israel; is my way not equal? are not
your ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> When the upright man, turning away from
his righteousness, does evil, death will overtake him; in the evil which
he has done death will overtake him.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Again, when the evil-doer, turning away
from the evil he has done, does what is ordered and right, he will have
life for his soul.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Because he had fear and was turned away
from all the wrong which he had done, life will certainly be his, death
will not be his fate.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> But still the children of Israel say,
The way of the Lord is not equal. O children of Israel, are my ways not
equal? are not your ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> For this cause I will be your judge, O
children of Israel, judging every man by his ways, says the Lord. Come
back and be turned from all your sins; so that they may not be the cause
of your falling into evil.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Put away all your evil-doing in which
you have done sin; and make for yourselves a new heart and a new spirit:
why are you desiring death, O children of Israel?

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For I have no pleasure in the death of
him on whom death comes, says the Lord: be turned back then, and have
life.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Take up now a song of grief for the ruler
of Israel, and say,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> What was your mother? Like a she-lion
among lions, stretched out among the young lions she gave food to her
little ones.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And one of her little ones came to growth
under her care, and became a young lion, learning to go after beasts for
his food; and he took men for his meat.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And the nations had news of him; he was
taken in the hole they had made: and, pulling him with hooks, they took
him into the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now when she saw that her hope was made
foolish and gone, she took another of her little ones and made him into
a young lion.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he went up and down among the lions
and became a young lion, learning to go after beasts for his food; and
he took men for his meat.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And he sent destruction on their widows
and made waste their towns; and the land and everything in it became
waste because of the loud sound of his voice.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the nations came against him from
the kingdoms round about: their net was stretched over him and he was
taken in the hole they had made.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> They made him a prisoner with hooks, and
took him to the king of Babylon; they put him in the strong place so
that his voice might be sounding no longer on the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Your mother was in comparison like a
vine, planted by the waters: she was fertile and full of branches
because of the great waters.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And she had a strong rod for a rod of
authority for the rulers, and it became tall among the clouds and it was
seen lifted up among the number of its branches.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> But she was uprooted in burning wrath,
and made low on the earth; the east wind came, drying her up, and her
branches were broken off; her strong rod became dry, the fire made a
meal of it.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And now she is planted in the waste
land, in a dry and unwatered country.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And fire has gone out from her rod,
causing the destruction of her branches, so that there is no strong rod
in her to be the ruler's rod of authority. This is a song of grief, and
it was for a song of grief.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Now it came about in the seventh year, in
the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that certain of the
responsible men of Israel came to get directions from the Lord and were
seated before me.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Son of man, say to the responsible men of
Israel, This is what the Lord has said: Have you come to get directions
from me? By my life, says the Lord, you will get no directions from me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Will you be their judge, O son of man,
will you be their judge? make clear to them the disgusting ways of their
fathers,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And say to them, This is what the Lord
has said: In the day when I took Israel for myself, when I made an oath
to the seed of the family of Jacob, and I gave them knowledge of myself
in the land of Egypt, saying to them with an oath, I am the Lord your
God;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> In that day I gave my oath to take them
out of the land of Egypt into a land which I had been searching out for
them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands:

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And I said to them, Let every man among
you put away the disgusting things to which his eyes are turned, and do
not make yourselves unclean with the images of Egypt; I am the Lord your
God.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> But they would not be controlled by me,
and did not give ear to me; they did not put away the disgusting things
to which their eyes were turned, or give up the images of Egypt: then I
said I would let loose my passion on them to give full effect to my
wrath against them in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And I was acting for the honour of my
name, so that it might not be made unclean before the eyes of the
nations among whom they were, and before whose eyes I gave them
knowledge of myself, by taking them out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> So I made them go out of the land of
Egypt and took them into the waste land.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And I gave them my rules and made clear
to them my orders, which, if a man keeps them, will be life to him.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And further, I gave them my Sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, so that it might be clear that I, who
make them holy, am the Lord.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But the children of Israel would not be
controlled by me in the waste land: they were not guided by my rules,
and they were turned away from my orders, which, if a man does them,
will be life to him; and they had no respect for my Sabbaths: then I
said that I would let loose my passion on them in the waste land, and
put an end to them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And I was acting for the honour of my
name, so that it might not be made unclean in the eyes of the nations,
before whose eyes I had taken them out.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And further, I gave my oath to them in
the waste land, that I would not take them into the land which I had
given them, a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands;

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Because they were turned away from my
orders, and were not guided by my rules, and had no respect for my
Sabbaths: for their hearts went after their images.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> But still my eye had pity on them and I
kept them from destruction and did not put an end to them completely in
the waste land.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And I said to their children in the
waste land, Do not be guided by the rules of your fathers or keep their
orders or make yourselves unclean with their images:

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I am the Lord your God; be guided by my
rules and keep my orders and do them:

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And keep my Sabbaths holy; and they
will be a sign between me and you so that it may be clear to you that I
am the Lord your God.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> But the children would not be
controlled by me; they were not guided by my rules, and they did not
keep and do my orders, which, if a man does them, will be life to him;
and they had no respect for my Sabbaths: then I said I would let loose
my passion on them to give full effect to my wrath against them in the
waste land.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And I was acting for the honour of my
name, so that it might not be made unclean in the eyes of the nations,
before whose eyes I had taken them out.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Further, I gave my oath to them in the
waste land that I would send them wandering among the nations, driving
them out among the countries;

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Because they had not done my orders,
but had been turned away from my rules, and had not given respect to my
Sabbaths, and their eyes were turned to the images of their fathers.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And further, I gave them rules which
were not good and orders in which there was no life for them;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> I made them unclean in the offerings
they gave, causing them to make every first child go through the fire,
so that I might put an end to them.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> For this cause, son of man, say to the
children of Israel, This is what the Lord has said: In this your fathers
have further put shame on my name by doing wrong against me.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> For when I had taken them into the land
which I made an oath to give to them, then they saw every high hill and
every branching tree and made their offerings there, moving me to wrath
by their offerings; and there the sweet smell of their offerings went up
and their drink offerings were drained out.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Then I said to them, What is this high
place where you go to no purpose? And it is named Bamah to this day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> For this cause say to the children of
Israel, This is what the Lord has said: Are you making yourselves
unclean as your fathers did? are you being untrue to me by going after
their disgusting works?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And when you give your offerings,
causing your sons to go through the fire, you make yourselves unclean
with all your images to this day; and will you come to me for
directions, O children of Israel? By my life, says the Lord, you will
get no direction from me.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And that which comes into your minds
will never take place; when you say, We will be like the nations, like
the families of the countries, servants of wood and stone;

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> By my life, says the Lord, truly, with
a strong hand and with an outstretched arm and with burning wrath let
loose, I will be King over you:

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And I will take you out from the
peoples and get you together out of the countries where you are
wandering, with a strong hand and with an outstretched arm and with
burning wrath let loose:

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And I will take you into the waste land
of the peoples, and there I will take up the cause with you face to
face.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> As I took up the cause with your
fathers in the waste land of the land of Egypt, so will I take up the
cause with you says the Lord.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And I will make you go under the rod
and will make you small in number:

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Clearing out from among you all those
who are uncontrolled and who are sinning against me; I will take them
out of the land where they are living, but they will not come into the
land of Israel: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> As for you, O children of Israel, the
Lord has said: Let every man completely put away his images and give ear
to me: and let my holy name no longer be shamed by your offerings and
your images.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> For in my holy mountain, in the high
mountain of Israel, says the Lord, there all the children of Israel, all
of them, will be my servants in the land; there I will take pleasure in
them, and there I will be worshipped with your offerings and the
first-fruits of the things you give, and with all your holy things.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> I will take pleasure in you as in a
sweet smell, when I take you out from the peoples and get you together
from the countries where you have been sent in flight; and I will make
myself holy in you before the eyes of the nations.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And you will be certain that I am the
Lord, when I take you into the land of Israel, into the country which I
made an oath to give to your fathers.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And there, at the memory of your ways
and of all the things you did to make yourselves unclean, you will have
bitter hate for yourselves because of all the evil things you have done.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> And you will be certain that I am the
Lord, when I take you in hand for the honour of my name, and not for
your evil ways or your unclean doings, O children of Israel, says the
Lord.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> Son of man, let your face be turned to
the south, let your words be dropped to the south, and be a prophet
against the woodland of the South;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> And say to the woodland of the South,
Give ear to the words of the Lord: this is what the Lord has said: See,
I will have a fire lighted in you, for the destruction of every green
tree in you and every dry tree: the flaming flame will not be put out,
and all faces from the south to the north will be burned by it.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> And all flesh will see that I the Lord
have had it lighted: it will not be put out.

<span id="an_20:49">20:49</span> Then I said, Ah, Lord! they say of me,
Is he not a maker of stories?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Son of man, let your face be turned to
Jerusalem, let your words be dropped in the direction of her holy place,
and be a prophet against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And say to the land of Israel, These are
the words of the Lord: See, I am against you, and I will take my sword
out of its cover, cutting off from you the upright and the evil.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Because I am going to have the upright
and the evil cut off from you, for this cause my sword will go out from
its cover against all flesh from the south to the north:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And all flesh will see that I the Lord
have taken my sword out of its cover: and it will never go back.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Make sounds of grief, son of man; with
body bent and a bitter heart make sounds of grief before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And when they say to you, Why are you
making sounds of grief? then say, Because of the news, for it is coming:
and every heart will become soft, and all hands will be feeble, and
every spirit will be burning low, and all knees will be turned to water:
see, it is coming and it will be done, says the Lord.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Son of man, say as a prophet, These are
the words of the Lord: Say, A sword, a sword which has been made sharp
and polished:

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> It has been made sharp to give death;
it is polished so that it may be like a thunder-flame: ...

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And I have given it to the polisher so
that it may be taken in the hand: he has made the sword sharp, he has
had it polished, to put it into the hand of him who gives death.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Give loud cries and make sounds of
grief, O son of man: for it has come on my people, it has come on all
the rulers of Israel: fear of the sword has come on my people: for this
cause give signs of grief.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> ...

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> So then, son of man, be a prophet, and
put your hands together with a loud sound, and give two blows with the
sword, and even three; it is the sword of those who are wounded, even
the sword of the wounded; the great sword which goes round about them.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> In order that hearts may become soft,
and the number of those who are falling may be increased, I have sent
death by the sword against all their doors: you are made like a flame,
you are polished for death.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Be pointed to the right, to the left,
wherever your edge is ordered.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And I will put my hands together with a
loud sound, and I will let my wrath have rest: I the Lord have said it.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And the word of the Lord came to me
again, saying,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And you, son of man, have two ways
marked out, so that the sword of the king of Babylon may come; let the
two of them come out of one land: and let there be a pillar at the top
of the road:

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Put a pillar at the top of the road for
the sword to come to Rabbah in the land of the children of Ammon, and to
Judah and to Jerusalem in the middle of her.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For the king of Babylon took his place
at the parting of the ways, at the top of the two roads, to make use of
secret arts: shaking the arrows this way and that, he put questions to
the images of his gods, he took note of the inner parts of dead beasts.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> At his right hand was the fate of
Jerusalem, to give orders for destruction, to send up the war-cry, to
put engines of war against the doors, lifting up earthworks, building
walls.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And this answer given by secret arts
will seem false to those who have given their oaths and have let them be
broken: but he will keep the memory of evil-doing so that they may be
taken.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> For this cause the Lord has said:
Because you have made your evil-doing come to mind by the uncovering of
your wrongdoing, causing your sins to be seen in all your evil-doings;
because you have come to mind, you will be taken in them.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And you, O evil one, wounded to death,
O ruler of Israel, whose day has come in the time of the last
punishment;

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> This is what the Lord has said: Take
away the holy head-dress, take off the crown: this will not be again:
let that which is low be lifted up, and that which is high be made low.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> I will let it be overturned,
overturned, overturned: this will not be again till he comes whose right
it is; and I will give it to him.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And you, son of man, say as a prophet,
This is what the Lord has said about the children of Ammon and about
their shame: Say, A sword, even a sword let loose, polished for death,
to make it shining so that it may be like a flame:

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Your vision is to no purpose, your use
of secret arts gives a false answer, to put it on the necks of
evil-doers who are wounded to death, whose day has come, in the time of
the last punishment.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Go back into your cover. In the place
where you were made, in the land from which you were taken, I will be
your judge.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And I will let loose my burning passion
on you, breathing out on you the fire of my wrath: and I will give you
up into the hands of men like beasts, trained to destruction.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> You will be food for the fire; your
blood will be drained out in the land; there will be no more memory of
you: for I the Lord have said it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And you, son of man, will you be a judge,
will you be a judge of the town of blood? then make clear to her all her
disgusting ways.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And you are to say, This is what the Lord
has said: A town causing blood to be drained out in her streets so that
her time may come, and making images in her to make her unclean!

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> You are responsible for the blood drained
out by you, and you are unclean through the images which you have made;
and you have made your day come near, and the time of your judging has
come; for this cause I have made you a name of shame to the nations and
a cause of laughing to all countries.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Those who are near and those who are far
from you will make sport of you; your name is unclean, you are full of
sounds of fear.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> See, the rulers of Israel, every one in
his family, have been causing death in you.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In you they have had no respect for
father and mother; in you they have been cruel to the man from a strange
land; in you they have done wrong to the child without a father and to
the widow.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> You have made little of my holy things,
and have made my Sabbaths unclean.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> In you there are men who say evil of
others, causing death; in you they have taken the flesh with the blood
for food; in your streets they have put evil designs into effect.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> In you they have let the shame of their
fathers be seen; in you they have done wrong to a woman at the time when
she was unclean.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And in you one man has done what was
disgusting with his neighbour's wife; and another has made his
daughter-in-law unclean; and another has done wrong to his sister, his
father's daughter.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> In you they have taken rewards as the
price of blood; you have taken interest and great profits, and you have
taken away your neighbours' goods by force, and have not kept me in
mind, says the Lord.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> See, then, I have made my hands come
together in wrath against your taking of goods by force and against the
blood which has been flowing in you.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Will your heart be high or your hands
strong in the days when I take you in hand? I the Lord have said it and
will do it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And I will send you in flight among the
nations and wandering among the countries; and I will completely take
away out of you everything which is unclean.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And you will be made low before the
eyes of the nations; and it will be clear to you that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Son of man, the children of Israel have
become like the poorest sort of waste metal to me: they are all silver
and brass and tin and iron and lead mixed with waste.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> For this cause the Lord has said:
Because you have all become waste metal, see, I will get you together
inside Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> As they put silver and brass and iron
and lead and tin together inside the oven, heating up the fire on it to
make it soft; so will I get you together in my wrath and in my passion,
and, heating the fire with my breath, will make you soft.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yes, I will take you, breathing on you
the fire of my wrath, and you will become soft in it.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> As silver becomes soft in the oven, so
you will become soft in it; and you will be certain that I the Lord have
let loose my passion on you.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Son of man, say to her, You are a land
on which no rain or thunderstorm has come in the day of wrath.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Her rulers in her are like a
loud-voiced lion violently taking his food; they have made a meal of
souls; they have taken wealth and valued property; they have made great
the number of widows in her.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Her priests have been acting violently
against my law; they have made my holy things unclean: they have made no
division between what is holy and what is common, and they have not made
it clear that the unclean is different from the clean, and their eyes
have been shut to my Sabbaths, and I am not honoured among them.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Her rulers in her are like wolves
violently taking their food; putting men to death and causing the
destruction of souls, so that they may get their profit.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And her prophets have been using
whitewash, seeing foolish visions and making false use of secret arts,
saying, This is what the Lord has said, when the Lord has said nothing.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> The people of the land have been acting
cruelly, taking men's goods by force; they have been hard on the poor
and those in need, and have done wrong to the man from a strange land.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And I was looking for a man among them
who would make up the wall and take his station in the broken place
before me for the land, so that I might not send destruction on it: but
there was no one.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And I let loose my passion on them, and
have put an end to them in the fire of my wrath: I have made the
punishment of their ways come on their heads, says the Lord.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The word of the Lord came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Son of man, there were two women,
daughters of one mother:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> They were acting like loose women in
Egypt; when they were young their behaviour was loose: there their
breasts were crushed, even the points of their young breasts were
crushed.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Their names were Oholah, the older, and
Oholibah, her sister: and they became mine, and gave birth to sons and
daughters. As for their names, Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem,
Oholibah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Oholah was untrue to me when she was
mine; she was full of desire for her lovers, even for the Assyrians, her
neighbours,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Who were clothed in blue, captains and
rulers, all of them young men to be desired, horsemen seated on horses.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And she gave her unclean love to them,
all of them the noblest men of Assyria: and she made herself unclean
with the images of all who were desired by her.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And she has not given up her loose ways
from the time when she was in Egypt; for when she was young they were
her lovers, and by them her young breasts were crushed, and they let
loose on her their unclean desire.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> For this cause I gave her up into the
hands of her lovers, into the hands of the Assyrians on whom her desire
was fixed.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> By these her shame was uncovered: they
took her sons and daughters and put her to death with the sword: and she
became a cause of wonder to women; for they gave her the punishment
which was right.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And her sister Oholibah saw this, but
her desire was even more unmeasured, and her loose behaviour was worse
than that of her sister.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> She was full of desire for the
Assyrians, captains and rulers, her neighbours, clothed in blue,
horsemen going on horses, all of them young men to be desired.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And I saw that she had become unclean;
the two of them went the same way.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And her loose behaviour became worse;
for she saw men pictured on a wall, pictures of the Chaldaeans painted
in bright red,

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> With bands round their bodies and with
head-dresses hanging round their heads, all of them looking like rulers,
like the Babylonians, the land of whose birth is Chaldaea.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And when she saw them she was full of
desire for them, and sent servants to them in Chaldaea.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And the Babylonians came to her, into
the bed of love, and made her unclean with their loose desire, and she
became unclean with them, and her soul was turned from them.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So her loose behaviour was clearly seen
and her shame uncovered: then my soul was turned from her as it had been
turned from her sister.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> But still she went on the more with her
loose behaviour, keeping in mind the early days when she had been a
loose woman in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And she was full of desire for her
lovers, whose flesh is like the flesh of asses and whose seed is like
the seed of horses.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And she made the memory of the loose
ways of her early years come back to mind, when her young breasts were
crushed by the Egyptians.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> For this cause, O Oholibah, this is
what the Lord has said: See, I will make your lovers come up against
you, even those from whom your soul is turned away in disgust; and I
will make them come up against you on every side;

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> The Babylonians and all the Chaldaeans,
Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them: young men to be
desired, captains and rulers all of them, and chiefs, her neighbours,
all of them on horseback.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And they will come against you from the
north on horseback, with war-carriages and a great band of peoples; they
will put themselves in order against you with breastplate and body-cover
and metal head-dress round about you: and I will make them your judges,
and they will give their decision against you as seems right to them.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And my bitter feeling will be working
against you, and they will take you in hand with passion; they will take
away your nose and your ears, and the rest of you will be put to the
sword: they will take your sons and daughters, and the rest of you will
be burned up in the fire.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> And they will take all your clothing
off you and take away your ornaments.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> So I will put an end to your evil ways
and your loose behaviour which came from the land of Egypt: and your
eyes will never be lifted up to them again, and you will have no more
memory of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> For this is what the Lord has said:
See, I will give you up into the hands of those who are hated by you,
into the hands of those from whom your soul is turned away in disgust:

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> And they will take you in hand with
hate, and take away all the fruit of your work, and let you be unveiled
and without clothing: and the shame of your loose behaviour will be
uncovered, your evil designs and your loose ways.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> They will do these things to you
because you have been untrue to me, and have gone after the nations, and
have become unclean with their images.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> You have gone in the way of your
sister; and I will give her cup into your hand.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> This is what the Lord has said: You
will take a drink from your sister's cup, which is deep and wide: you
will be laughed at and looked down on, more than you are able to
undergo.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> You will be broken and full of sorrow,
with the cup of wonder and destruction, with the cup of your sister
Samaria.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And after drinking it and draining it
out, you will take the last drops of it to the end, pulling off your
breasts: for I have said it, says the Lord.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> So this is what the Lord has said:
Because you have not kept me in your memory, and because your back has
been turned to me, you will even undergo the punishment of your evil
designs and your loose ways.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Then the Lord said to me: Son of man,
will you be the judge of Oholibah? then make clear to her the disgusting
things she has done.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> For she has been false to me, and blood
is on her hands, and with her images she has been untrue; and more than
this, she made her sons, whom she had by me, go through the fire to them
to be burned up.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Further, this is what she has done to
me: she has made my holy place unclean and has made my Sabbaths unclean.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For when she had made an offering of
her children to her images, she came into my holy place to make it
unclean; see, this is what she has done inside my house.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> And she even sent for men to come from
far away, to whom a servant was sent, and they came: for whom she was
washing her body and painting her eyes and making herself fair with
ornaments.

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> And she took her seat on a great bed,
with a table put ready before it on which she put my perfume and my oil.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> ... and they put jewels on her hands
and beautiful crowns on her head.

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> Then I said ... now she will go on with
her loose ways.

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> And they went in to her, as men go to a
loose woman: so they went in to Oholibah, the loose woman.

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> And upright men will be her judges,
judging her as false wives and women who take lives are judged; because
she has been untrue to me and blood is on her hands.

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> For this is what the Lord has said: I
will make a great meeting of the people come together against her, and
will send on her shaking fear and take everything from her.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> And the meeting, after stoning her with
stones, will put an end to her with their swords; they will put her sons
and daughters to death and have her house burned up with fire.

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> And I will put an end to evil in all
the land, teaching all women not to do as you have done.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> And I will send on you the punishment
of your evil ways, and you will be rewarded for your sins with your
images: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me in
the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month,
saying,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Son of man, put down in writing this very
day: The king of Babylon let loose the weight of his attack against
Jerusalem on this very day.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And make a comparison for this
uncontrolled people, and say to them, This is what the Lord has said:
Put on the cooking-pot, put it on the fire and put water in it:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And get the bits together, the fat tail,
every good part, the leg and the top part of it: make it full of the
best bones.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Take the best of the flock, put much wood
under it: see that its bits are boiling well; let the bones be cooked
inside it.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For this is what the Lord has said: A
curse is on the town of blood, the cooking-pot which is unclean inside,
which has never been made clean! take out its bits; its fate is still to
come on it.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For her blood is in her; she has put it
on the open rock not draining it on to the earth so that it might be
covered with dust;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> In order that it might make wrath come up
to give punishment, she has put her blood on the open rock, so that it
may not be covered.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> For this cause the Lord has said: A curse
is on the town of blood! and I will make great the burning mass.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Put on much wood, heating up the fire,
boiling the flesh well, and making the soup thick, and let the bones be
burned.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And I will put her on the coals so that
she may be heated and her brass burned, so that what is unclean in her
may become soft and her waste be completely taken away.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> I have made myself tired to no purpose:
still all the waste which is in her has not come out, it has an evil
smell.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> As for your unclean purpose: because I
have been attempting to make you clean, but you have not been made clean
from it, you will not be made clean till I have let loose my passion on
you in full measure.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> I the Lord have said the word and I
will do it; I will not go back or have mercy, and my purpose will not be
changed; in the measure of your ways and of your evil doings you will be
judged, says the Lord.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Son of man, see, I am taking away the
desire of your eyes by disease: but let there be no sorrow or weeping or
drops running from your eyes.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Let there be no sound of sorrow; make
no weeping for your dead, put on your head-dress and your shoes on your
feet, let not your lips be covered, and do not take the food of those in
grief.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> So in the morning I was teaching the
people and in the evening death took my wife; and in the morning I did
what I had been ordered to do.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And the people said to me, Will you not
make clear to us the sense of these things; is it for us you do them?

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Then I said to them, The word of the
Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Say to the people of Israel, The Lord
has said, See, I will make my holy place unclean, the pride of your
strength, the pleasure of your eyes, and the desire of your soul; and
your sons and daughters, who did not come with you here, will be put to
the sword.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And you will do as I have done, not
covering your lips or taking the food of those in grief.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And your head-dresses will be on your
heads and your shoes on your feet: there will be no sorrow or weeping;
but you will be wasting away in the punishment of your evil-doing, and
you will be looking at one another in wonder.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And Ezekiel will be a sign to you;
everything he has done you will do: when this takes place, you will be
certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And as for you, son of man, your mouth
will be shut in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of
their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that on which their hearts
are fixed, and their sons and daughters.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> In that day, one who has got away safe
will come to you to give you news of it.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> In that day your mouth will be open to
him who has got away safe, and you will say words to him and your lips
will no longer be shut: so you will be a sign to them and they will be
certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Son of man, let your face be turned to
the children of Ammon, and be a prophet against them:

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And say to the children of Ammon, Give
ear to the word of the Lord; this is what the Lord has said: Because you
said, Aha! against my holy place when it was made unclean, and against
the land of Israel when it was made waste, and against the people of
Judah when they were taken away as prisoners;

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> For this cause I will give you up to the
children of the east for their heritage, and they will put their
tent-circles in you and make their houses in you; they will take your
fruit for their food and your milk for their drink.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And I will make Rabbah a place for
housing camels, and the children of Ammon a resting-place for flocks:
and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> For the Lord has said, Because you have
made sounds of joy with your hands, stamping your feet, and have been
glad, putting shame with all your soul on the land of Israel;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> For this cause my hand has been stretched
out against you, and I will give up your goods to be taken by the
nations; I will have you cut off from the peoples and will put an end to
you among the countries: I will give you up to destruction; and you will
be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
Moab and Seir are saying, See, the people of Judah are like all the
nations;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> For this cause, I will let the side of
Moab be uncovered, and his towns on every side, the glory of the land,
Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon and as far as Kiriathaim.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> To the children of the east I have
given her for a heritage, as well as the children of Ammon, so that
there may be no memory of her among the nations:

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And I will be the judge of Moab; and
they will see that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
Edom has taken his payment from the people of Judah, and has done great
wrong in taking payment from them;

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> The Lord has said, My hand will be
stretched out against Edom, cutting off from it man and beast: and I
will make it waste, from Teman even as far as Dedan they will be put to
the sword.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> I will take payment from Edom because
of my people Israel; and I will take Edom in hand in my wrath and in my
passion: and they will have experience of my reward, says the Lord.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
the Philistines have taken payment, with the purpose of causing shame
and destruction with unending hate;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> The Lord has said, See, my hand will be
stretched out against the Philistines, cutting off the Cherethites and
sending destruction on the rest of the sea-land.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And I will take great payment from them
with acts of wrath; and they will be certain that I am the Lord when I
send my punishment on them.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Now in the eleventh year, on the first
day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Son of man, because Tyre has said against
Jerusalem, Aha, she who was the doorway of the peoples is broken; she is
turned over to them; she who was full is made waste;

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> For this cause the Lord has said, See, I
am against you, O Tyre, and will send up a number of nations against you
as the sea sends up its waves.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And they will give the walls of Tyre to
destruction and have its towers broken: and I will take even her dust
away from her, and make her an uncovered rock

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> She will be a place for the stretching
out of nets in the middle of the sea; for I have said it, says the Lord:
and her goods will be given over to the nations.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And her daughters in the open country
will be put to the sword: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> For this is what the Lord has said: See,
I will send up from the north Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, king of
kings, against Tyre, with horses and war-carriages and with an army and
great numbers of people.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He will put to the sword your daughters
in the open country: he will make strong walls against you and put up an
earthwork against you, arming himself for war against you.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> He will put up his engines of war against
your walls, and your towers will be broken down by his axes.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Because of the number of his horses you
will be covered with their dust: your walls will be shaking at the noise
of the horsemen and of the wheels and of the war-carriages, when he
comes through your doorways, as into a town which has been broken open.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Your streets will be stamped down by
the feet of his horses: he will put your people to the sword, and will
send down the pillars of your strength to the earth.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> They will take by force all your wealth
and go off with the goods with which you do trade: they will have your
walls broken down and all the houses of your desire given up to
destruction: they will put your stones and your wood and your dust deep
in the water.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> I will put an end to the noise of your
songs, and the sound of your instruments of music will be gone for ever.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I will make you an uncovered rock: you
will be a place for the stretching out of nets; there will be no
building you up again: for I the Lord have said it, says the Lord.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> This is what the Lord has said to Tyre:
Will not the sea-lands be shaking at the sound of your fall, when the
wounded give cries of pain, when men are put to the sword in you?

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Then all the rulers of the sea will
come down from their high seats, and put away their robes and take off
their clothing of needlework: they will put on the clothing of grief,
they will take their seats on the earth, shaking with fear every minute
and overcome with wonder at you.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And they will send up a song of grief
for you, and say to you, What destruction has come on you, how are you
cut off from the sea, the noted town, which was strong in the sea, she
and her people, causing the fear of them to come on all the dry land!

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Now the sea-lands will be shaking in
the day of your fall; and all the ships on the sea will be overcome with
fear at your going.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> For this is what the Lord has said: I
will make you a waste town, like the towns which are unpeopled; when I
make the deep come upon you, covering you with great waters.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Then I will make you go down with those
who go down into the underworld, to the people of the past, causing your
living-place to be in the deepest parts of the earth, in places long
unpeopled, with those who go down into the deep, so that there will be
no one living in you; and you will have no glory in the land of the
living.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> I will make you a thing of fear, and
you will come to an end: even if you are looked for, you will not be
seen again for ever, says the Lord.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> The word of the Lord came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And you, son of man, make a song of grief
for Tyre;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And say to Tyre, O you who are seated at
the doorway of the sea, trading for the peoples with the great
sea-lands, these are the words of the Lord: You, O Tyre, have said, I am
a ship completely beautiful.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Your builders have made your outlines in
the heart of the seas, they have made you completely beautiful.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> They have made all your boards of
fir-trees from Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make the
supports for your sails.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Of oak-trees from Bashan they have made
your driving blades; they have made your floors of ivory and boxwood
from the sea-lands of Kittim.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The best linen with needlework from Egypt
was your sail, stretched out to be a flag for you; blue and purple from
the sea-lands of Elishah gave you shade.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The people of Zidon and Arvad were your
boatmen; the wise men of Zemer were in you; they were guiding your
ships;

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> The responsible men of Gebal and its wise
men were in you, making your boards watertight: all the ships of the sea
with their seamen were in you trading in your goods.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Cush and Lud and Put were in your army,
your men of war, hanging up their body-covers and head-dresses of war in
you: they gave you your glory.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> The men of Arvad in your army were on
your walls, and were watchmen in your towers, hanging up their arms on
your walls round about; they made you completely beautiful.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Tarshish did business with you because
of the great amount of your wealth; they gave silver, iron, tin, and
lead for your goods.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech were your
traders; they gave living men and brass vessels for your goods.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> The people of Togarmah gave horses and
war-horses and transport beasts for your goods.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> The men of Rodan were your traders: a
great number of sea-lands did business with you: they gave you horns of
ivory and ebony as an offering.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Edom did business with you because of
the great number of things which you made; they gave emeralds, purple,
and needlework, and the best linen and coral and rubies for your goods.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Judah and the land of Israel were your
traders; they gave grain of Minnith and sweet cakes and honey and oil
and perfume for your goods.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Damascus did business with you because
of the great amount of your wealth, with wine of Helbon and white wool.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> ... for your goods: they gave polished
iron and spices for your goods.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Dedan did trade with you in cloths for
the backs of horses.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Arabia and all the rulers of Kedar did
business with you; in lambs and sheep and goats, in these they did
business with you.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> The traders of Sheba and Raamah did
trade with you; they gave the best of all sorts of spices and all sorts
of stones of great price and gold for your goods.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Haran and Canneh and Eden, the traders
of Asshur and all the Medes:

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> These were your traders in beautiful
robes, in rolls of blue and needlework, and in chests of coloured cloth,
corded with cords and made of cedar-wood, in them they did trade with
you.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Tarshish ships did business for you in
your goods: and you were made full, and great was your glory in the
heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Your boatmen have taken you into great
waters: you have been broken by the east wind in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Your wealth and your goods, the things
in which you do trade, your seamen and those guiding your ships, those
who make your boards watertight, and those who do business with your
goods, and all your men of war who are in you, with all who have come
together in you, will go down into the heart of the seas in the day of
your downfall.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> At the sound of the cry of your ships'
guides, the boards of the ship will be shaking.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And all the boatmen, the seamen and
those who are expert at guiding a ship through the sea, will come down
from their ships and take their places on the land;

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And their voices will be sounding over
you, and crying bitterly they will put dust on their heads, rolling
themselves in the dust:

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And they will have the hair of their
heads cut off because of you, and will put haircloth on their bodies,
weeping for you with bitter grief in their souls, even with bitter
sorrow.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And in their weeping they will make a
song of grief for you, sorrowing over you and saying, Who is like Tyre,
who has come to an end in the deep sea?

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> When your goods went out over the seas,
you made numbers of peoples full; the wealth of the kings of the earth
was increased with your great wealth and all your goods.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Now that you are broken by the seas in
the deep waters, your goods and all your people will go down with you.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> All the people of the sea-lands are
overcome with wonder at you, and their kings are full of fear, their
faces are troubled.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> Those who do business among the peoples
make sounds of surprise at you; you have become a thing of fear, you
have come to an end for ever.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The word of the Lord came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Son of man, say to the ruler of Tyre,
This is what the Lord has said: Because your heart has been lifted up,
and you have said, I am a god, I am seated on the seat of God in the
heart of the seas; but you are man and not God, though you have made
your heart as the heart of God:

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> See, you are wiser than Daniel; there is
no secret which is deeper than your knowledge:

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> By your wisdom and deep knowledge you
have got power for yourself, and put silver and gold in your
store-houses:

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> By your great wisdom and by your trade
your power is increased, and your heart is lifted up because of your
power:

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> For this cause the Lord has said: Because
you have made your heart as the heart of God,

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> See, I am sending against you strange
men, feared among the nations: they will let loose their swords against
your bright wisdom, they will make your glory a common thing.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They will send you down to the
underworld, and your death will be the death of those who are put to the
sword in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Will you say, in the face of those who
are taking your life, I am God? but you are man and not God in the hands
of those who are wounding you.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Your death will be the death of those
who are without circumcision, by the hands of men from strange lands:
for I have said it, says the Lord.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Son of man, make a song of grief for
the king of Tyre, and say to him, This is what the Lord has said: You
are all-wise and completely beautiful;

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> You were in Eden, the garden of God;
every stone of great price was your clothing, the sardius, the topaz,
and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the emerald and
the carbuncle: your store-houses were full of gold, and things of great
price were in you; in the day when you were made they were got ready.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> I gave you your place with the winged
one; I put you on the mountain of God; you went up and down among the
stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> There has been no evil in your ways
from the day when you were made, till sin was seen in you.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Through all your trading you have
become full of violent ways, and have done evil: so I sent you out
shamed from the mountain of God; the winged one put an end to you from
among the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Your heart was lifted up because you
were beautiful, you made your wisdom evil through your sin: I have sent
you down, even to the earth; I have made you low before kings, so that
they may see you.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> By all your sin, even by your evil
trading, you have made your holy places unclean; so I will make a fire
come out from you, it will make a meal of you, and I will make you as
dust on the earth before the eyes of all who see you.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> All who have knowledge of you among the
peoples will be overcome with wonder at you: you have become a thing of
fear, and you will never be seen again.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Son of man, let your face be turned to
Zidon, and be a prophet against it, and say,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> These are the words of the Lord: See, I
am against you, O Zidon; and I will get glory for myself in you: and
they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I send my punishments on
her, and I will be seen to be holy in her.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And I will send on her disease and
blood in her streets; and the wounded will be falling in the middle of
her, and the sword will be against her on every side; and they will be
certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And there will no longer be a plant
with sharp points wounding the children of Israel, or a thorn troubling
them among any who are round about them, who put shame on them; and they
will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> This is what the Lord has said: When I
have got together the children of Israel from the peoples among whom
they are wandering, and have been made holy among them before the eyes
of the nations, then they will have rest in the land which is theirs,
which I gave to my servant Jacob

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And they will be safe there, building
houses and planting vine-gardens and living without fear; when I have
sent my punishments on all those who put shame on them round about them;
and they will be certain that I am the Lord their God.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on
the twelfth day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Son of man, let your face be turned
against Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and be a prophet against him and against
all Egypt:

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Say to them, These are the words of the
Lord: See, I am against you, Pharaoh, king of Egypt, the great
river-beast stretched out among his Nile streams, who has said, The Nile
is mine, and I have made it for myself.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And I will put hooks in your mouth, and
the fish of your streams will be hanging from your skin; and I will make
you come up out of your streams, with all the fish of your streams
hanging from your skin.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And I will let you be in the waste land,
you and all the fish of your streams: you will go down on the face of
the land; you will not be taken up or put to rest in the earth; I have
given you for food to the beasts of the field and the birds of the
heaven.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And it will be clear to all the people of
Egypt that I am the Lord, because you have been a false support to the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When they took a grip of you in their
hands, you were crushed so that their arms were broken: and when they
put their weight on you for support, you were broken and all their
muscles gave way.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> For this cause the Lord has said: See, I
am sending a sword on you, cutting off from you man and beast.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And the land of Egypt will be an
unpeopled waste; and they will be certain that I am the Lord: because he
has said, The Nile is mine, and I made it.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> See, then, I am against you and against
your streams, and I will make the land of Egypt an unpeopled waste, from
Migdol to Syene, even as far as the edge of Ethiopia.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> No foot of man will go through it and
no foot of beast, and it will be unpeopled for forty years.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> I will make the land of Egypt a waste
among the countries which are made waste, and her towns will be
unpeopled among the towns which have been made waste, for forty years:
and I will send the Egyptians in flight among the nations and wandering
through the countries.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> For this is what the Lord has said: At
the end of forty years I will get the Egyptians together from the
peoples where they have gone in flight:

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> I will let the fate of Egypt be
changed, and will make them come back into the land of Pathros, into the
land from which they came; and there they will be an unimportant
kingdom.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> It will be the lowest of the kingdoms,
and never again will it be lifted up over the nations: I will make them
small, so that they may not have rule over the nations.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And Egypt will no longer be the hope of
the children of Israel, causing sin to come to mind when their eyes are
turned to them: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Now in the twenty-seventh year, in the
first month, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar, king of
Babylon, made his army do hard work against Tyre, and the hair came off
every head and every arm was rubbed smooth: but he and his army got no
payment out of Tyre for the hard work which he had done against it.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> For this cause the Lord has said: See,
I am giving the land of Egypt to Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon: he
will take away her wealth, and take her goods by force and everything
which is there; and this will be the payment for his army.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> I have given him the land of Egypt as
the reward for his hard work, because they were working for me, says the
Lord.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> In that day I will make a horn put out
buds for the children of Israel, and I will let your words come freely
among them, and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word of the Lord came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Son of man, be a prophet, and say, These
are the words of the Lord: Give a cry, Aha, for the day!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For the day is near, the day of the Lord
is near, a day of cloud; it will be the time of the nations.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And a sword will come on Egypt, and cruel
pain will be in Ethiopia, when they are falling by the sword in Egypt;
and they will take away her wealth and her bases will be broken down.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Ethiopia and Put and Lud and all the
mixed people and Libya and the children of the land of the Cherethites
will all be put to death with them by the sword.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> This is what the Lord has said: The
supporters of Egypt will have a fall, and the pride of her power will
come down: from Migdol to Syene they will be put to the sword in it,
says the Lord.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And she will be made waste among the
countries which have been made waste, and her towns will be among the
towns which are unpeopled.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And they will be certain that I am the
Lord, when I have put a fire in Egypt and all her helpers are broken.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> In that day men will go out quickly to
take the news, causing fear in untroubled Ethiopia; and bitter pain will
come on them as in the day of Egypt; for see, it is coming.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> This is what the Lord has said: I will
put an end to great numbers of the people of Egypt by the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> He and the people with him, causing
fear among the nations, will be sent for the destruction of the land;
their swords will be let loose against Egypt and the land will be full
of dead.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> And I will make the Nile streams dry,
and will give the land into the hands of evil men, causing the land and
everything in it to be wasted by the hands of men from a strange
country: I the Lord have said it.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> This is what the Lord has said: In
addition to this, I will give up the images to destruction and put an
end to the false gods in Noph; never again will there be a ruler in the
land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And I will make Pathros a waste, and
put a fire in Zoan, and send my punishments on No.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> I will let loose my wrath on Sin, the
strong place of Egypt, cutting off the mass of the people of No.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And I will put a fire in Egypt; Syene
will be twisting in pain, and No will be broken into, as by the onrush
of waters.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The young men of On and Pi-beseth will
be put to the sword: and these towns will be taken away prisoners.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And at Tehaphnehes the day will become
dark, when the yoke of Egypt is broken there, and the pride of her power
comes to an end: as for her, she will be covered with a cloud, and her
daughters will be taken away prisoners.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And I will send my punishments on
Egypt: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Now in the eleventh year, in the first
month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Son of man, the arm of Pharaoh, king of
Egypt, has been broken by me, and no band has been put round it to make
it well, no band has been twisted round it to make it strong for
gripping the sword.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> For this cause the Lord has said: See,
I am against Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and by me his strong arm will be
broken; and I will make the sword go out of his hand.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And I will send the Egyptians in flight
among the nations and wandering through the countries.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And I will make the arms of the king of
Babylon strong, and will put my sword in his hand: but Pharaoh's arms
will be broken, and he will give cries of pain before him like the cries
of a man wounded to death.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And I will make the arms of the king of
Babylon strong, and the arms of Pharaoh will be hanging down; and they
will be certain that I am the Lord, when I put my sword into the hand of
the king of Babylon and it is stretched out against the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And I will send the Egyptians in flight
among the nations and wandering through the countries; and they will be
certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Now in the eleventh year, in the third
month, on the first day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Son of man, say to Pharaoh, king of
Egypt, and to his people; Whom are you like in your great power?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> See, a pine-tree with beautiful branches
and thick growth, giving shade and very tall; and its top was among the
clouds.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> It got strength from the waters and the
deep made it tall: its streams went round about its planted land and it
sent out its waterways to all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> In this way it became taller than all the
trees of the field; and its branches were increased and its arms became
long because of the great waters.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> In its branches all the birds of heaven
came to rest, and under its arms all the beasts of the field gave birth
to their young, and great nations were living in its shade.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> So it was beautiful, being so tall and
its branches so long, for its root was by great waters.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> No cedars were equal to it in the garden
of God; the fir-trees were not like its branches, and plane-trees were
as nothing in comparison with its arms; no tree in the garden of God was
so beautiful.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> I made it beautiful with its mass of
branches: so that all the trees in the garden of God were full of envy
of it.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> For this cause the Lord has said:
Because he is tall, and has put his top among the clouds, and his heart
is full of pride because he is so high,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> I have given him up into the hands of a
strong one of the nations; he will certainly give him the reward of his
sin, driving him out.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And men from strange lands, who are to
be feared among the nations, after cutting him off, have let him be: on
the mountains and in all the valleys his branches have come down; his
arms are broken by all the waterways of the land; all the peoples of the
earth have gone from his shade, and have let him be.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> All the birds of heaven have come to
rest on his broken stem where it is stretched on the earth, and all the
beasts of the field will be on his branches:

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> In order that no trees by the waters
may be lifted up in their growth, putting their tops among the clouds;
and that no trees which are watered may take their place on high: for
they are all given up to death, to the lowest parts of the earth among
the children of men, with those who go down to the underworld.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> This is what the Lord has said: The day
when he goes down to the underworld, I will make the deep full of grief
for him; I will keep back her streams and the great waters will be
stopped: I will make Lebanon dark for him, and all the trees of the
field will be feeble because of him.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> I will send shaking on the nations at
the sound of his fall, when I send him down to the underworld with those
who go down into the deep: and on earth they will be comforting
themselves, all the trees of Eden, the best of Lebanon, even all the
watered ones.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And they will go down with him to the
underworld, to those who have been put to the sword; even those who were
his helpers, living under his shade among the nations

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> Whom then are you like? for you will be
sent down with the trees of Eden into the lowest parts of the earth:
there you will be stretched out among those without circumcision, with
those who were put to the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his people,
says the Lord.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And it came about in the twelfth year, in
the twelfth month, on the first day of the month, that the word of the
Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Son of man, make a song of grief for
Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and say to him, Young lion of the nations,
destruction has come on you; and you were like a sea-beast in the seas,
sending out bursts of water, troubling the waters with your feet, making
their streams dirty.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> This is what the Lord has said: My net
will be stretched out over you, and I will take you up in my
fishing-net.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And I will let you be stretched on the
land; I will send you out violently into the open field; I will let all
the birds of heaven come to rest on you and will make the beasts of all
the earth full of you.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And I will put your flesh on the
mountains, and make the valleys full of your blood.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And the land will be watered with your
blood, and the waterways will be full of you.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And when I put out your life, the heaven
will be covered and its stars made dark; I will let the sun be covered
with a cloud and the moon will not give her light.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> All the bright lights of heaven I will
make dark over you, and put dark night on your land, says the Lord.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And the hearts of numbers of peoples will
be troubled, when I send your prisoners among the nations, into a
country which is strange to you.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And I will make a number of peoples
overcome with wonder at you, and their kings will be full of fear
because of you, when my sword is waved before them: they will be shaking
every minute, every man fearing for his life, in the day of your fall.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> For this is what the Lord has said: The
sword of the king of Babylon will come on you.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> I will let the swords of the strong be
the cause of the fall of your people; all of them men to be feared among
the nations: and they will make waste the pride of Egypt, and all its
people will come to destruction.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And I will put an end to all her beasts
which are by the great waters, and they will never again be troubled by
the foot of man or by the feet of beasts.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Then I will make their waters clear and
their rivers will be flowing like oil, says the Lord.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> When I make Egypt an unpeopled waste,
cutting off from the land all the things in it; when I send punishment
on all those living in it, then it will be clear to them that I am the
Lord.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> It is a song of grief, and people will
give voice to it, the daughters of the nations will give voice to it,
even for Egypt and all her people, says the Lord.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And in the twelfth year, on the
fifteenth day of the month, the word of the Lord came to me, saying,

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Son of man, let your voice be loud in
sorrow for the people of Egypt and send them down, even you and the
daughters of the nations; I will send them down into the lowest parts of
the earth, with those who go down into the underworld.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Are you more beautiful than any? go
down, and take your rest among those without circumcision,

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Among those who have been put to the
sword: they will give a resting-place with them to all their people.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> The strong among the great ones will
say to him from the underworld, Are you more beautiful than any? go
down, you and your helpers, and take your rest among those without
circumcision, and those who have been put to the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> There is Asshur and all her army, round
about her last resting-place: all of them put to death by the sword:

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> Whose resting-places are in the inmost
parts of the underworld, who were a cause of fear in the land of the
living.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> There is Elam and all her people, round
about her last resting-place: all of them put to death by the sword, who
have gone down without circumcision into the lowest parts of the earth,
who were a cause of fear in the land of the living, and are put to shame
with those who go down to the underworld:

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> They have made a bed for her among the
dead, and all her people are round about her resting-place: all of them
without circumcision, put to death with the sword; for they were a cause
of fear in the land of the living, and are put to shame with those who
go down to the underworld: they have been given a place among those who
have been put to the sword.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her
people, round about her last resting-place: all of them without
circumcision, put to death by the sword; for they were a cause of fear
in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And they have been put to rest with the
fighting men who came to their end in days long past, who went down to
the underworld with their instruments of war, placing their swords under
their heads, and their body-covers are over their bones; for their
strength was a cause of fear in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> But you will have your bed among those
without circumcision, and will be put to rest with those who have been
put to death with the sword.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> There is Edom, her kings and all her
princes, who have been given a resting-place with those who were put to
the sword: they will be resting among those without circumcision, even
with those who go down to the underworld.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> There are the chiefs of the north, all
of them, and all the Zidonians, who have gone down with those who have
been put to the sword: they are shamed on account of all the fear caused
by their strength; they are resting there without circumcision, among
those who have been put to the sword, and are put to shame with those
who go down to the underworld.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Pharaoh will see them and be comforted
on account of all his people: even Pharaoh and all his army, put to
death by the sword, says the Lord.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For he put his fear in the land of the
living: and he will be put to rest among those without circumcision,
with those who have been put to death with the sword, even Pharaoh and
all his people, says the Lord.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Son of man, give a word to the children
of your people, and say to them, When I make the sword come on a land,
if the people of the land take a man from among their number and make
him their watchman:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> If, when he sees the sword coming on the
land, by sounding the horn he gives the people news of their danger;

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Then anyone who, hearing the sound of the
horn, does not take note of it, will himself be responsible for his
death, if the sword comes and takes him away.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> On hearing the sound of the horn, he did
not take note; his blood will be on him; for if he had taken note his
life would have been safe.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> But if the watchman sees the sword
coming, and does not give a note on the horn, and the people have no
word of the danger, and the sword comes and takes any person from among
them; he will be taken away in his sin, but I will make the watchman
responsible for his blood.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> So you, son of man, I have made you a
watchman for the children of Israel; and you are to give ear to the word
of my mouth and give them news from me of their danger.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> When I say to the evil-doer, Death will
certainly overtake you; and you say nothing to make clear to the
evil-doer the danger of his way; death will overtake that evil man in
his evil-doing, but I will make you responsible for his blood.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> But if you make clear to the evil-doer
the danger of his way for the purpose of turning him from it, and he is
not turned from his way, death will overtake him in his evil-doing, but
your life will be safe.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And you, son of man, say to the
children of Israel, You say, Our wrongdoing and our sins are on us and
we are wasting away in them; how then may we have life?

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Say to them, By my life, says the Lord,
I have no pleasure in the death of the evil-doer; it is more pleasing to
me if he is turned from his way and has life: be turned, be turned from
your evil ways; why are you looking for death, O children of Israel?

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And you, son of man, say to the
children of your people, The righteousness of the upright man will not
make him safe in the day when he does wrong; and the evil-doing of the
evil man will not be the cause of his fall in the day when he is turned
from his evil-doing; and the upright man will not have life because of
his righteousness in the day when he does evil.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> When I say to the upright that life
will certainly be his; if he puts his faith in his righteousness and
does evil, not one of his upright acts will be kept in memory; but in
the evil he has done, death will overtake him.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And when I say to the evil-doer, Death
will certainly be your fate; if he is turned from his sin and does what
is ordered and right;

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> If the evil-doer lets one who is in his
debt have back what is his, and gives back what he had taken by force,
and is guided by the rules of life, doing no evil; life will certainly
be his, death will not overtake him.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> Not one of the sins which he has done
will be kept in mind against him: he has done what is ordered and right,
life will certainly be his.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> But the children of your people say,
The way of the Lord is not equal: when it is they whose way is not
equal.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> When the upright man, turning away from
his righteousness, does evil, death will overtake him in it.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And when the evil man, turning away
from his evil-doing, does what is ordered and right, he will get life by
it.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And still you say, The way of the Lord
is not equal. O children of Israel, I will be your judge, giving to
everyone the reward of his ways.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Now in the twelfth year after we had
been taken away prisoners, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the
month, one who had got away in flight from Jerusalem came to me, saying,
The town has been taken.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Now the hand of the Lord had been on me
in the evening, before the man who had got away came to me; and he made
my mouth open, ready for his coming to me in the morning; and my mouth
was open and I was no longer without voice.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Son of man, those who are living in
these waste places in the land of Israel say, Abraham was but one, and
he had land for his heritage: but we are a great number; the land is
given to us for our heritage.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> For this cause say to them, This is
what the Lord has said: You take your meat with the blood, your eyes are
lifted up to your images, and you are takers of life: are you to have
the land for your heritage?

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> You put your faith in your swords, you
do disgusting things, everyone takes his neighbour's wife: are you to
have the land for your heritage?

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> This is what you are to say to them:
The Lord has said, By my life, truly, those who are in the waste places
will be put to the sword, and him who is in the open field I will give
to the beasts for their food, and those who are in the strong places and
in holes in the rocks will come to their death by disease.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And I will make the land a waste and a
cause of wonder, and the pride of her strength will come to an end; and
the mountains of Israel will be made waste so that no one will go
through.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Then they will be certain that I am the
Lord, when I have made the land a waste and a cause of wonder, because
of all the disgusting things which they have done,

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> And as for you, son of man, the
children of your people are talking together about you by the walls and
in the doorways of the houses, saying to one another, Come now, give ear
to the word which comes from the Lord.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> And they come to you as my people come,
and are seated before you as my people, hearing your words but doing
them not: for deceit is in their mouth and their heart goes after profit
for themselves.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> And truly you are to them like a love
song by one who has a very pleasing voice and is an expert player on an
instrument: for they give ear to your words but do them not.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And when this comes about (see, it is
coming), then it will be clear to them that a prophet has been among
them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Son of man, be a prophet against the
keepers of the flock of Israel, and say to them, O keepers of the sheep!
this is the word of the Lord: A curse is on the keepers of the flock of
Israel who take the food for themselves! is it not right for the keepers
to give the food to the sheep?

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> You take the milk and are clothed with
the wool, you put the fat beasts to death, but you give the sheep no
food.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> You have not made the diseased ones
strong or made well that which was ill; you have not put bands on the
broken or got back that which had been sent away or made search for the
wandering ones; and the strong you have been ruling cruelly.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And they were wandering in every
direction because there was no keeper: and they became food for all the
beasts of the field.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And my sheep went out of the way,
wandering through all the mountains and on every high hill: my sheep
went here and there over all the face of the earth; and no one was
troubled about them or went in search of them.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> For this cause, O keepers of the flock,
give ear to the word of the Lord:

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> By my life, says the Lord, truly, because
my sheep have been taken away, and my sheep became food for all the
beasts of the field, because there was no keeper, and my keepers did not
go in search of the sheep, but the keepers took food for themselves and
gave my sheep no food;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> For this reason, O you keepers of the
flock, give ear to the word of the Lord;

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> This is what the Lord has said: See I
am against the keepers of the flock, and I will make search and see what
they have done with my sheep, and will let them be keepers of my sheep
no longer; and the keepers will no longer get food for themselves; I
will take my sheep out of their mouths so that they may not be food for
them.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For this is what the Lord has said:
Truly, I, even I, will go searching and looking for my sheep.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> As the keeper goes looking for his
flock when he is among his wandering sheep, so I will go looking for my
sheep, and will get them safely out of all the places where they have
been sent wandering in the day of clouds and black night.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And I will take them out from among the
peoples, and get them together from the countries, and will take them
into their land; and I will give them food on the mountains of Israel by
the water-streams and wherever men are living in the country.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> I will give them good grass-land for
their food, and their safe place will be the mountains of the high place
of Israel: there they will take their rest in a good place, and on fat
grass-land they will take their food on the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> I myself will give food to my flock,
and I will give them rest, says the Lord.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> I will go in search of that which had
gone wandering from the way, and will get back that which had been sent
in flight, and will put bands on that which was broken, and give
strength to that which was ill: but the fat and the strong I will give
up to destruction; I will give them for their food the punishment which
is theirs by right.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And as for you, O my flock, says the
Lord, truly, I will be judge between sheep and sheep, the he-sheep and
the he-goats.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Does it seem a small thing to you to
have taken your food on good grass-land while the rest of your
grass-land is stamped down under your feet? and that after drinking from
clear waters you make the rest of the waters dirty with your feet?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And as for my sheep, their food is the
grass which has been stamped on by your feet, and their drink the water
which has been made dirty by your feet.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> For this reason the Lord has said to
them, Truly, I, even I, will be judge between the fat sheep and the thin
sheep.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Because you have been pushing with side
and leg, pushing the diseased with your horns till they were sent away
in every direction;

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> I will make my flock safe, and they
will no longer be taken away, and I will be judge between sheep and
sheep.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> And I will put over them one keeper,
and he will give them food, even my servant David; he will give them
food and be their keeper.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> And I the Lord will be their God and my
servant David their ruler; I the Lord have said it.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> And I will make with them an agreement
of peace, and will put an end to evil beasts through all the land: and
they will be living safely in the waste land, sleeping in the woods.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And I will give the rain at the right
time, and I will make the shower come down at the right time; there will
be showers of blessing.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the tree of the field will give its
fruit and the earth will give its increase, and they will be safe in
their land; and they will be certain that I am the Lord, when I have had
their yoke broken and have given them salvation from the hands of those
who made them servants.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And their goods will no longer be taken
by the nations, and they will not again be food for the beasts of the
earth; but they will be living safely and no one will be a cause of fear
to them.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And I will give them planting-places of
peace, and they will no longer be wasted from need of food or put to
shame by the nations.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And they will be certain that I the
Lord their God am with them, and that they, the children of Israel, are
my people, says the Lord.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And you are my sheep, the sheep of my
grass-lands, and I am your God, says the Lord.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Son of man, let your face be turned to
Mount Seir, and be a prophet against it,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And say to it, This is what the Lord has
said: See, I am against you, O Mount Seir, and my hand will be stretched
out against you, and I will make you a waste and a cause for wonder.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will make your towns unpeopled and you
will be a waste; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Because yours has been a hate without
end, and you have given up the children of Israel to the power of the
sword in the time of their trouble, in the time of the punishment of the
end:

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> For this cause, by my life, says the
Lord, because you have been sinning through blood, blood will come after
you.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And I will make Mount Seir a cause for
wonder and a waste, cutting off from it all comings and goings.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> I will make his mountains full of those
who have been put to death; in your valleys and in all your
water-streams men will be falling by the sword.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> I will make you waste for ever, and your
towns will be unpeopled: and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Because you have said, The two nations
and the two countries are to be mine, and we will take them for our
heritage; though the Lord was there:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> For this cause, by my life, says the
Lord, I will do to you as you have done in your wrath and in your envy,
which you have made clear in your hate for them; and I will make clear
to you who I am when you are judged by me.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And you will see that I the Lord have
had knowledge of all the bitter things which you have said against the
mountains of Israel, saying, They have been made waste, they are given
to us to take for our heritage.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And you have made yourselves great
against me with your mouths, increasing your words against me; and it
has come to my ears.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
you were glad over my land when it was a waste, so will I do to you:

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> You will become a waste, O Mount Seir,
and all Edom, even all of it: and you will be certain that I am the
Lord.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And you, son of man, be a prophet about
the mountains of Israel, and say, You mountains of Israel, give ear to
the word of the Lord:

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
your hater has said against you, Aha! and, The old waste places are our
heritage, we have taken them:

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> For this cause be a prophet, and say,
This is what the Lord has said: Because, even because they have been
glad over you and put you to shame on every side, because you have
become a heritage for the rest of the nations, and you are taken up on
the lips of talkers and in the evil talk of the people:

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For this reason, you mountains of Israel,
give ear to the word of the Lord; this is what the Lord has said to the
mountains and to the hills, to the streams and to the valleys, to the
unpeopled wastes and to the towns where no one is living, from which the
goods have been taken and which have been put to shame by the rest of
the nations who are round about:

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> For this cause the Lord has said: Truly,
in the heat of my bitter feeling I have said things against the rest of
the nations and against all Edom, who have taken my land as a heritage
for themselves with the joy of all their heart, and with bitter envy of
soul have made attacks on it:

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> For this cause be a prophet about the
land of Israel, and say to the mountains and to the hills, to the
streams and to the valleys, This is what the Lord has said: Truly, in my
bitter feeling and in my wrath I have said these things, because you
have undergone the shame of the nations:

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For this cause the Lord has said, See, I
have taken an oath that the nations which are round about you are
themselves to undergo the shame which they have put on you.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> But you, O mountains of Israel, will put
out your branches and give your fruit to my people Israel; for they are
ready to come.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> For truly I am for you, and I will be
turned to you, and you will be ploughed and planted:

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And I will let your numbers be
increased, all the children of Israel, even all of them: and the towns
will be peopled and the waste places will have buildings;

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> Man and beast will be increased in you,
and they will have offspring and be fertile: I will make you thickly
peopled as you were before, and will do more for you than at the first:
and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Yes, I will have you walked on by the
feet of men, even my people Israel; they will have you for a heritage
and you will be theirs, and never again will you take their children
from them.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> This is what the Lord has said: Because
they say to you, You, O land, are the destruction of men, causing loss
of children to your nation;

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> For this reason you will no longer take
the lives of men and will never again be the cause of loss of children
to your nation, says the Lord.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> And I will not let the shaming of the
nations come to your ears, and no longer will you be looked down on by
the peoples, says the Lord.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Then the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Son of man, when the children of Israel
were living in their land, they made it unclean by their way and their
acts: their way before me was as when a woman is unclean at the time
when she is kept separate.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> So I let loose my wrath on them because
of those whom they had violently put to death in the land, and because
they had made it unclean with their images:

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And I sent them in flight among the
nations and wandering through the countries: I was their judge,
rewarding them for their way and their acts.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And when they came among the nations,
wherever they went, they made my holy name unclean, when it was said of
them, These are the people of the Lord who have gone out from his land.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But I had pity for my holy name which
the children of Israel had made unclean wherever they went.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> For this cause say to the children of
Israel, This is what the Lord has said: I am doing this, not because of
you, O children of Israel, but because of my holy name, which you have
made unclean among the nations wherever you went.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And I will make holy my great name
which has been made unclean among the nations, which you have made
unclean among them; and it will be clear to the nations that I am the
Lord, says the Lord, when I make myself holy in you before their eyes.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> For I will take you out from among the
nations, and get you together from all the countries, and take you into
your land.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And I will put clean water on you so
that you may be clean: from all your unclean ways and from all your
images I will make you clean.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And I will give you a new heart and put
a new spirit in you: I will take away the heart of stone from your
flesh, and give you a heart of flesh.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And I will put my spirit in you,
causing you to be guided by my rules, and you will keep my orders and do
them.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> So that you may go on living in the
land which I gave to your fathers; and you will be to me a people, and I
will be to you a God.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And I will make you free from all your
unclean ways: and at my voice the grain will come up and be increased,
and I will not let you be short of food.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And I will make the tree give more
fruit and the field fuller produce, and no longer will you be shamed
among the nations for need of food.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And at the memory of your evil ways and
your wrongdoings, you will have bitter hate for yourselves because of
your evil-doings and your disgusting ways, O children of Israel.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Not because of you am I doing it, says
the Lord; let it be clear to you, and be shamed and made low because of
your ways, O children of Israel.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> This is what the Lord has said: In the
day when I make you clean from all your evil-doings I will let the towns
be peopled and there will be building on the waste places.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And the land which was waste will be
farmed, in place of being a waste in the eyes of everyone who went by.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And they will say, This land which was
waste has become like the garden of Eden; and the towns which were
unpeopled and wasted and pulled down are walled and peopled.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> Then the rest of the nations round
about you will be certain that I the Lord am the builder of the places
which were pulled down and the planter of that which was waste: I the
Lord have said it, and I will do it.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> This is what the Lord has said: The
children of Israel will again make prayer to me for this, that I may do
it for them; I will make them increased with men like a flock.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> Like sheep for the offerings, like the
sheep of Jerusalem at her fixed feasts, so the unpeopled towns will be
made full of men: and they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> The hand of the Lord had been on me, and
he took me out in the spirit of the Lord and put me down in the middle
of the valley; and it was full of bones;

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he made me go past them round about:
and I saw that there was a very great number of them on the face of the
wide valley, and they were very dry.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he said to me, Son of man, is it
possible for these bones to come to life? And I made answer, and said,
It is for you to say, O Lord.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And again he said to me, Be a prophet to
these bones, and say to them, O you dry bones, give ear to the word of
the Lord.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> This is what the Lord has said to these
bones: See, I will make breath come into you so that you may come to
life;

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And I will put muscles on you and make
flesh come on you, and put skin over you, and breath into you, so that
you may have life; and you will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> So I gave the word as I was ordered: and
at my words there was a shaking of the earth, and the bones came
together, bone to bone.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And looking I saw that there were muscles
on them and flesh came up, and they were covered with skin: but there
was no breath in them.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And he said to me, Be a prophet to the
wind, be a prophet, son of man, and say to the wind, The Lord has said:
Come from the four winds, O wind, breathing on these dead so that they
may come to life.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And I gave the word at his orders, and
breath came into them, and they came to life and got up on their feet, a
very great army.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, these
bones are all the children of Israel: and see, they are saying, Our
bones have become dry our hope is gone, we are cut off completely.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> For this cause be a prophet to them,
and say, This is what the Lord has said: See, I am opening the
resting-places of your dead, and I will make you come up out of your
resting-places, O my people; and I will take you into the land of
Israel.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And you will be certain that I am the
Lord by my opening the resting-places of your dead and making you come
up out of your resting-places, O my people.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And I will put my spirit in you, so
that you may come to life, and I will give you a rest in your land: and
you will be certain that I the Lord have said it and have done it, says
the Lord.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And you, son of man, take one stick,
writing on it, For Judah and for the children of Israel who are in his
company: then take another stick, writing on it, For Joseph, the stick
of Ephraim, and all the children of Israel who are in his company:

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Then, joining them one to another, make
them one stick, so that they may be one in your hand.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And when the children of your people
say to you, Will you not make clear to us what these things have to do
with us?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Then say to them, This is what the Lord
has said: See, I am taking the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of
Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel who are in his company; and I will put
it on the stick of Judah and make them one stick, and they will be one
in my hand.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And the sticks with your writing on
them will be in your hand before their eyes.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And say to them, These are the words of
the Lord: See, I am taking the children of Israel from among the nations
where they have gone, and will get them together on every side, and take
them into their land:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> And I will make them one nation in the
land, on the mountains of Israel; and one king will be king over them
all: and they will no longer be two nations, and will no longer be
parted into two kingdoms:

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And they will no longer make themselves
unclean with their images or with their hated things or with any of
their sins: but I will give them salvation from all their turning away
in which they have done evil, and will make them clean; and they will be
to me a people, and I will be to them a God.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> And my servant David will be king over
them; and they will all have one keeper: and they will be guided by my
orders and will keep my rules and do them.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And they will be living in the land
which I gave to Jacob, my servant, in which your fathers were living;
and they will go on living there, they and their children and their
children's children, for ever: and David, my servant, will be their
ruler for ever.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And I will make an agreement of peace
with them: it will be an eternal agreement with them: and I will have
mercy on them and make their numbers great, and will put my holy place
among them for ever.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And my House will be over them; and I
will be to them a God, and they will be to me a people.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And the nations will be certain that I
who make Israel holy am the Lord, when my holy place is among them for
ever.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And the word of the Lord came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Son of man, let your face be turned
against Gog, of the land of Magog, the ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and
Tubal, and be a prophet against him,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And say, This is what the Lord has said:
See, I am against you, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And turning you round, I will put hooks
in your mouth and make you come out with all your army, horses and
horsemen, all of them in full war-dress, a great force with breastplate
and body-cover, all of them armed with swords:

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Persia, Cush, and Put with them; all of
them with body-cover and metal head-dress:

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Gomer and all her forces; the people of
Togarmah in the inmost parts of the north, with all his forces: a great
number of peoples with you.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Be ready, make yourself ready, you and
all the forces who are with you, and be ready for my orders.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> After a long time you will get your
orders: in the last years you will come into the land which has been
given back from the sword, which has been got together out of a great
number of peoples, on the mountains of Israel which have ever been a
waste: but it has been taken out from the peoples and they will be
living, all of them, without fear of danger.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And you will go up, you will come like a
storm, you will be like a cloud covering the land, you and all your
forces, and a great number of peoples with you.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> This is what the Lord has said: In that
day it will come about that things will come into your mind, and you
will have thoughts of an evil design:

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And you will say, I will go up to the
land of small unwalled towns; I will go to those who are quiet, living,
all of them, without fear of danger, without walls or locks or doors:

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> To take their property by force and go
off with their goods; turning your hand against the waste places which
now are peopled, and against the people who have been got together out
of the nations, who have got cattle and goods for themselves, who are
living in the middle of the earth.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Sheba, and Dedan and her traders,
Tarshish with all her traders, will say to you, Have you come to take
our goods? have you got your armies together to take away our property
by force? to take away silver and gold, cattle and goods, to go off with
great wealth?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> For this cause, son of man, be a
prophet and say to Gog, These are the words of the Lord: In that day,
when my people Israel are living without fear of danger, will you not be
moved against them?

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And you will come from your place in
the inmost parts of the north, you and a great number of peoples with
you, all of them on horseback, a great force and a strong army:

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And you will come up against my people
Israel, like a cloud covering the land; and it will come about, in the
last days, that I will make you come against my land, so that the
nations may have knowledge of me when I make myself holy in you, O Gog,
before their eyes.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> This is what the Lord has said: You are
he of whom I gave them word in earlier times by my servants, the
prophets of Israel, who in those days went on saying, year after year,
that I would make you come up against them.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And it will come about in that day,
when Gog comes up against the land of Israel, says the Lord, that my
wrath will come up, and my passion and my bitter feeling.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> For in the fire of my wrath I have
said, Truly, in that day there will be a great shaking in the land of
Israel;

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> So that the fish of the sea and the
birds of heaven and the beasts of the field and everything moving on the
earth, and all the men who are on the face of the earth, will be shaking
before me, and the mountains will be overturned and the high places will
come down, and every wall will come falling down to the earth.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> And I will send to all my mountains for
a sword against him, says the Lord: every man's sword will be against
his brother.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And I will take up my cause against him
with disease and with blood; and I will send down on him and on his
forces and on the peoples who are with him, an overflowing shower and
great ice-drops, fire, and burning.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And I will make my name great and make
myself holy, and I will make myself clear to a number of nations; and
they will be certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And you, son of man, be a prophet against
Gog, and say, These are the words of the Lord: See, I am against you, O
Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And turning you round, I will be your
guide, and make you come up from the inmost parts of the north; I will
make you come on to the mountains of Israel:

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And with a blow I will send your bow out
of your left hand and your arrows falling from your right hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> On the mountains of Israel you will come
down, you and all your forces and the peoples who are with you: I will
give you to cruel birds of every sort and to the beasts of the field to
be their food.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> You will come down in the open field: for
I have said it, says the Lord.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And I will send a fire on Magog, and on
those who are living in the sea-lands without fear: and they will be
certain that I am the Lord.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And I will make clear my holy name among
my people Israel; I will no longer let my holy name be made unclean: and
the nations will be certain that I am the Lord, the Holy One in Israel.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> See, it is coming and it will be done,
says the Lord; this is the day of which I have given word.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> And those who are living in the towns of
Israel will go out and make fires of the instruments of war, burning the
body-covers and the breastplates, the bows and the arrows and the sticks
and the spears, and for seven years they will make fires of them:

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And they will take no wood out of the
field or have any cut down in the woods; for they will make their fires
of the instruments of war: and they will take by force the property of
those who took their property, and go off with the goods of those who
took their goods, says the Lord.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And it will come about in those days,
that I will give to Gog a last resting-place there in Israel, in the
valley of Abarim on the east of the sea: and those who go through will
be stopped: and there Gog and all his people will be put to rest, and
the place will be named, The valley of Hamon-gog.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And the children of Israel will be
seven months putting them in the earth, so as to make the land clean.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> And all the people of the land will put
them in the earth; and it will be to their honour in the day when I let
my glory be seen, says the Lord.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And they will put on one side men to do
no other work but to go through the land and put in the earth the rest
of those who are still on the face of the land, to make it clean: after
seven months are ended they are to make a search.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And while they go through the land, if
anyone sees a man's bone, he is to put up a sign by the place till those
who are doing the work have put it in the earth in the valley of
Hamon-gog.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And there they will put all the army of
Gog in the earth. So they will make the land clean.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And you, son of man, this is what the
Lord has said: Say to the birds of every sort and to all the beasts of
the field, Get together and come; come together on every side to the
offering which I am putting to death for you, a great offering on the
mountains of Israel, so that you may have flesh for your food and blood
for your drink.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> The flesh of the men of war will be
your food, and your drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of
sheep and lambs, of he-goats, of oxen, all of them fat beasts of Bashan.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> You will go on feasting on the fat till
you are full, and drinking the blood till you are overcome with it, of
my offering which I have put to death for you.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> At my table you will have food in full
measure, horses and war-carriages, great men and all the men of war,
says the Lord.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And I will put my glory among the
nations, and all the nations will see my punishments which I have put
into effect, and my hand which I have put on them.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> So the children of Israel will be
certain that I am the Lord their God, from that day and for the future.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And it will be clear to the nations
that the children of Israel were taken away prisoners for their
evil-doing; because they did wrong against me, and my face was covered
from them: so I gave them up into the hands of their attackers, and they
all came to their end by the sword.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> In the measure of their unclean ways
and their sins, so I did to them; and I kept my face covered from them.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> For this cause the Lord has said, Now I
will let the fate of Jacob be changed, and I will have mercy on all the
children of Israel, and will take care of the honour of my holy name.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> And they will be conscious of their
shame and of all the wrong which they have done against me, when they
are living in their land with no sense of danger and with no one to be a
cause of fear to them;

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> When I have taken them back from among
the peoples and got them together out of the lands of their haters, and
have made myself holy in them before the eyes of a great number of
nations.

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And they will be certain that I am the
Lord their God, because I sent them away as prisoners among the nations,
and have taken them together back to their land; and I have not let one
of them be there any longer.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> And my face will no longer be covered
from them: for I have sent the out-flowing of my spirit on the children
of Israel, says the Lord.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> In the twenty-fifth year after we had
been taken away prisoners, in the first month of the year, on the tenth
day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the town was taken, on
the very same day, the hand of the Lord was on me, and he took me there.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> In the visions of God he took me into the
land of Israel, and put me down on a very high mountain, on which there
was, as it seemed, a building like a town opposite me.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> He took me there, and I saw a man,
looking like brass, with a linen cord in his hand and a measuring rod:
and he was stationed in the doorway.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And the man said to me, Son of man, see
with your eyes and give hearing with your ears, and take to heart
everything I am going to let you see; for in order that I might let you
see them, you have come here: and give an account of all you see to the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And there was a wall on the outside of
the house all round, and in the man's hand there was a measuring rod six
cubits long by a cubit and a hand's measure: so he took the measure of
the building from side to side, one rod; and from base to top, one rod.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then he came to the doorway looking to
the east, and went up by its steps; and he took the measure of the
doorstep, one rod wide.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And the watchmen's rooms were one rod
long and one rod wide; and the space between the rooms was five cubits;
the doorstep of the doorway, by the covered way of the doorway inside,
was one rod.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And he took the measure of the covered
way of the doorway inside,

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Eight cubits; and its uprights, two
cubits; the covered way of the doorway was inside.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And the rooms of the doorway on the
east were three on this side and three on that; all three were of the
same size; and the uprights on this side and on that were of the same
size.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And he took the measure of the opening
of the doorway, ten cubits wide; and the way down the doorway was
thirteen cubits;

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> And the space in front of the rooms, a
cubit on this side and a cubit on that side; and the rooms six cubits on
this side and six cubits on that.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And he took the measure of the doorway
from the back of one room to the back of the other, twenty-five cubits
across, from door to door.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And he took the measure of the covered
way, twenty cubits; and opening from the covered way of the doorway was
the open square round about.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And from before the opening of the
doorway to before the inner covered way of the doorway was fifty cubits.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And the rooms and their uprights had
sloping windows inside the doorway all round, and in the same way the
covered way had windows all round on the inside: and on every upright
there were palm-trees.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> Then he took me into the outer square,
and there were rooms and a stone floor made for the open square all
round: there were thirty rooms on the stone floor.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And the stone floor was by the side of
the doorways, and was as wide as the doorways were long, even the lower
floor.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Then he took the measure of the square
across, from before the lower doorway inside to before the inner doorway
outside, one hundred cubits. And he took me in the direction of the
north,

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And there was a doorway to the outer
square, looking to the north; and he took the measure of it to see how
wide and how long it was.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And it had three rooms on this side of
it and three on that; its uprights and its covered ways were the same
size as those of the first doorway: it was fifty cubits long and
twenty-five cubits wide.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And its windows, and the windows of its
covered ways, and its palm-trees, were the same as those of the doorway
looking to the east; and there were seven steps up to it; and the
covered way went inside.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And there was a doorway to the inner
square opposite the doorway on the north, like the doorway on the east;
and he took the measure from doorway to doorway, a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And he took me to the south, and I saw
a doorway looking to the south: and he took the measure of its rooms and
its uprights and its covered ways by these measures.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And there were windows in it and in the
covered way all round, like the other windows: it was fifty cubits long
and twenty-five cubits wide.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And there were seven steps up to it,
and its covered way went inside: and it had palm-trees, one on this side
and one on that, on its uprights.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> And there was a doorway to the inner
square looking to the south: he took the measure from doorway to doorway
to the south, a hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Then he took me to the inner square by
the south doorway: and he took the measure of the south doorway by these
measures;

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> And the rooms in it and the uprights
and the covered ways, by these measures:

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And there were windows in it and in the
covered way all round: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits
wide.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> The covered way was on the side nearest
the outer square; and there were palm-trees on the uprights: and there
were eight steps going up to it.

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> And he took me into the inner square
facing the east: and he took the measure of the doorway by these
measures;

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> And of the rooms in it and its uprights
and its covered ways, by these measures: and there were windows in it
and in the covered way round about: it was fifty cubits long and
twenty-five cubits wide.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> And the covered way was on the side
nearest the outer square; there were palm-trees on the uprights, on this
side and on that: and there were eight steps going up to it.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> And he took me to the north doorway:
and he took the measure of it by these measures;

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> Its rooms, its uprights, and its
covered way had the same measures, and its covered way had windows all
round: it was fifty cubits long and twenty-five cubits wide.

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> Its uprights were on the side nearest
to the outer square; there were palm-trees on the uprights, on this side
and on that: and there were eight steps going up to it.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> And there was a room with a door in the
covered way of the doorway, where the burned offering was washed.

<span id="an_40:39">40:39</span> And in the covered way of the doorway
there were two tables on this side and two tables on that side, on which
the burned offering and the sin-offering and the offering for error were
put to death:

<span id="an_40:40">40:40</span> On the outer side, to the north, as one
goes up to the opening of the doorway, were two tables.

<span id="an_40:41">40:41</span> There were four tables on one side and
four tables on the other, by the side of the doorway; eight tables, on
which they put to death the beasts for the offerings.

<span id="an_40:42">40:42</span> And there were four tables for the
burned offering, made of cut stone, one and a half cubits long, one and
a half cubits wide and a cubit high, where the instruments were placed
which were used for putting to death the burned offering and the beasts
for the offerings.

<span id="an_40:43">40:43</span> And they had edges all round as wide as
a man's hand: and on the tables was the flesh of the offerings.

<span id="an_40:44">40:44</span> And he took me into the inner square,
and there were two rooms in the inner square, one at the side of the
north doorway, facing south; and one at the side of the south doorway,
facing north.

<span id="an_40:45">40:45</span> And he said to me, This room, facing
south, is for the priests who have the care of the house.

<span id="an_40:46">40:46</span> And the room facing north is for the
priests who have the care of the altar: these are the sons of Zadok,
who, from among the sons of Levi, come near to the Lord to do the work
of his house.

<span id="an_40:47">40:47</span> And he took the measure of the open
square, a hundred cubits long and a hundred cubits wide, being square;
and the altar was in front of the house.

<span id="an_40:48">40:48</span> Then he took me to the covered way
before the house, and took the measure of its uprights, five cubits on
one side and five cubits on the other: and the doorway was fourteen
cubits wide; and the side-walls of the doorway were three cubits on one
side and three cubits on the other.

<span id="an_40:49">40:49</span> The covered way was twenty cubits long
and twelve cubits wide, and they went up to it by ten steps; and there
were pillars by the uprights, one on one side and one on the other.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> And he took me to the Temple, and took
the measure of the uprights, six cubits wide on one side and six cubits
wide on the other.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And the door-opening was ten cubits wide;
and the side walls of the door-opening were five cubits on one side and
five cubits on the other: and it was forty cubits long and twenty cubits
wide.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> And he went inside and took the measure
of the uprights of the door-opening, two cubits: and the door-opening,
six cubits; and the side-walls of the door-opening were seven cubits on
one side and seven cubits on the other.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And by his measure it was twenty cubits
long and twenty cubits wide in front of the Temple: and he said to me,
This is the most holy place.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Then he took the measure of the wall of
the house, which was six cubits; and of the side-rooms round the house,
which were four cubits wide.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And the side-rooms, room over room, were
three times thirty; there were inlets in the wall of the house for the
side-rooms round about, for supports in the wall of the house.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> The side-rooms became wider as they went
higher up the house, by the amount of the space let into the wall up
round about the house, because of the inlets in the house; and one went
up from the lowest floor by steps to the middle, and from the middle to
the upper floor.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> And I saw that the house had a stone
floor all round; the bases of the side-rooms were a full rod of six
great cubits high.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> The wall supporting the side-rooms on the
outside was five cubits thick: and there was a free space of five cubits
between the side-rooms of the house.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> And between the rooms was a space
twenty cubits wide all round the house.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And the free space had doors opening
from the side-rooms, one door on the north and one door on the south:
and the free space was five cubits wide all round.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> And the building which was in front of
the separate place at the side to the west was seventy cubits wide; the
wall of the building was five cubits thick all round and ninety cubits
long.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And he took the measure of the house;
it was a hundred cubits long; and the separate place and the building
with its walls was a hundred cubits long;

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> And the east front of the house and of
the separate place was a hundred cubits wide.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And he took the measure of the building
in front of the separate place which was at the back of it, and the
pillared walks on one side and on the other side; they were a hundred
cubits long; and the Temple and the inner part and its outer covered way
were covered in;

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> And the sloping windows and the covered
ways round all three of them were of shakiph-wood all round from the
level of the earth up to the windows;

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> And there was a roof over the doorway
and as far as the inner house, and to the outside and on the wall all
round, inside and outside.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> And it had pictured forms of winged
beings and palm-trees; a palm-tree between two winged ones, and every
winged one had two faces;

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> So that there was the face of a man
turned to the palm-tree on one side, and the face of a young lion on the
other side: so it was made all round the house.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> From earth level up to the windows
there were winged ones and palm-trees pictured on the wall.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> ...

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> The altar was made of wood, and was
three cubits high and two cubits long; it had angles, and its base and
sides were of wood; and he said to me, This is the table which is before
the Lord.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> The Temple had two doors.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> And the holy place had two doors, and
the doors had two turning leaves, two for one and two for the other.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> And on them were pictured winged ones
and palm-trees, as on the walls; and a ... of wood was on the front of
the covered way outside.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> And there were sloping windows and
palm-trees on one side and on the other, on the sides of the covered
way: and the side-rooms of the house and the ...

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And he took me out into the inner square
in the direction of the north: and he took me into the rooms which were
opposite the separate place and opposite the building to the north.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> On the north side it was a hundred cubits
long and fifty cubits wide,

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Opposite the space of twenty cubits which
was part of the inner square, and opposite the stone floor of the outer
square. There were covered ways facing one another on the third floor.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> And in front of the rooms was a walk, ten
cubits wide and a hundred cubits long; and their doors were facing
north.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And the higher rooms were shorter: for
the covered ways took up more space from these than from the lower and
middle rooms.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> For they were on three floors, and they
had no pillars like the pillars of the outer square; so the highest was
narrower than the lowest and middle floors from the earth level.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And the wall which went outside by the
side of the rooms, in the direction of the outer square in front of the
rooms, was fifty cubits long.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> For the rooms in the outer square were
fifty cubits long: and in front of the Temple was a space of a hundred
cubits.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And under these rooms was the way in from
the east side, as one goes into them from the outer square at the head
of the outer wall.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> (And he took me) to the south, and in
front of the separate place and in front of the building there were
rooms.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And there was a walk in front of them
like that by the rooms on the north; they were equally long and wide;
and the ways out of them were the same in design and had the same sort
of doors.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And under the rooms on the south was a
door at the head of the outer wall in the direction of the east as one
goes in.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And he said to me, The north rooms and
the south rooms in front of the separate place are the holy rooms, where
the priests who come near the Lord take the most holy things for their
food: there the most holy things are placed, with the meal offering and
the sin-offering and the offering for error; for the place is holy.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> When the priests go in, they may not go
out of the holy place into the outer square, and there they are to put
the robes in which they do the work of the Lord's house, for they are
holy: and they have to put on other clothing before they come near that
which has to do with the people.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And when he had come to the end of
measuring the inner house, he took me out to the doorway looking to the
east, and took its measure all round.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> He went round and took the measure of
it on the east side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured with
the rod all round.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> And he went round and took the measure
of it on the north side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured
with the rod all round.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> And he went round and took the measure
of it on the south side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured
with the rod all round.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> And he went round and took the measure
of it on the west side with the measuring rod, five hundred, measured
with the rod all round.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> He took its measure on the four sides:
and it had a wall all round, five hundred long and five hundred wide,
separating what was holy from what was common.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> And he took me to the doorway looking to
the east:

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And there was the glory of the God of
Israel coming from the way of the east: and his voice was like the sound
of great waters, and the earth was shining with his glory.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> And the vision which I saw was like the
vision I had seen when he came for the destruction of the town: and like
the vision which I saw by the river Chebar; and I went down on my face.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> And the glory of the Lord came into the
house by the way of the doorway looking to the east.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> And the spirit, lifting me up, took me
into the inner square; and I saw that the house was full of the glory of
the Lord.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And the voice of one talking to me came
to my ears from inside the house; and the man was by my side.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And he said to me, Son of man, this is
the place where the seat of my power is and the resting-place of my
feet, where I will be among the children of Israel for ever: and no
longer will the people of Israel make my holy name unclean, they or
their kings, by their loose ways and by the dead bodies of their kings;

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> By putting their doorstep by my doorstep,
and the pillar of their door by the pillar of my door, with only a wall
between me and them; and they have made my holy name unclean by the
disgusting things which they have done: so in my wrath I sent
destruction on them.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Now let them put their loose ways and the
dead bodies of their kings far from me, and I will be among them for
ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> You, son of man, give the children of
Israel an account of this house, so that they may be shamed because of
their evil-doing: and let them see the vision of it and its image.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> And they will be shamed by what they
have done; so give them the knowledge of the form of the house and its
structure, and the ways out of it and into it, and all its laws and its
rules, writing it down for them: so that they may keep all its laws and
do them.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> This is the law of the house: On the
top of the mountain all the space round it on every side will be most
holy. See, this is the law of the house.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And these are the measures of the altar
in cubits: (the cubit being a cubit and a hand's measure;) its hollow
base is a cubit high and a cubit wide, and it has an overhanging edge as
wide as a hand-stretch all round it:

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> And from the base on the earth level to
the lower shelf, the altar is two cubits high and a cubit wide; and from
the smaller shelf to the greater shelf it is four cubits high and a
cubit wide.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> And the fireplace is four cubits high:
and coming up from the fireplace are the horns, a cubit high.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And the fireplace is twelve cubits long
and twelve cubits wide, square on its four sides.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> And the shelf is fourteen cubits long
and fourteen cubits wide, on its four sides; the edge round it is half a
cubit; the base of it is a cubit all round, and its steps are facing the
east.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> And he said to me, Son of man, the Lord
God has said, These are the rules for the altar, when they make it, for
the offering of burned offerings on it and the draining out of the
blood.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> You are to give to the priests, the
Levites of the seed of Zadok, who come near to me, says the Lord God, to
do my work, a young ox for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> You are to take some of its blood and
put it on the four horns and on the four angles of the shelf and on the
edge all round: and you are to make it clean and free from sin.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> And you are to take the ox of the
sin-offering, and have it burned in the special place ordered for it in
the house, outside the holy place.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> And on the second day you are to have a
he-goat without any mark on it offered for a sin-offering; and they are
to make the altar clean as they did with the young ox.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> And after you have made it clean, let a
young ox without a mark be offered, and a male sheep from the flock
without a mark.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> And you are to take them before the
Lord, and the priests will put salt on them, offering them up for a
burned offering to the Lord.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> Every day for seven days you are to
give a goat for a sin-offering: and let them give in addition a young ox
and a male sheep from the flock without any mark on them.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> For seven days they are to make
offerings to take away sin from the altar and to make it clean; so they
are to make it holy.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> And when these days have come to an
end, then on the eighth day and after, the priests will make your burned
offerings on the altar and your peace-offerings; and I will take
pleasure in you, says the Lord.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> And he took me back to the outer doorway
of the holy place, looking to the east; and it was shut.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> And the Lord said to me, This doorway is
to be shut, it is not to be open, and no man is to go in by it, because
the Lord, the God of Israel, has gone in by it; and it is to be shut.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> But the ruler will be seated there to
take his food before the Lord; he will go in by the covered way to the
door, and will come out by the same way.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And he took me to the north doorway in
front of the house; and, looking, I saw that the house of the Lord was
full of the glory of the Lord; and I went down on my face.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> And the Lord said to me, Son of man, take
to heart, and let your eyes see and your ears be open to everything I
say to you about all the rules of the house of the Lord and all its
laws; and take note of the ways into the house and all the ways out of
the holy place.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> And say to the uncontrolled children of
Israel, This is what the Lord has said: O you children of Israel, let it
be enough for you, among the disgusting things which you have done,

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> To have let men from strange lands,
without circumcision of heart or flesh, come into my holy place, making
my house unclean; and to have made the offering of my food, even the fat
and the blood; and in addition to all your disgusting ways, you have let
my agreement be broken.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> And you have not taken care of my holy
things; but you have put them as keepers to take care of my work in my
holy place.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> For this cause the Lord has said, No man
from a strange land, without circumcision of heart and flesh, of all
those who are living among the children of Israel, is to come into my
holy place.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> But as for the Levites, who went far
from me, when Israel went out of the right way, turning away from me to
go after their images; their punishment will come on them.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> But they may be caretakers in my holy
place, and overseers at the doors of the house, doing the work of the
house: they will put to death the burned offering and the beasts offered
for the people, and they will take their place before them as their
servants.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Because they did this work for them
before their images, and became a cause of sin to the children of
Israel; for this cause my hand has been lifted up against them, says the
Lord, and their punishment will be on them.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> And they will not come near me to do
the work of priests to me, or come near any of my holy things, or the
things which are most holy: but their shame will be on them, and the
punishment for the disgusting things which they have done.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> But I will make them responsible for
the care of the house and all its work and everything which is done in
it.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> But as for the priests, the sons of
Zadok, who took care of my holy place when the children of Israel were
turned away from me, they are to come near me to do my work, they will
take their places before me, offering to me the fat and the blood, says
the Lord;

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> They are to come into my holy place and
they are to come near to my table, to do my work and have the care of my
house.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And when they come in by the doorways
of the inner square, they are to be clothed in linen robes; there is to
be no wool on them while they are doing my work in the doorway of the
inner square and inside the house.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They are to have linen head-dresses on
their heads and linen trousers on their legs, and they are to have
nothing round them to make their skin wet with heat.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And when they go out into the outer
square to the people, they are to take off the robes in which they do
the work of priests, and put them away in the holy rooms, and put on
other clothing, so that the people may not be made holy by their robes.

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> They are not to have all the hair cut
off their heads, and they are not to let their hair get long, but they
are to have the ends of their hair cut.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> The priests are not to take wine when
they go into the inner square.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> And they are not to take as wives any
widow or woman whose husband has put her away: but they may take virgins
of the seed of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a priest.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> And they are to make clear to my people
the division between what is holy and what is common, and to give them
the knowledge of what is clean and what is unclean.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> In any cause, they are to be in the
position of judges, judging in harmony with my decisions: they are to
keep my laws and my rules in all my fixed feasts; and they are to keep
my Sabbaths holy.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> They are not to come near any dead
person so as to become unclean: but for a father or mother or son or
daughter or brother or for a sister who has no husband, they may make
themselves unclean.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And after he has been made clean, seven
days are to be numbered for him.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And on the day when he goes into the
inner square, to do the work of the holy place, he is to make his
sin-offering, says the Lord.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> And they are to have no heritage; I am
their heritage: you are to give them no property in Israel; I am their
property.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> Their food is to be the meal offering
and the sin-offering and the offering for error; and everything given
specially to the Lord in Israel will be theirs.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> And the best of all the first-fruits of
everything, and every offering which is lifted up of all your offerings,
will be for the priests: and you are to give the priest the first of
your bread-making, so causing a blessing to come on your house.

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> The priests may not take for food any
bird or beast which has come to a natural death or whose death has been
caused by another animal.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> And when you are making a distribution of
the land, by the decision of the Lord, for your heritage, you are to
make an offering to the Lord of a part of the land as holy: it is to be
twenty-five thousand long and twenty thousand wide: all the land inside
these limits is to be holy.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Of this, a square five hundred long and
five hundred wide is to be for the holy place, with a space of fifty
cubits all round it.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And of this measure, let a space be
measured, twenty-five thousand long and ten thousand wide: in it there
will be the holy place, even the most holy.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> This holy part of the land is to be for
the priests, the servants of the holy place, who come near to the Lord
to do his work; it is to be a place for their houses and for grass-land
and for cattle.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> A space of land twenty-five thousand long
and ten thousand wide is to be for the Levites, the servants of the
house, a property for themselves, for towns for their living-places.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> And as the property for the town you are
to have a part five thousand wide and twenty-five thousand long, by the
side of the offering of the holy part of the land: this is to be for all
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> And for the ruler there is to be a part
on one side and on the other side of the holy offering and of the
property of the town, in front of the holy offering and in front of the
property of the town on the west of it and on the east: measured in the
same line as one of the parts of the land, from its limit on the west to
its limit on the east of the land.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> And this will be his heritage in Israel:
and my rulers will no longer be cruel masters to my people; but they
will give the land as a heritage to the children of Israel by their
tribes.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> This is what the Lord has said: Let this
be enough for you, O rulers of Israel: let there be an end of violent
behaviour and wasting; do what is right, judging uprightly; let there be
no more driving out of my people, says the Lord.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Have true scales and a true ephah and a
true bath.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> The ephah and the bath are to be of the
same measure, so that the bath is equal to a tenth of a homer, and the
ephah to a tenth of a homer: the unit of measure is to be a homer.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> And the shekel is to be twenty gerahs:
five shekels are five, and ten shekels are ten, and your maneh is to be
fifty shekels

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> This is the offering you are to give: a
sixth of an ephah out of a homer of wheat, and a sixth of an ephah out
of a homer of barley;

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> And the fixed measure of oil is to be a
tenth of a bath from the cor, for ten baths make up the cor;

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> And one lamb from the flock out of
every two hundred, from all the families of Israel, for a meal offering
and for a burned offering and for peace-offerings, to take away their
sin, says the Lord.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> All the people are to give this
offering to the ruler.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And the ruler will be responsible for
the burned offering and the meal offering and the drink offering, at the
feasts and the new moons and the Sabbaths, at all the fixed feasts of
the children of Israel: he will give the sin-offering and meal offering
and burned offering and the peace-offerings, to take away the sin of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> This is what the Lord has said: In the
first month, on the first day of the month, you are to take a young ox
without any mark on him, and you are to make the holy place clean.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> And the priest is to take some of the
blood of the sin-offering and put it on the uprights at the sides of the
doors of the house, and on the four angles of the shelf of the altar,
and on the sides of the doorway of the inner square.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> And this you are to do on the seventh
day of the month for everyone who is in error and for the feeble-minded:
you are to make the house free from sin.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> In the first month, on the fourteenth
day of the month, you are to have the Passover, a feast of seven days;
unleavened bread is to be your food.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> And on that day the ruler is to give
for himself and for all the people of the land an ox for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> And on the seven days of the feast he
is to give a burned offering to the Lord, seven oxen and seven sheep
without any mark on them, every day for seven days; and a he-goat every
day for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> And he is to give a meal offering, an
ephah for every ox and an ephah for every sheep and a hin of oil to
every ephah.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the seventh month, on the fifteenth
day of the month, at the feast, he is to give the same for seven days;
the sin-offering, the burned offering, the meal offering, and the oil as
before.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> This is what the Lord has said: The
doorway of the inner square looking to the east is to be shut on the six
working days; but on the Sabbath it is to be open, and at the time of
the new moon it is to be open.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> And the ruler is to go in through the
covered way of the outer doorway outside, and take his place by the
pillar of the doorway, and the priests will make his burned offering and
his peace-offerings and he will give worship at the doorstep of the
doorway; then he will go out, and the door will not be shut till the
evening.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> And the people of the land are to give
worship at the door of that doorway before the Lord on the Sabbaths and
at the new moons.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> And the burned offering offered to the
Lord by the ruler on the Sabbath day is to be six lambs without a mark
on them and a male sheep without a mark;

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> And the meal offering is to be an ephah
for the sheep, and for the lambs whatever he is able to give, and a hin
of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And at the time of the new moon it is to
be a young ox of the herd without a mark on him, and six lambs and a
male sheep, all without a mark:

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> And he is to give a meal offering, an
ephah for the ox and an ephah for the sheep, and for the lambs whatever
he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And when the ruler comes in, he is to go
in through the covered way of the doorway, and he is to go out by the
same way.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> But when the people of the land come
before the Lord at the fixed feasts, he who comes in by the north
doorway to give worship is to go out by the south doorway; and he who
comes in by the south doorway is to go out by the north doorway: he is
not to come back by the doorway through which he went in, but is to go
straight before him.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And the ruler, when they come in, is to
come among them, and is to go out when they go out.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> At the feasts and the fixed meetings
the meal offerings are to be an ephah for an ox, and an ephah for a male
sheep, and for the lambs whatever he is able to give, and a hin of oil
to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> And when the ruler makes a free
offering, a burned offering or a peace-offering freely given to the
Lord, the doorway looking to the east is to be made open for him, and he
is to make his burned offering and his peace-offerings as he does on the
Sabbath day: and he will go out; and the door will be shut after he has
gone out.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> And you are to give a lamb a year old
without any mark on it for a burned offering to the Lord every day:
morning by morning you are to give it.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> And you are to give, morning by
morning, a meal offering with it, a sixth of an ephah and a third of a
hin of oil dropped on the best meal; a meal offering offered to the Lord
at all times by an eternal order.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> And they are to give the lamb and the
meal offering and the oil, morning by morning, for a burned offering at
all times.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> This is what the Lord has said: If the
ruler gives a property to any of his sons, it is his heritage and will
be the property of his sons; it is theirs for their heritage.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> And if he gives a part of his heritage
to one of his servants, it will be his till the year of making free, and
then it will go back to the ruler; for it is his sons' heritage, and is
to be theirs.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> And the ruler is not to take the
heritage of any of the people, driving them out of their property; he is
to give a heritage to his sons out of the property which is his: so that
my people may not be sent away from their property.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> And he took me through by the way in at
the side of the doorway into the holy rooms which are the priests',
looking to the north: and I saw a place at the side of them to the west.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And he said to me, This is the place
where the offering for error and the sin-offering are to be cooked in
water by the priests, and where the meal offering is to be cooked in the
oven; so that they may not be taken out into the outer square to make
the people holy.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> And he took me out into the outer
square and made me go by the four angles of the square; and I saw that
in every angle of the open square there was a space shut in.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> In the four angles there were spaces
walled in, forty cubits long and thirty wide; the four were of the same
size.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And there was a line of wall all round
inside them, round all four, and boiling-places were made under it all
round about.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> And he said to me, These are the
boiling-rooms, where the offering of the people is cooked by the
servants of the house.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> And he took me back to the door of the
house; and I saw that waters were flowing out from under the doorstep of
the house on the east, for the house was facing east: and the waters
came down from under, from the right side of the house, on the south
side of the altar.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> And he took me out by the north doorway,
and made me go round to the outside of the doorway looking to the east;
and I saw waters running slowly out on the south side.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> And the man went out to the east with the
line in his hand, and after measuring a thousand cubits, he made me go
through the waters, which came over my feet.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> And again, measuring a thousand cubits,
he made me go through the waters which came up to my knees. Again,
measuring a thousand, he made me go through the waters up to the middle
of my body.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Again, after his measuring a thousand, it
became a river which it was not possible to go through: for the waters
had become deep enough for swimming, a river it was not possible to go
through.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> And he said to me, Son of man, have you
seen this? Then he took me to the river's edge.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> And he took me back, and I saw at the
edge of the river a very great number of trees on this side and on that.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And he said to me, These waters are
flowing out to the east part of the land and down into the Arabah; and
they will go to the sea, and the waters will be made sweet.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> And it will come about that every living
and moving thing, wherever their streams come, will have life; and there
will be very much fish because these waters have come there and have
been made sweet: and everything wherever the river comes will have life.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And fishermen will take up their places
by it: from En-gedi as far as En-eglaim will be a place for the
stretching out of nets; the fish will be of every sort, like the fish of
the Great Sea, a very great number.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> The wet places and the pools will not
be made sweet; they will be given up to salt.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And by the edge of the river, on this
side and on that, will come up every tree used for food, whose leaves
will ever be green and its fruit will not come to an end: it will have
new fruit every month, because its waters come out from the holy place:
the fruit will be for food and the leaf will make well those who are
ill.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> This is what the Lord has said: These
are the limits by which you will take up your heritage in the land among
the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph is to have two parts.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> And you are to make an equal division
of it; as I gave my oath to your fathers to give it to you: for this
land is to be your heritage.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And this is to be the limit of the
land: on the north side, from the Great Sea, in the direction of
Hethlon, as far as the way into Hamath;

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> To Zedad, Berothah, Sibraim, which is
between the limit of Damascus and the limit of Hazar-hatticon, which is
on the limit of Hauran.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> And this is the limit from the sea in
the direction of Hazar-enon; and the limit of Damascus is to the north,
and on the north is the limit of Hamath. This is the north side.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> And the east side will be from
Hazar-enon, which is between Hauran and Damascus; and between Gilead and
the land of Israel the Jordan will be the limit, to the east sea, to
Tamar. This is the east side.

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> And the south side to the south will be
from Tamar as far as the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the stream of
Egypt, to the Great Sea. This is the south side, on the south.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> And the west side will be the Great
Sea, from the limit on the south to a point opposite the way into
Hamath. This is the west side.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> You will make a division of the land
among you, tribe by tribe.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> And you are to make a distribution of
it, by the decision of the Lord, for a heritage to you and to the men
from other lands who are living among you and who have children in your
land: they will be the same to you as if they were Israelites by birth,
they will have their heritage with you among the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> In whatever tribe the man from a
strange land is living, there you are to give him his heritage, says the
Lord.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Now these are the names of the tribes:
from the north end, from the west on the way of Hethlon to the way into
Hamath, in the direction of Hazar-enon, with the limit of Damascus to
the north, by Hamath; and on the limit from the east side to the west
side: Dan, one part.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And on the limit of Dan, from the east
side to the west side: Asher, one part.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And on the limit of Asher, from the east
side to the west side: Naphtali, one part.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> And on the limit of Naphtali, from the
east side to the west side: Manasseh, one part.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> And on the limit of Manasseh, from the
east side to the west side: Ephraim, one part.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> And on the limit of Ephraim, from the
east side to the west side: Reuben, one part.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> And on the limit of Reuben, from the east
side to the west side: Judah, one part.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> And on the limit of Judah, from the east
side to the west side, will be the offering which you are to make,
twenty-five thousand wide, and as long as one of the parts, from the
east side to the west side: and the holy place will be in the middle of
it.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> The offering you will give to the Lord is
to be twenty-five thousand long and twenty-five thousand wide.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> And for these, that is the priests, the
holy offering is to be twenty-five thousand long to the north, ten
thousand wide to the west, ten thousand wide to the east and twenty-five
thousand long to the south; and the holy place of the Lord will be in
the middle of it.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> For the priests who have been made
holy, those of the sons of Zadok who kept the orders I gave them, who
did not go out of the right way when the children of Israel went from
the way, as the Levites did,

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Even for them will be the offering from
the offering of the land, a thing most holy, on the limit of the land
given to the Levites.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> And the Levites are to have a part of
the land equal to the limit of the priests', twenty-five thousand long
and ten thousand wide, all of it together to be twenty-five thousand
long and twenty thousand wide.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> And they are not to let any of it go
for a price, or give it in exchange; and the part of the land given to
the Lord is not to go into other hands: for it is holy to the Lord.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And the other five thousand, measured
from side to side, in front of the twenty-five thousand, is to be for
common use, for the town, for living in and for a free space: and the
town will be in the middle of it.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> And these will be its measures: the
north side, four thousand five hundred, and the south side, four
thousand five hundred, and on the east side, four thousand five hundred,
and on the west side, four thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> And the town will have a free space on
the north of two hundred and fifty, on the south of two hundred and
fifty, on the east of two hundred and fifty, and on the west of two
hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And the rest, in measure as long as the
holy offering, will be ten thousand to the east and ten thousand to the
west: and its produce will be for food for the workers of the town.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> It will be farmed by workers of the
town from all the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> The size of the offering all together
is to be twenty-five thousand by twenty-five thousand: you are to make
the holy offering a square, together with the property of the town.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And the rest is to be for the prince,
on this side and on that side of the holy offering and of the property
of the town, in front of the twenty-five thousand to the east, as far as
the east limit, and to the west, in front of the twenty-five thousand,
as far as the west limit, and of the same measure as those parts; it
will be the property of the prince: and the holy offering and holy place
of the house will be in the middle of it.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> And the property of the Levites and the
property of the town will be in the middle of the prince's property;
between the limit of Judah's part and the limit of Benjamin's part will
be for the prince.

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> And as for the rest of the tribes: from
the east side to the west side: Benjamin, one part.

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> And on the limit of Benjamin, from the
east side to the west side: Simeon, one part.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> And on the limit of Simeon, from the
east side to the west side: Issachar, one part.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> And on the limit of Issachar, from the
east side to the west side: Zebulun, one part.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> And on the limit of Zebulun, from the
east side to the west side: Gad one part.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> And on the limit of Gad, on the south
side and to the south of it, the limit will be from Tamar to the waters
of Meribath-kadesh, to the stream, to the Great Sea.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> This is the land of which distribution
is to be made by the decision of the Lord, among the tribes of Israel
for their heritage, and these are their heritages, says the Lord.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> And these are the outskirts of the
town: on the north side, four thousand five hundred by measure;

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> And the doors of the town are to be
named by the names of the tribes of Israel; three doors on the north,
one for Reuben, one for Judah, one for Levi;

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> And at the east side, four thousand
five hundred by measure, and three doors, one for Joseph, one for
Benjamin, one for Dan;

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> And at the south side, four thousand
five hundred by measure, and three doors, one for Simeon, one for
Issachar, one for Zebulun;

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> At the west side, four thousand five
hundred by measure, with their three doors, one for Gad, one for Asher,
one for Naphtali.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> It is to be eighteen thousand all
round: and the name of the town from that day will be, The Lord is
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel](dan)
