[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Next](exo) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Genesis

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> At the first God made the heaven and the
earth.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the earth was waste and without form;
and it was dark on the face of the deep: and the Spirit of God was
moving on the face of the waters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And God said, Let there be light: and there
was light.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And God, looking on the light, saw that it
was good: and God made a division between the light and the dark,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Naming the light, Day, and the dark, Night.
And there was evening and there was morning, the first day.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And God said, Let there be a solid arch
stretching over the waters, parting the waters from the waters.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And God made the arch for a division
between the waters which were under the arch and those which were over
it: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And God gave the arch the name of Heaven.
And there was evening and there was morning, the second day.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And God said, Let the waters under the
heaven come together in one place, and let the dry land be seen: and it
was so.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And God gave the dry land the name of
Earth; and the waters together in their place were named Seas: and God
saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And God said, Let grass come up on the
earth, and plants producing seed, and fruit-trees giving fruit, in which
is their seed, after their sort: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And grass came up on the earth, and every
plant producing seed of its sort, and every tree producing fruit, in
which is its seed, of its sort: and God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, the third day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And God said, Let there be lights in the
arch of heaven, for a division between the day and the night, and let
them be for signs, and for marking the changes of the year, and for days
and for years:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And let them be for lights in the arch of
heaven to give light on the earth: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And God made the two great lights: the
greater light to be the ruler of the day, and the smaller light to be
the ruler of the night: and he made the stars.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And God put them in the arch of heaven,
to give light on the earth;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> To have rule over the day and the night,
and for a division between the light and the dark: and God saw that it
was good.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, the fourth day.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And God said, Let the waters be full of
living things, and let birds be in flight over the earth under the arch
of heaven.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And God made great sea-beasts, and every
sort of living and moving thing with which the waters were full, and
every sort of winged bird: and God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And God gave them his blessing, saying,
Be fertile and have increase, making all the waters of the seas full,
and let the birds be increased in the earth.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And there was evening and there was
morning, the fifth day.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And God said, Let the earth give birth to
all sorts of living things, cattle and all things moving on the earth,
and beasts of the earth after their sort: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And God made the beast of the earth after
its sort, and the cattle after their sort, and everything moving on the
face of the earth after its sort: and God saw that it was good.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And God said, Let us make man in our
image, like us: and let him have rule over the fish of the sea and over
the birds of the air and over the cattle and over all the earth and over
every living thing which goes flat on the earth.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And God made man in his image, in the
image of God he made him: male and female he made them.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And God gave them his blessing and said
to them, Be fertile and have increase, and make the earth full and be
masters of it; be rulers over the fish of the sea and over the birds of
the air and over every living thing moving on the earth.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And God said, See, I have given you every
plant producing seed, on the face of all the earth, and every tree which
has fruit producing seed: they will be for your food:

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And to every beast of the earth and to
every bird of the air and every living thing moving on the face of the
earth I have given every green plant for food: and it was so.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And God saw everything which he had made
and it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the
sixth day.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the heaven and the earth and all things
in them were complete.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And on the seventh day God came to the end
of all his work; and on the seventh day he took his rest from all the
work which he had done.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And God gave his blessing to the seventh
day and made it holy: because on that day he took his rest from all the
work which he had made and done.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> These are the generations of the heaven and
the earth when they were made.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> In the day when the Lord God made earth and
heaven there were no plants of the field on the earth, and no grass had
come up: for the Lord God had not sent rain on the earth and there was
no man to do work on the land.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But a mist went up from the earth, watering
all the face of the land.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the Lord God made man from the dust of
the earth, breathing into him the breath of life: and man became a
living soul.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And the Lord God made a garden in the east,
in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had made.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And out of the earth the Lord made every
tree to come, delighting the eye and good for food; and in the middle of
the garden, the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And a river went out of Eden giving water
to the garden; and from there it was parted and became four streams.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The name of the first is Pishon, which
goes round about all the land of Havilah where there is gold.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And the gold of that land is good: there
is bdellium and the onyx stone.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the name of the second river is
Gihon: this river goes round all the land of Cush.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the name of the third river is
Tigris, which goes to the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is
Euphrates.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And the Lord God took the man and put him
in the garden of Eden to do work in it and take care of it.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the Lord God gave the man orders,
saying, You may freely take of the fruit of every tree of the garden:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But of the fruit of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil you may not take; for on the day when you
take of it, death will certainly come to you.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the Lord God said, It is not good for
the man to be by himself: I will make one like himself as a help to him

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And from the earth the Lord God made
every beast of the field and every bird of the air, and took them to the
man to see what names he would give them: and whatever name he gave to
any living thing, that was its name.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the man gave names to all cattle and
to the birds of the air and to every beast of the field; but Adam had no
one like himself as a help.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And the Lord God sent a deep sleep on the
man, and took one of the bones from his side while he was sleeping,
joining up the flesh again in its place:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the bone which the Lord God had taken
from the man he made into a woman, and took her to the man.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And the man said, This is now bone of my
bone and flesh of my flesh: let her name be Woman because she was taken
out of Man.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> For this cause will a man go away from
his father and his mother and be joined to his wife; and they will be
one flesh.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And the man and his wife were without
clothing, and they had no sense of shame.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now the snake was wiser than any beast of
the field which the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman, Has God
truly said that you may not take of the fruit of any tree in the garden?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the woman said, We may take of the
fruit of the trees in the garden:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But of the fruit of the tree in the middle
of the garden, God has said, If you take of it or put your hands on it,
death will come to you.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the snake said, Death will not
certainly come to you:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For God sees that on the day when you take
of its fruit, your eyes will be open, and you will be as gods, having
knowledge of good and evil.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And when the woman saw that the tree was
good for food, and a delight to the eyes, and to be desired to make one
wise, she took of its fruit, and gave it to her husband.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And their eyes were open and they were
conscious that they had no clothing and they made themselves coats of
leaves stitched together.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And there came to them the sound of the
Lord God walking in the garden in the evening wind: and the man and his
wife went to a secret place among the trees of the garden, away from the
eyes of the Lord God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And the voice of the Lord God came to the
man, saying, Where are you?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said, Hearing your voice in the
garden I was full of fear, because I was without clothing: and I kept
myself from your eyes.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And he said, Who gave you the knowledge
that you were without clothing? Have you taken of the fruit of the tree
which I said you were not to take?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the man said, The woman whom you gave
to be with me, she gave me the fruit of the tree and I took it.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And the Lord God said to the woman, What
have you done? And the woman said, I was tricked by the deceit of the
snake and I took it.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the Lord God said to the snake,
Because you have done this you are cursed more than all cattle and every
beast of the field; you will go flat on the earth, and dust will be your
food all the days of your life:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And there will be war between you and the
woman and between your seed and her seed: by him will your head be
crushed and by you his foot will be wounded.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> To the woman he said, Great will be your
pain in childbirth; in sorrow will your children come to birth; still
your desire will be for your husband, but he will be your master.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And to Adam he said, Because you gave ear
to the voice of your wife and took of the fruit of the tree which I said
you were not to take, the earth is cursed on your account; in pain you
will get your food from it all your life.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Thorns and waste plants will come up, and
the plants of the field will be your food;

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> With the hard work of your hands you will
get your bread till you go back to the earth from which you were taken:
for dust you are and to the dust you will go back.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And the man gave his wife the name of Eve
because she was the mother of all who have life.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And the Lord God made for Adam and for
his wife coats of skins for their clothing.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the Lord God said, Now the man has
become like one of us, having knowledge of good and evil; and now if he
puts out his hand and takes of the fruit of the tree of life, he will go
on living for ever.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> So the Lord God sent him out of the
garden of Eden to be a worker on the earth from which he was taken.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> So he sent the man out; and at the east
of the garden of Eden he put winged ones and a flaming sword turning
every way to keep the way to the tree of life.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the man had connection with Eve his
wife, and she became with child and gave birth to Cain, and said, I have
got a man from the Lord.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Then again she became with child and gave
birth to Abel, his brother. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was
a farmer.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And after a time, Cain gave to the Lord an
offering of the fruits of the earth.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Abel gave an offering of the young
lambs of his flock and of their fat. And the Lord was pleased with
Abel's offering;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But in Cain and his offering he had no
pleasure. And Cain was angry and his face became sad.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the Lord said to Cain, Why are you
angry? and why is your face sad?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> If you do well, will you not have honour?
and if you do wrong, sin is waiting at the door, desiring to have you,
but do not let it be your master.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Cain said to his brother, Let us go
into the field: and when they were in the field, Cain made an attack on
his brother Abel and put him to death.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And the Lord said to Cain, Where is your
brother Abel? And he said, I have no idea: am I my brother's keeper?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And he said, What have you done? the
voice of your brother's blood is crying to me from the earth.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And now you are cursed from the earth,
whose mouth is open to take your brother's blood from your hand;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No longer will the earth give you her
fruit as the reward of your work; you will be a wanderer in flight over
the earth.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And Cain said, My punishment is greater
than my strength.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> You have sent me out this day from the
face of the earth and from before your face; I will be a wanderer in
flight over the earth, and whoever sees me will put me to death.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And the Lord said, Truly, if Cain is put
to death, seven lives will be taken for his. And the Lord put a mark on
Cain so that no one might put him to death.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Cain went away from before the face
of the Lord, and made his living-place in the land of Nod on the east of
Eden.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And Cain had connection with his wife and
she became with child and gave birth to Enoch: and he made a town, and
gave the town the name of Enoch after his son.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Enoch had a son Irad: and Irad became
the father of Mehujael: and Mehujael became the father of Methushael:
and Methushael became the father of Lamech.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And Lamech had two wives; the name of the
one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Adah gave birth to Jabal: he was the
father of such as are living in tents and keep cattle.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And his brother's name was Jubal: he was
the father of all players on instruments of music.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And Zillah gave birth to Tubal-cain, who
is the father of every maker of cutting instruments of brass and iron:
and the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Lamech said to his wives, Adah and
Zillah, give ear to my voice; you wives of Lamech, give attention to my
words, for I would put a man to death for a wound, and a young man for a
blow;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> If seven lives are to be taken as
punishment for Cain's death, seventy-seven will be taken for Lamech's.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And Adam had connection with his wife
again, and she gave birth to a son to whom she gave the name of Seth:
for she said, God has given me another seed in place of Abel, whom Cain
put to death.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And Seth had a son, and he gave him the
name of Enosh: at this time men first made use of the name of the Lord
in worship.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> This is the book of the generations of
Adam. In the day when God made man, he made him in the image of God;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Male and female he made them, naming them
Man, and giving them his blessing on the day when they were made.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Adam had been living for a hundred and
thirty years when he had a son like himself, after his image, and gave
him the name of Seth:

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And after the birth of Seth, Adam went on
living for eight hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And all the years of Adam's life were nine
hundred and thirty: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And Seth was a hundred and five years old
when he became the father of Enosh:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And he went on living after the birth of
Enosh for eight hundred and seven years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And all the years of Seth's life were nine
hundred and twelve: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Enosh was ninety years old when he
became the father of Kenan:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And after the birth of Kenan, Enosh went
on living for eight hundred and fifteen years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And all the years of Enosh were nine
hundred and five: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And Kenan was seventy years old when he
became the father of Mahalalel:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And after the birth of Mahalalel, Kenan
went on living for eight hundred and forty years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And all the years of Kenan's life were
nine hundred and ten; and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And Mahalalel was sixty-five years old
when he became the father of Jared:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And after the birth of Jared, Mahalalel
went on living for eight hundred and thirty years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And all the years of Mahalalel's life
were eight hundred and ninety-five: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And Jared was a hundred and sixty-two
years old when he became the father of Enoch:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And Jared went on living after the birth
of Enoch for eight hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And all the years of Jared's life were
nine hundred and sixty-two: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Enoch was sixty-five years old when
he became the father of Methuselah:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And after the birth of Methuselah, Enoch
went on in God's ways for three hundred years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And all the years of Enoch's life were
three hundred and sixty-five:

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And Enoch went on in God's ways: and he
was not seen again, for God took him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And Methuselah was a hundred and
eighty-seven years old when he became the father of Lamech:

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And after the birth of Lamech, Methuselah
went on living for seven hundred and eighty-two years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And all the years of Methuselah's life
were nine hundred and sixty-nine: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And Lamech was a hundred and eighty-two
years old when he had a son:

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And he gave him the name of Noah, saying,
Truly, he will give us rest from our trouble and the hard work of our
hands, because of the earth which was cursed by God.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And after the birth of Noah, Lamech went
on living for five hundred and ninety-five years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And all the years of Lamech's life were
seven hundred and seventy-seven: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And when Noah was five hundred years old,
he became the father of Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And after a time, when men were increasing
on the earth, and had daughters,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The sons of God saw that the daughters of
men were fair; and they took wives for themselves from those who were
pleasing to them.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And the Lord said, My spirit will not be in
man for ever, for he is only flesh; so the days of his life will be a
hundred and twenty years.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> There were men of great strength and size
on the earth in those days; and after that, when the sons of God had
connection with the daughters of men, they gave birth to children: these
were the great men of old days, the men of great name.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the Lord saw that the sin of man was
great on the earth, and that all the thoughts of his heart were evil.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And the Lord had sorrow because he had made
man on the earth, and grief was in his heart.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the Lord said, I will take away man,
whom I have made, from the face of the earth, even man and beast and
that which goes on the earth and every bird of the air; for I have
sorrow for having made them.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But Noah had grace in the eyes of God.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> These are the generations of Noah. Noah was
an upright man and without sin in his generation: he went in the ways of
God.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and
Japheth.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the earth was evil in God's eyes and
full of violent ways.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And God, looking on the earth, saw that
it was evil: for the way of all flesh had become evil on the earth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And God said to Noah, The end of all
flesh has come; the earth is full of their violent doings, and now I
will put an end to them with the earth.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Make for yourself an ark of gopher wood
with rooms in it, and make it safe from the water inside and out.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And this is the way you are to make it:
it is to be three hundred cubits long, fifty cubits wide, and thirty
cubits high.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> You are to put a window in the ark, a
cubit from the roof, and a door in the side of it, and you are to make
it with a lower and second and third floors.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For truly, I will send a great flow of
waters over the earth, for the destruction from under the heaven of all
flesh in which is the breath of life; everything on the earth will come
to an end.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> But with you I will make an agreement;
and you will come into the ark, you and your sons and your wife and your
sons' wives with you.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And you will take with you into the ark
two of every sort of living thing, and keep them safe with you; they
will be male and female.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Two of every sort of bird and cattle and
of every sort of living thing which goes on the earth will you take with
you to keep them from destruction.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And make a store of every sort of food
for yourself and them.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And all these things Noah did; as God
said, so he did.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the Lord said to Noah, Take all your
family and go into the ark, for you only in this generation have I seen
to be upright.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Of every clean beast you will take seven
males and seven females, and of the beasts which are not clean, two, the
male and his female;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And of the birds of the air, seven males
and seven females, so that their seed may still be living on the face of
the earth.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For after seven days I will send rain on
the earth for forty days and forty nights, for the destruction of every
living thing which I have made on the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And Noah did everything which the Lord said
he was to do.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Noah was six hundred years old when the
waters came flowing over all the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Noah, with his sons and his wife and
his sons' wives, went into the ark because of the flowing of the waters.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Of clean beasts, and of beasts which are
not clean, and of birds, and of everything which goes on the earth,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> In twos, male and female, they went into
the ark with Noah, as God had said.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And after the seven days, the waters came
over all the earth.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> In the six hundredth year of Noah's life,
in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, all the
fountains of the great deep came bursting through, and the windows of
heaven were open;

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And rain came down on the earth for forty
days and forty nights.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> On the same day Noah, with Shem, Ham, and
Japheth, his sons, and his wife and his sons' wives, went into the ark;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And with them, every sort of beast and
cattle, and every sort of thing which goes on the earth, and every sort
of bird.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> They went with Noah into the ark, two and
two of all flesh in which is the breath of life.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Male and female of all flesh went in, as
God had said, and the ark was shut by the Lord.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And for forty days the waters were over
all the earth; and the waters were increased so that the ark was lifted
up high over the earth.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the waters overcame everything and
were increased greatly on the earth, and the ark was resting on the face
of the waters.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the waters overcame everything on the
earth; and all the mountains under heaven were covered.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The waters went fifteen cubits higher,
till all the mountains were covered.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And destruction came on every living
thing moving on the earth, birds and cattle and beasts and everything
which went on the earth, and every man.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Everything on the dry land, in which was
the breath of life, came to its end.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Every living thing on the face of all the
earth, man and cattle and things moving on the face of the earth, and
birds of the air, came to destruction: only Noah and those who were with
him in the ark, were kept from death.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And the waters were over the earth a
hundred and fifty days.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And God kept Noah in mind, and all the
living things and the cattle which were with him in the ark: and God
sent a wind over the earth, and the waters went down.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And the fountains of the deep and the
windows of heaven were shut, and the rain from heaven was stopped.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And the waters went slowly back from the
earth, and at the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters were lower.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And on the seventeenth day of the seventh
month the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And still the waters went on falling, till
on the first day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains were seen.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Then, after forty days, through the open
window of the ark which he had made,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Noah sent out a raven, which went this way
and that till the waters were gone from the earth.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And he sent out a dove, to see if the
waters had gone from the face of the earth;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But the dove saw no resting-place for her
foot, and came back to the ark, for the waters were still over all the
earth; and he put out his hand, and took her into the ark.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And after waiting another seven days, he
sent the dove out again;

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the dove came back at evening, and in
her mouth was an olive-leaf broken off: so Noah was certain that the
waters had gone down on the earth.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And after seven days more, he sent the
dove out again, but she did not come back to him.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And in the six hundred and first year, on
the first day of the first month, the waters were dry on the earth: and
Noah took the cover off the ark and saw that the face of the earth was
dry.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And on the twenty-seventh day of the
second month the earth was dry.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And God said to Noah,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Go out of the ark, you and your wife and
your sons and your sons' wives.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Take out with you every living thing
which is with you, birds and cattle and everything which goes on the
earth, so that they may have offspring and be fertile and be increased
on the earth.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And Noah went out with his sons and his
wife and his sons' wives;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And every beast and bird and every living
thing of every sort which goes on the earth, went out of the ark.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Noah made an altar to the Lord, and
from every clean beast and bird he made burned offerings on the altar.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And when the sweet smell came up to the
Lord, he said in his heart, I will not again put a curse on the earth
because of man, for the thoughts of man's heart are evil from his
earliest days; never again will I send destruction on all living things
as I have done.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> While the earth goes on, seed time and
the getting in of the grain, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and
night, will not come to an end.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And God gave his blessing to Noah and his
sons, and said, Be fertile, and have increase, and make the earth full.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And the fear of you will be strong in every
beast of the earth and every bird of the air; everything which goes on
the land, and all the fishes of the sea, are given into your hands.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Every living and moving thing will be food
for you; I give them all to you as before I gave you all green things.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> But flesh with the life-blood in it you may
not take for food.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And for your blood, which is your life,
will I take payment; from every beast I will take it, and from every man
will I take payment for the blood of his brother-man.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Whoever takes a man's life, by man will his
life be taken; because God made man in his image.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And now, be fertile and have increase; have
offspring on the earth and become great in number.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And God said to Noah and to his sons,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Truly, I will make my agreement with you
and with your seed after you,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And with every living thing with you, all
birds and cattle and every beast of the earth which comes out of the ark
with you.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And I will make my agreement with you;
never again will all flesh be cut off by the waters; never again will
the waters come over all the earth for its destruction.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And God said, This is the sign of the
agreement which I make between me and you and every living thing with
you, for all future generations:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> I will put my bow in the cloud and it
will be for a sign of the agreement between me and the earth.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And whenever I make a cloud come over the
earth, the bow will be seen in the cloud,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And I will keep in mind the agreement
between me and you and every living thing; and never again will there be
a great flow of waters causing destruction to all flesh.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And the bow will be in the cloud, and
looking on it, I will keep in mind the eternal agreement between God and
every living thing on the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And God said to Noah, This is the sign of
the agreement which I have made between me and all flesh on the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And the sons of Noah who went out of the
ark were Shem, Ham, and Japheth; and Ham is the father of Canaan.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> These three were the sons of Noah and
from them all the earth was peopled.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> In those days Noah became a farmer, and
he made a vine-garden.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he took of the wine of it and was
overcome by drink; and he was uncovered in his tent.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw his
father unclothed, and gave news of it to his two brothers outside.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Shem and Japheth took a robe, and
putting it on their backs went in with their faces turned away, and put
it over their father so that they might not see him unclothed.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And, awaking from his wine, Noah saw what
his youngest son had done to him, and he said,

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Cursed be Canaan; let him be a servant of
servants to his brothers.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And he said, Praise to the Lord, the God
of Shem; let Canaan be his servant.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> May God make Japheth great, and let his
living-place be in the tents of Shem, and let Canaan be his servant.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And Noah went on living three hundred and
fifty years after the great flow of waters;

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> all the years of his life were nine
hundred and fifty: and he came to his end.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now these are the generations of the sons
of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: these are the sons which they had after
the great flow of waters

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> The sons of Japheth: Gomer and Magog and
Madai and Javan and Tubal and Meshech and Tiras.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz and
Riphath and Togarmah.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And the sons of Javan: Elishah and
Tarshish, the Kittim and the Dodanim.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> From these came the nations of the
sea-lands, with their different families and languages.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And the sons of Ham: Cush and Mizraim and
Put and Canaan.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the sons of Cush: Seba and Havilah
and Sabtah and Raamah and Sabteca; and the sons of Raamah: Sheba and
Dedan.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And Cush was the father of Nimrod, who
was the first of the great men of the earth.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He was a very great bowman, so that there
is a saying, Like Nimrod, a very great bowman.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And at the first, his kingdom was Babel
and Erech and Accad and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> From that land he went out into
Assyria, building Nineveh with its wide streets and Calah,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And Resen between Nineveh and Calah,
which is a very great town.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Mizraim was the father of the Ludim
and Anamim and Lehabim and Naphtuhim;

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And Pathrusim and Casluhim and
Caphtorim, from whom came the Philistines.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And Canaan was the father of Zidon, who
was his oldest son, and Heth,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And the Jebusite and the Amorite and
the Girgashite,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the Hivite and the Arkite and the
Sinite,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the Arvadite and the Zemarite and
the Hamathite; after that the families of the Canaanites went far and
wide in all directions;

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Their country stretching from Zidon to
Gaza, in the direction of Gerar; and to Lasha, in the direction of Sodom
and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> All these, with their different
families, languages, lands, and nations, are the offspring of Ham.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Shem, the older brother of Japheth,
the father of the children of Eber, had other sons in addition.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> These are the sons of Shem: Elam and
Asshur and Arpachshad and Lud and Aram.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And the sons of Aram: Uz and Hul and
Gether and Mash.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Arpachshad became the father of
Shelah; and Shelah became the father of Eber.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And Eber had two sons: the name of the
one was Peleg, because in his time the peoples of the earth became
separate; and his brother's name was Joktan.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Joktan was the father of Almodad
and Sheleph and Hazarmaveth and Jerah

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And Hadoram and Uzal and Diklah

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Obal and Abimael and Sheba

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Ophir and Havilah and Jobab; all
these were the sons of Joktan.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And their country was from Mesha, in
the direction of Sephar, the mountain of the east.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> These, with their families and their
languages and their lands and their nations, are the offspring of Shem.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> These are the families of the sons of
Noah, in the order of their generations and their nations: from these
came all the nations of the earth after the great flow of waters.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And all the earth had one language and
one tongue.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And it came about that in their wandering
from the east, they came to a stretch of flat country in the land of
Shinar, and there they made their living-place.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And they said one to another, Come, let
us make bricks, burning them well. And they had bricks for stone,
putting them together with sticky earth.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they said, Come, let us make a town,
and a tower whose top will go up as high as heaven; and let us make a
great name for ourselves, so that we may not be wanderers over the face
of the earth.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the Lord came down to see the town
and the tower which the children of men were building.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the Lord said, See, they are all one
people and have all one language; and this is only the start of what
they may do: and now it will not be possible to keep them from any
purpose of theirs.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Come, let us go down and take away the
sense of their language, so that they will not be able to make
themselves clear to one another.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> So the Lord God sent them away into every
part of the earth: and they gave up building their town.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> So it was named Babel, because there the
Lord took away the sense of all languages and from there the Lord sent
them away over all the face of the earth.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> These are the generations of Shem. Shem
was a hundred years old when he became the father of Arpachshad, two
years after the great flow of waters;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And after the birth of Arpachshad, Shem
went on living for five hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And Arpachshad was thirty-five years
old when he became the father of Shelah:

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And after the birth of Shelah,
Arpachshad went on living for four hundred and three years, and had sons
and daughters:

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Shelah was thirty years old when he
became the father of Eber:

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And after the birth of Eber, Shelah
went on living for four hundred and three years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And Eber was thirty-four years old when
he became the father of Peleg:

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And after the birth of Peleg, Eber went
on living for four hundred and thirty years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And Peleg was thirty years old when he
became the father of Reu:

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And after the birth of Reu, Peleg went
on living for two hundred and nine years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And Reu was thirty-two years old when
he became the father of Serug:

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And after the birth of Serug, Reu went
on living for two hundred and seven years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Serug was thirty years old when he
became the father of Nahor:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And after the birth of Nahor, Serug
went on living for two hundred years, and had sons and daughters:

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And Nahor was twenty-nine years old
when he became the father of Terah:

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And after the birth of Terah, Nahor
went on living for a hundred and nineteen years, and had sons and
daughters:

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And Terah was seventy years old when he
became the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> These are the generations of Terah:
Terah was the father of Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran was the
father of Lot.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And death came to Haran when he was
with his father Terah in the land of his birth, Ur of the Chaldees.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Abram and Nahor took wives for
themselves: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor's
wife was Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah and Iscah.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Sarai had no child.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And Terah took Abram, his son, and Lot,
the son of Haran, and Sarai, his daughter-in-law, the wife of his son
Abram and they went out from Ur of the Chaldees, to go to the land of
Canaan; and they came to Haran, and were there for some time.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And all the years of Terah's life were
two hundred and five: and Terah came to his end in Haran.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now the Lord said to Abram, Go out from
your country and from your family and from your father's house, into the
land to which I will be your guide:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And I will make of you a great nation,
blessing you and making your name great; and you will be a blessing:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> To them who are good to you will I give
blessing, and on him who does you wrong will I put my curse: and you
will become a name of blessing to all the families of the earth.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> So Abram went as the Lord had said to
him, and Lot went with him: Abram was seventy-five years old when he
went away from Haran.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And Abram took Sarai, his wife, and Lot,
his brother's son, and all their goods and the servants which they had
got in Haran, and they went out to go to the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And Abram went through the land till he
came to Shechem, to the holy tree of Moreh. At that time, the Canaanites
were still living in the land.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And the Lord came to Abram, and said, I
will give all this land to your seed; then Abram made an altar there to
the Lord who had let himself be seen by him.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And moving on from there to the mountain
on the east of Beth-el, he put up his tent, having Beth-el on the west
and Ai on the east: and there he made an altar and gave worship to the
name of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he went on, journeying still to the
South.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And because there was little food to be
had in that land, he went down into Egypt.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Now when he came near to Egypt, he said
to Sarai, his wife, Truly, you are a fair woman and beautiful to the
eye;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And I am certain that when the men of
Egypt see you, they will say, This is his wife: and they will put me to
death and keep you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Say, then, that you are my sister, and
so it will be well with me because of you, and my life will be kept safe
on your account.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And so it was that when Abram came into
Egypt, the men of Egypt, looking on the woman, saw that she was fair.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And Pharaoh's great men, having seen
her, said words in praise of her to Pharaoh, and she was taken into
Pharaoh's house.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And because of her, he was good to
Abram, and he had sheep and oxen and asses, and men-servants and
women-servants, and camels.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And the Lord sent great troubles on
Pharaoh's house because of Sarai, Abram's wife.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Then Pharaoh sent for Abram, and said,
What have you done to me? why did you not say that she was your wife?

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Why did you say that she was your
sister? so that I took her for my wife: now, take your wife and go on
your way.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Pharaoh gave orders to his men, and
they sent him on his way, with his wife and all he had.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Abram went up out of Egypt with his
wife and all he had, and Lot with him, and they came in to the South.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Now Abram had great wealth of cattle and
silver and gold.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And travelling on from the South, he came
to Beth-el, to the place where his tent had been before, between Beth-el
and Ai;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> To the place where he had made his first
altar, and there Abram gave worship to the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Lot, who went with him, had flocks
and herds and tents;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So that the land was not wide enough for
the two of them: their property was so great that there was not room for
them together.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And there was an argument between the
keepers of Abram's cattle and the keepers of Lot's cattle: at that time
the Canaanites and Perizzites were still living in the land.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Then Abram said to Lot, Let there be no
argument between me and you, and between my herdmen and your herdmen,
for we are brothers.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Is not all the land before you? then let
us go our separate ways: if you go to the left, I will go to the right;
or if you take the right, I will go to the left.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And Lot, lifting up his eyes and
looking an the valley of Jordan, saw that it was well watered
everywhere, before the Lord had sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah;
it was like the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt, on the way
to Zoar.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> So Lot took for himself all the valley
of Jordan, and went to the east, and they were parted from one another.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Abram went on living in the land of
Canaan, and Lot went to the lowland towns, moving his tent as far as
Sodom.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Now the men of Sodom were evil, and
great sinners before the Lord.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And the Lord had said to Abram, after
Lot was parted from him, From this place where you are take a look to
the north and to the south, to the east and to the west:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For all the land which you see I will
give to you and to your seed for ever.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And I will make your children like the
dust of the earth, so that if the dust of the earth may be numbered,
then will your children be numbered.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Come, go through all the land from one
end to the other for I will give it to you.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And Abram, moving his tent, came and
made his living-place by the holy tree of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and
made an altar there to the Lord.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now in the days of Amraphel, king of
Shinar, Arioch, king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and Tidal,
king of Goiim,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> They made war with Bera, king of Sodom,
and with Birsha, king of Gomorrah, Shinab, king of Admah, and Shemeber,
king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (which is Zoar).

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> All these came together in the valley of
Siddim (which is the Salt Sea).

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For twelve years they were under the rule
of Chedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they put off his control.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And in the fourteenth year, Chedorlaomer
and the kings who were on his side, overcame the Rephaim in
Ashteroth-karnaim, and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in
Shaveh-kiriathaim,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And the Horites in their mountain Seir,
driving them as far as El-paran, which is near the waste land.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Then they came back to En-mishpat (which
is Kadesh), making waste all the country of the Amalekites and of the
Amorites living in Hazazon-tamar.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the king of Sodom with the king of
Gomorrah and the king of Admah and the king of Zeboiim and the king of
Bela (that is Zoar), went out, and put their forces in position in the
valley of Siddim,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Against Chedorlaomer, king of Elam, and
Tidal, king of Goiim, and Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of
Ellasar: four kings against the five.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Now the valley of Siddim was full of
holes of sticky earth; and the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah were put to
flight and came to their end there, but the rest got away to the
mountain.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And the four kings took all the goods
and food from Sodom and Gomorrah and went on their way.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And in addition they took Lot, Abram's
brother's son, who was living in Sodom, and all his goods.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And one who had got away from the fight
came and gave word of it to Abram the Hebrew, who was living by the holy
tree of Mamre, the Amorite, the brother of Eshcol and Aner, who were
friends of Abram.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Abram, hearing that his brother's
son had been made a prisoner, took a band of his trained men, three
hundred and eighteen of them, sons of his house, and went after them as
far as Dan.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And separating his forces by night, he
overcame them, putting them to flight and going after them as far as
Hobah, which is on the north side of Damascus.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he got back all the goods, and Lot,
his brother's son, with his goods and the women and the people.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And when he was coming back after
putting to flight Chedorlaomer and the other kings, he had a meeting
with the king of Sodom in the valley of Shaveh, that is, the King's
Valley.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And Melchizedek, king of Salem, the
priest of the Most High God, took bread and wine,

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And blessing him, said, May the
blessing of the Most High God, maker of heaven and earth, be on Abram:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And let the Most High God be praised,
who has given into your hands those who were against you. Then Abram
gave him a tenth of all the goods he had taken.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the king of Sodom said to Abram,
Give me the prisoners and take the goods for yourself.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But Abram said to the king of Sodom, I
have taken an oath to the Lord, the Most High God, maker of heaven and
earth,

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> That I will not take so much as a
thread or the cord of a shoe of yours; so that you may not say, I have
given wealth to Abram:

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> Give me nothing but the food which the
fighting-men who went with me have had; but let Aner and Eshcol and
Mamre have their part of the goods.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> After these things, the word of the Lord
came to Abram in a vision, saying, Have no fear, Abram: I will keep you
safe, and great will be your reward.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Abram said, What will you give me?
for I have no child and this Eliezer of Damascus will have all my wealth
after me.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And Abram said, You have given me no
child, and a servant in my house will get the heritage.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Then said the Lord, This man will not get
the heritage, but a son of your body will have your property after you.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And he took him out into the open air,
and said to him, Let your eyes be lifted to heaven, and see if the stars
may be numbered; even so will your seed be.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And he had faith in the Lord, and it was
put to his account as righteousness.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And he said to him, I am the Lord, who
took you from Ur of the Chaldees, to give you this land for your
heritage.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And he said, O Lord God, how may I be
certain that it will be mine?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And he said, Take a young cow of three
years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a sheep of three years
old, and a dove and a young pigeon.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> All these he took, cutting them in two
and putting one half opposite the other, but not cutting the birds in
two.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And evil birds came down on the bodies,
but Abram sent them away.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Now when the sun was going down, a deep
sleep came on Abram, and a dark cloud of fear.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And he said to Abram, Truly, your seed
will be living in a land which is not theirs, as servants to a people
who will be cruel to them for four hundred years;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But I will be the judge of that nation
whose servants they are, and they will come out from among them with
great wealth.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> As for you, you will go to your fathers
in peace; at the end of a long life you will be put in your last
resting-place.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And in the fourth generation they will
come back here; for at present the sin of the Amorite is not full.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Then when the sun went down and it was
dark, he saw a smoking fire and a flaming light which went between the
parts of the bodies.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> In that day the Lord made an agreement
with Abram, and said, To your seed have I given this land from the river
of Egypt to the great river, the river Euphrates:

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The Kenite, the Kenizzite, and the
Kadmonite,

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and
the Rephaim,

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and
the Girgashite, and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now Sarai, Abram's wife, had given him no
children; and she had a servant, a woman of Egypt whose name was Hagar.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And Sarai said to Abram, See, the Lord
has not let me have children; go in to my servant, for I may get a
family through her. And Abram did as Sarai said.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> So after Abram had been living for ten
years in the land of Canaan, Sarai took Hagar, her Egyptian servant, and
gave her to Abram for his wife.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And he went in to Hagar and she became
with child, and when she saw that she was with child, she no longer had
any respect for her master's wife.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And Sarai said to Abram, May my wrong be
on you: I gave you my servant for your wife and when she saw that she
was with child, she no longer had any respect for me: may the Lord be
judge between you and me.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Abram said, The woman is in your
power; do with her whatever seems good to you. And Sarai was cruel to
her, so that she went running away from her.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And an angel of the Lord came to her by a
fountain of water in the waste land, by the fountain on the way to Shur.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And he said, Hagar, Sarai's servant,
where have you come from and where are you going? And she said, I am
running away from Sarai, my master's wife.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And the angel said to her, Go back, and
put yourself under her authority.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And the angel of the Lord said, Your
seed will be greatly increased so that it may not be numbered.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And the angel of the Lord said, See,
you are with child and will give birth to a son, to whom you will give
the name Ishmael, because the ears of the Lord were open to your sorrow.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And he will be like a mountain ass
among men; his hand will be against every man and every man's hand
against him, and he will keep his place against all his brothers.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And to the Lord who was talking with
her she gave this name, You are a God who is seen; for she said, Have I
not even here in the waste land had a vision of God and am still living?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> So that fountain was named, Fountain of
Life and Vision: it is between Kadesh and Bered.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And Hagar gave birth to a child, the
son of Abram, to whom Abram gave the name of Ishmael.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Abram was eighty-six years old when
Hagar gave birth to Ishmael.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the
Lord came to him, and said, I am God, Ruler of all; go in my ways and be
upright in all things,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And I will make an agreement between you
and me, and your offspring will be greatly increased.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And Abram went down on his face on the
earth, and the Lord God went on talking with him, and said,

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> As for me, my agreement is made with you,
and you will be the father of nations without end.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> No longer will your name be Abram, but
Abraham, for I have made you the father of a number of nations.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> I will make you very fertile, so that
nations will come from you and kings will be your offspring.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And I will make between me and you and
your seed after you through all generations, an eternal agreement to be
a God to you and to your seed after you.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And to you and to your seed after you, I
will give the land in which you are living, all the land of Canaan for
an eternal heritage; and I will be their God.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And God said to Abraham, On your side,
you are to keep the agreement, you and your seed after you through all
generations.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And this is the agreement which you are
to keep with me, you and your seed after you: every male among you is to
undergo circumcision.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> In the flesh of your private parts you
are to undergo it, as a mark of the agreement between me and you.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Every male among you, from one
generation to another, is to undergo circumcision when he is eight days
old, with every servant whose birth takes place in your house, or for
whom you gave money to someone of another country, and not of your seed.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> He who comes to birth in your house and
he who is made yours for a price, all are to undergo circumcision; so
that my agreement may be marked in your flesh, an agreement for all
time.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And any male who does not undergo
circumcision will be cut off from his people: my agreement has been
broken by him.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And God said, As for Sarai, your wife,
from now her name will be not Sarai, but Sarah.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And I will give her a blessing so that
you will have a son by her: truly my blessing will be on her, and she
will be the mother of nations: kings of peoples will be her offspring.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Then Abraham went down on his face, and
laughing, said in his heart, May a man a hundred years old have a child?
will Sarah, at ninety years old, give birth?

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And Abraham said to God, If only
Ishmael's life might be your care!

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And God said, Not so; but Sarah, your
wife, will have a son, and you will give him the name Isaac, and I will
make my agreement with him for ever and with his seed after him.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> As for Ishmael, I have given ear to
your prayer: truly I have given him my blessing and I will make him
fertile and give him great increase; he will be the father of twelve
chiefs, and I will make him a great nation.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> But my agreement will be with Isaac, to
whom Sarah will give birth a year from this time.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And having said these words, God went
up from Abraham.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And Abraham took Ishmael, his son, and
all whose birth had taken place in his house, and all his servants whom
he had made his for a price, every male of his house, and on that very
day he gave them circumcision in the flesh of their private parts as God
had said to him.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Abraham was ninety-nine years old when
he underwent circumcision.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And Ishmael, his son, was thirteen
years old when he underwent circumcision.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Abraham and Ishmael, his son, underwent
circumcision on that very day.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And all the men of his house, those
whose birth had taken place in the house and those whom he had got for
money from men of other lands, underwent circumcision with him.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Now the Lord came to him by the holy tree
of Mamre, when he was seated in the doorway of his tent in the middle of
the day;

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And lifting up his eyes, he saw three men
before him; and seeing them, he went quickly to them from the door of
the tent, and went down on his face to the earth;

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And said, My Lord, if now I have grace in
your eyes, do not go away from your servant:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Let me get water for washing your feet,
and take your rest under the tree:

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And let me get a bit of bread to keep up
your strength, and after that you may go on your way: for this is why
you have come to your servant. And they said, Let it be so.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> Then Abraham went quickly into the tent,
and said to Sarah, Get three measures of meal straight away and make
cakes.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And running to the herd, he took a young
ox, soft and fat, and gave it to the servant and he quickly made it
ready;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And he took butter and milk and the young
ox which he had made ready and put it before them, waiting by them under
the tree while they took food.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And they said to him, Where is Sarah your
wife? And he said, She is in the tent.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And he said, I will certainly come back
to you in the spring, and Sarah your wife will have a son. And his words
came to the ears of Sarah who was at the back of the tent-door.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now Abraham and Sarah were very old,
and Sarah was past the time for giving birth.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And Sarah, laughing to herself, said,
Now that I am used up am I still to have pleasure, my husband himself
being old?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And the Lord said, Why was Sarah
laughing and saying, Is it possible for me, being old, to give birth to
a child?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Is there any wonder which the Lord is
not able to do? At the time I said, in the spring, I will come back to
you, and Sarah will have a child.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Then Sarah said, I was not laughing;
for she was full of fear. And he said, No, but you were laughing.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And the men went on from there in the
direction of Sodom; and Abraham went with them on their way.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the Lord said, Am I to keep back
from Abraham the knowledge of what I do;

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Seeing that Abraham will certainly
become a great and strong nation, and his name will be used by all the
nations of the earth as a blessing?

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> For I have made him mine so that he may
give orders to his children and those of his line after him, to keep the
ways of the Lord, to do what is good and right: so that the Lord may do
to Abraham as he has said.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And the Lord said, Because the outcry
against Sodom and Gomorrah is very great, and their sin is very evil,

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> I will go down now, and see if their
acts are as bad as they seem from the outcry which has come to me; and
if they are not, I will see.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And the men, turning from that place,
went on to Sodom: but Abraham was still waiting before the Lord.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And Abraham came near, and said, Will
you let destruction come on the upright with the sinners?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> If by chance there are fifty upright
men in the town, will you give the place to destruction and not have
mercy on it because of the fifty upright men?

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Let such a thing be far from you, to
put the upright to death with the sinner: will not the judge of all the
earth do right?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And the Lord said, If there are fifty
upright men in the town, I will have mercy on it because of them.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Abraham answering said, Truly, I
who am only dust, have undertaken to put my thoughts before the Lord:

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> If by chance there are five less than
fifty upright men, will you give up all the town to destruction because
of these five? And he said, I will not give it to destruction if there
are forty-five.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And again he said to him, By chance
there may be forty there. And he said, I will not do it if there are
forty.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And he said, Let not the Lord be angry
with me if I say, What if there are thirty there? And he said, I will
not do it if there are thirty.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And he said, See now, I have undertaken
to put my thoughts before the Lord: what if there are twenty there? And
he said, I will have mercy because of the twenty.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And he said, O let not the Lord be
angry and I will say only one word more: by chance there may be ten
there. And he said, I will have mercy because of the ten.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> And the Lord went on his way when his
talk with Abraham was ended, and Abraham went back to his place.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And at nightfall the two angels came to
Sodom; and Lot was seated at the way into the town: and when he saw them
he got up and came before them, falling down on his face to the earth.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And he said, My masters, come now into
your servant's house and take your rest there for the night, and let
your feet be washed; and early in the morning you may go on your way.
And they said, Not so, but we will take our night's rest in the street.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> But he made his request more strongly, so
they went with him into his house; and he got food ready for them, and
made unleavened bread, of which they took.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> But before they had gone to bed, the men
of the town, all the men of Sodom, came round the house, young and old,
from every part of the town;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And crying out to Lot, they said, Where
are the men who came to your house this night? Send them out to us, so
that we may take our pleasure with them.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Lot went out to them in the doorway,
shutting the door after him.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And he said, My brothers, do not this
evil.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> See now, I have two unmarried daughters;
I will send them out to you so that you may do to them whatever seems
good to you: only do nothing to these men, for this is why they have
come under the shade of my roof.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And they said, Give way there. This one
man, they said, came here from a strange country, and will he now be our
judge? now we will do worse to you than to them; and pushing violently
against Lot, they came near to get the door broken in.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> But the men put out their hands and
took Lot into the house to them, shutting the door again.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But the men who were outside the door
they made blind, all of them, small and great, so that they were tired
out with looking for the door.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Then the men said to Lot, Are there any
others of your family here? sons-in-law or sons or daughters, take them
all out of this place;

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> For we are about to send destruction on
this place, because a great outcry against them has come to the ears of
the Lord; and the Lord has sent us to put an end to the town.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Lot went out and said to his
sons-in-law, who were married to his daughters, Come, let us go out of
this place, for the Lord is about to send destruction on the town. But
his sons-in-law did not take him seriously.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And when morning came, the angels did
all in their power to make Lot go, saying, Get up quickly and take your
wife and your two daughters who are here, and go, for fear that you come
to destruction in the punishment of the town.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> But while he was waiting, the men took
him and his wife and his daughters by the hand, for the Lord had mercy
on them, and put them outside the town.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And when they had put them out, he
said, Go for your life, without looking back or waiting in the lowland;
go quickly to the mountain or you will come to destruction.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And Lot said to them, Not so, O my
Lord;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> See now, your servant has had grace in
your eyes and great is your mercy in keeping my life from destruction,
but I am not able to get as far as the mountain before evil overtakes me
and death;

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> This town, now, is near, and it is a
little one: O, let me go there (is it not a little one?) so that my life
may be safe.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he said, See, I have given you your
request in this one thing more: I will not send destruction on this
town.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Go there quickly, for I am not able to
do anything till you have come there. For this reason, the town was
named Zoar.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The sun was up when Lot came to Zoar.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> Then the Lord sent fire and flaming
smoke raining down from heaven on Sodom and Gomorrah.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And he sent destruction on those towns,
with all the lowland and all the people of those towns and every green
thing in the land.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> But Lot's wife, looking back, became a
pillar of salt.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And Abraham got up early in the morning
and went to the place where he had been talking with the Lord:

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And looking in the direction of Sodom
and Gomorrah and the lowland, he saw the smoke of the land going up like
the smoke of an oven.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> So it came about that when God sent
destruction on the towns of the lowland, he kept his word to Abraham,
and sent Lot safely away when he put an end to the towns where he was
living.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> Then Lot went up out of Zoar to the
mountain, and was living there with his two daughters, for fear kept him
from living in Zoar: and he and his daughters made their living-place in
a hole in the rock.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And the older daughter said to her
sister, Our father is old, and there is no man to be a husband to us in
the natural way:

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Come, let us give our father much wine,
and we will go into his bed, so that we may have offspring by our
father,

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And that night they made their father
take much wine; and the older daughter went into his bed; and he had no
knowledge of when she went in or when she went away.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And on the day after, the older
daughter said to the younger, Last night I was with my father; let us
make him take much wine this night again, and do you go to him, so that
we may have offspring by our father.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And that night again they made their
father take much wine; and the younger daughter went into his bed; and
he had no knowledge of when she went in or when she went away.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> And so the two daughters of Lot were
with child by their father.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And the older daughter had a son, and
she gave him the name Moab: he is the father of the Moabites to this
day.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And the younger had a son and gave him
the name Ben-ammi: from him come the children of Ammon to this day.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Abraham went on his way from there to
the land of the South, and was living between Kadesh and Shur, in Gerar.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And Abraham said of Sarah, his wife, She
is my sister: and Abimelech, king of Gerar, sent and took Sarah.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> But God came to Abimelech in a dream in
the night, and said to him, Truly you are a dead man because of the
woman whom you have taken; for she is a man's wife.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Now Abimelech had not come near her; and
he said, Lord, will you put to death an upright nation?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Did he not say to me himself, She is my
sister? and she herself said, He is my brother: with an upright heart
and clean hands have I done this.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And God said to him in the dream, I see
that you have done this with an upright heart, and I have kept you from
sinning against me: for this reason I did not let you come near her.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> So now, give the man back his wife, for
he is a prophet, and let him say a prayer for you, so your life may be
safe: but if you do not give her back, be certain that death will come
to you and all your house.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> So Abimelech got up early in the morning
and sent for all his servants and gave them word of these things, and
they were full of fear.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Then Abimelech sent for Abraham, and
said, What have you done to us? what wrong have I done you that you have
put on me and on my kingdom so great a sin? You have done to me things
which are not to be done.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Abimelech said to Abraham, Why did
you do this thing?

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Abraham said, Because it seemed to
me that there was no fear of God in this place, and that they might put
me to death because of my wife.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And, in fact, she is my sister, the
daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became
my wife:

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And when God sent me wandering from my
father's house, I said to her, Let this be the sign of your love for me;
wherever we go, say of me, He is my brother.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Then Abimelech gave to Abraham sheep
and oxen and men-servants and women-servants, and gave him back his wife
Sarah.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And Abimelech said, See, all my land is
before you; take whatever place seems good to you.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And he said to Sarah, See, I have given
to your brother a thousand bits of silver so that your wrong may be put
right; now your honour is clear in the eyes of all.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Then Abraham made prayer to God, and
God made Abimelech well again, and his wife and his women-servants, so
that they had children.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> For the Lord had kept all the women of
the house of Abimelech from having children, because of Sarah, Abraham's
wife.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the Lord came to Sarah as he had said
and did to her as he had undertaken.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And Sarah became with child, and gave
Abraham a son when he was old, at the time named by God.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Abraham gave to his son, to whom
Sarah had given birth, the name Isaac.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And when his son Isaac was eight days
old, Abraham made him undergo circumcision, as God had said to him.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Now Abraham was a hundred years old when
the birth of Isaac took place.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And Sarah said, God has given me cause
for laughing, and everyone who has news of it will be laughing with me.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And she said, Who would have said to
Abraham that Sarah would have a child at her breast? for see, I have
given him a son now when he is old.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And when the child was old enough to be
taken from the breast, Abraham made a great feast.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the
Egyptian playing with Isaac.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> So she said to Abraham, Send away that
woman and her son: for the son of that woman is not to have a part in
the heritage with my son Isaac.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And this was a great grief to Abraham
because of his son.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> But God said, Let it not be a grief to
you because of the boy and Hagar his mother; give ear to whatever Sarah
says to you, because it is from Isaac that your seed will take its name.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And I will make a nation of the son of
your servant-woman, because he is your seed.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And early in the morning Abraham got
up, and gave Hagar some bread and a water-skin, and put the boy on her
back, and sent her away: and she went, wandering in the waste land of
Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And when all the water in the skin was
used up, she put the child down under a tree.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And she went some distance away, about
an arrow flight, and seating herself on the earth, she gave way to
bitter weeping, saying, Let me not see the death of my child.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the boy's cry came to the ears of
God; and the angel of God said to Hagar from heaven, Hagar, why are you
weeping? have no fear, for the child's cry has come to the ears of God.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Come, take your child in your arms, for
I will make of him a great nation.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Then God made her eyes open, and she
saw a water-spring, and she got water in the skin and gave the boy a
drink.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And God was with the boy, and he became
tall and strong, and he became a bowman, living in the waste land.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And while he was in the waste land of
Paran, his mother got him a wife from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Now at that time, Abimelech and Phicol,
the captain of his army, said to Abraham, I see that God is with you in
all you do.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Now, then, give me your oath, in the
name of God, that you will not be false to me or to my sons after me,
but that as I have been good to you, so you will be to me and to this
land where you have been living.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Abraham said, I will give you my
oath.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But Abraham made a protest to Abimelech
because of a water-hole which Abimelech's servants had taken by force.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> But Abimelech said, I have no idea who
has done this thing; you never gave me word of it, and I had no
knowledge of it till this day.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And Abraham took sheep and oxen and
gave them to Abimelech, and the two of them made an agreement together.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And Abraham put seven young lambs of
the flock on one side by themselves.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Then Abimelech said, What are these
seven lambs which you have put on one side?

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And he said, Take these seven lambs
from me as a witness that I have made this water-hole.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> So he gave that place the name
Beer-sheba, because there the two of them had given their oaths.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> So they made an agreement at
Beer-sheba, and Abimelech and Phicol, the captain of his army, went back
to the land of the Philistines.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> And Abraham, after planting a holy tree
in Beer-sheba, gave worship to the name of the Lord, the Eternal God.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And Abraham went on living in the land
of the Philistines as in a strange country.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Now after these things, God put Abraham
to the test, and said to him, Abraham; and he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And he said to him, Take your son, your
dearly loved only son Isaac, and go to the land of Moriah and give him
as a burned offering on one of the mountains of which I will give you
knowledge.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And Abraham got up early in the morning,
and made ready his ass, and took with him two of his young men and
Isaac, his son, and after the wood for the burned offering had been cut,
he went on his way to the place of which God had given him word.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And on the third day, Abraham, lifting up
his eyes, saw the place a long way off.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Then he said to his young men, Keep here
with the ass; and I and the boy will go on and give worship and come
back again to you.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Abraham put the wood for the burned
offering on his son's back, and he himself took the fire and the knife
in his hand, and the two of them went on together.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Then Isaac said to Abraham, My father;
and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, We have wood and fire here,
but where is the lamb for the burned offering?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And Abraham said, God himself will give
the lamb for the burned offering: so they went on together.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they came to the place of which God
had given him knowledge; and there Abraham made the altar and put the
wood in place on it, and having made tight the bands round Isaac his
son, he put him on the wood on the altar.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And stretching out his hand, Abraham
took the knife to put his son to death.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> But the voice of the angel of the Lord
came from heaven, saying, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he said, Let not your hand be
stretched out against the boy to do anything to him; for now I am
certain that the fear of God is in your heart, because you have not kept
back your son, your only son, from me.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And lifting up his eyes, Abraham saw a
sheep fixed by its horns in the brushwood: and Abraham took the sheep
and made a burned offering of it in place of his son.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Abraham gave that place the name
Yahweh-yireh: as it is said to this day, In the mountain the Lord is
seen.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And the voice of the angel of the Lord
came to Abraham a second time from heaven,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Saying, I have taken an oath by my
name, says the Lord, because you have done this and have not kept back
from me your dearly loved only son,

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> That I will certainly give you my
blessing, and your seed will be increased like the stars of heaven and
the sand by the seaside; your seed will take the land of those who are
against them;

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And your seed will be a blessing to all
the nations of the earth, because you have done what I gave you orders
to do.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Then Abraham went back to his young men
and they went together to Beer-sheba, the place where Abraham was
living.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> After these things, Abraham had news
that Milcah, the wife of his brother Nahor, had given birth to children;

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Uz the oldest, and Buz his brother, and
Kemuel, the father of Aram,

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And Chesed and Hazo and Pildash and
Jidlaph and Bethuel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Bethuel was the father of Rebekah:
these eight were the children of Milcah and Nahor, Abraham's brother.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And his servant Reumah gave birth to
Tebah and Gaham and Tahash and Maacah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Now the years of Sarah's life were a
hundred and twenty-seven.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And Sarah's death took place in
Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron, in the land of Canaan: and Abraham went
into his house, weeping and sorrowing for Sarah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And Abraham came from his dead and said
to the children of Heth,

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I am living among you as one from a
strange country: give me some land here as my property, so that I may
put my dead to rest.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And in answer the children of Heth said
to Abraham,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> My lord, truly you are a great chief
among us; take the best of our resting-places for your dead; not one of
us will keep back from you a place where you may put your dead to rest.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And Abraham got up and gave honour to the
children of Heth, the people of that land.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And he said to them, If you will let me
put my dead to rest here, make a request for me to Ephron, the son of
Zohar,

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> That he will give me the hollow in the
rock named Machpelah, which is his property at the end of his field; let
him give it to me for its full price as a resting-place for my dead
among you.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Now Ephron was seated among the
children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite gave Abraham his answer in the
hearing of the children of Heth, and of all those who came into his
town, saying,

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> No, my lord, I will give you the field
with the hollow in the rock; before all the children of my people will I
give it to you for a resting-place for your dead.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And Abraham went down on his face
before the people of the land.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And Abraham said to Ephron, in the
hearing of the people of the land, If only you will give ear to me, I
will give you the price of the field; take it, and let me put my dead to
rest there.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> So Ephron said to Abraham,

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My lord, give ear to me: the value of
the land is four hundred shekels; what is that between me and you? so
put your dead to rest there.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Abraham took note of the price
fixed by Ephron in the hearing of the children of Heth, and gave him
four hundred shekels in current money.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> So Ephron's field at Machpelah near
Mamre, with the hollow in the rock and all the trees in the field and
round it,

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Became the property of Abraham before
the eyes of the children of Heth and of all who came into the town.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Then Abraham put Sarah his wife to rest
in the hollow rock in the field of Machpelah near Mamre, that is, Hebron
in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And the field and the hollow rock were
handed over to Abraham as his property by the children of Heth.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Now Abraham was old and far on in years:
and the Lord had given him everything in full measure.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Abraham said to his chief servant,
the manager of all his property, Come now, put your hand under my leg:

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And take an oath by the Lord, the God of
heaven and the God of the earth, that you will not get a wife for my son
Isaac from the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I am living;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But that you will go into my country and
to my relations and get a wife there for my son Isaac.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And the servant said, If by chance the
woman will not come with me into this land, am I to take your son back
again to the land from which you came?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Abraham said, Take care that you do
not let my son go back to that land.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The Lord God of heaven, who took me from
my father's house and from the land of my birth, and made an oath to me,
saying, To your seed I will give this land: he will send his angel
before you and give you a wife for my son in that land.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And if the woman will not come with you,
then you are free from this oath; only do not take my son back there.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the servant put his hand under
Abraham's leg, and gave him his oath about this thing.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And the servant took ten of his
master's camels, and all sorts of good things of his master's, and went
to Mesopotamia, to the town of Nahor.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And he made the camels take their rest
outside the town by the water-spring in the evening, at the time when
the women came to get water.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And he said, O Lord, the God of my
master Abraham, let me do well in what I have undertaken this day, and
give your mercy to my master Abraham.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> See, I am waiting here by the
water-spring; and the daughters of the town are coming out to get water:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Now, may the girl to whom I say, Let
down your vessel and give me a drink, and who says in answer, Here is a
drink for you and let me give water to your camels: may she be the one
marked out by you for your servant Isaac: so may I be certain that you
have been good to my master Abraham.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And even before his words were ended,
Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, who was the wife of
Nahor, Abraham's brother, came out with her water-vessel on her arm.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> She was a very beautiful girl, a
virgin, who had never been touched by a man: and she went down to the
spring to get water in her vessel.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the servant came running to her and
said, Give me a little water from your vessel.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And she said, Take a drink, my lord:
and quickly letting down her vessel onto her hand, she gave him a drink.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And having done so, she said, I will
get water for your camels till they have had enough.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And after putting the water from her
vessel into the animals' drinking-place, she went quickly back to the
spring and got water for all the camels.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And the man, looking at her, said
nothing, waiting to see if the Lord had given his journey a good
outcome.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And when the camels had had enough, the
man took a gold nose-ring, half a shekel in weight, and two ornaments
for her arms of ten shekels weight of gold;

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And said to her, Whose daughter are
you? is there room in your father's house for us?

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And she said to him, I am the daughter
of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, Nahor's wife.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And she said, We have a great store of
dry grass and cattle-food, and there is room for you.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> And with bent head the man gave worship
to the Lord;

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> And said, Praise be to the Lord, the
God of my master Abraham, who has given a sign that he is good and true
to my master, by guiding me straight to the house of my master's family.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> So the girl went running and took the
news of these things to her mother's house

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Now Rebekah had a brother named Laban,
and he came out quickly to the man at the water-spring.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And when he saw the nose-ring and the
ornaments on his sister's hands, and when she gave him word of what the
man had said to her, then he went out to the man who was waiting with
the camels by the water-spring.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And he said to him, Come in, you on
whom is the blessing of the Lord; why are you waiting outside? for I
have made the house ready for you, and a place for the camels.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Then the man came into the house, and
Laban took their cords off the camels and gave them dry grass and food,
and he gave to him and the men who were with him water for washing their
feet.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> And meat was put before him, but he
said, I will not take food till I have made my business clear to you.
And they said, Do so.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> And he said, I am Abraham's servant.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> The Lord has given my master every
blessing, and he has become great: he has given him flocks and herds and
silver and gold, and men-servants and women-servants and camels and
asses.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> And when Sarah, my master's wife, was
old, she gave birth to a son, to whom he has given all he has.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> And my master made me take an oath,
saying, Do not get a wife for my son from the daughters of the
Canaanites among whom I am living;

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> But go to my father's house and to my
relations for a wife for my son.

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> And I said to my master, What if the
woman will not come with me?

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> And he said, The Lord, whom I have ever
kept before me, will send his angel with you, who will make it possible
for you to get a wife for my son from my relations and my father's
house;

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> And you will be free from your oath to
me when you come to my people; and if they will not give her to you, you
will be free from your oath.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> And I came today to the water-spring,
and I said, O Lord, the God of my master Abraham, if it is your purpose
to give a good outcome to my journey,

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> Let it come about that, while I am
waiting here by the water-spring, if a girl comes to get water and I say
to her, Give me a little water from your vessel, and she says,

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> Take a drink, and I will get water for
your camels; let her be the woman marked out by the Lord for my master's
son.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> And even while I was saying this to
myself, Rebekah came out with her vessel on her arm; and she went down
to the spring to get water; and I said to her, Give me a drink.

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> And straight away she took down her
vessel from her arm, and said, Take a drink, and I will get water for
your camels.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> And questioning her, I said, Whose
daughter are you? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, the son of
Nahor, and Milcah his wife. Then I put the ring on her nose and the
ornaments on her hands.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> And with bent head I gave worship and
praise to the Lord, the God of my master Abraham, by whom I had been
guided in the right way, to get the daughter of my master's brother for
his son.

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And now, say if you will do what is
good and right for my master or not, in order that it may be clear to me
what I have to do.

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> Then Laban and Bethuel said in answer,
This is the Lord's doing: it is not for us to say Yes or No to you.

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> See, here is Rebekah: take her and go,
and let her be your master's son's wife, as the Lord has said.

<span id="an_24:52">24:52</span> And at these words, Abraham's servant
went down on his face and gave praise to the Lord.

<span id="an_24:53">24:53</span> Then he took jewels of silver and
jewels of gold and fair robes and gave them to Rebekah: and he gave
things of value to her mother and her brother.

<span id="an_24:54">24:54</span> Then he and the men who were with him
had food and drink, and took their rest there that night; and in the
morning he got up, and said, Let me now go back to my master.

<span id="an_24:55">24:55</span> But her brother and her mother said,
Let the girl be with us a week or ten days, and then she may go.

<span id="an_24:56">24:56</span> And he said, Do not keep me; the Lord
has given a good outcome to my journey; let me now go back to my master.

<span id="an_24:57">24:57</span> And they said, We will send for the
girl, and let her make the decision.

<span id="an_24:58">24:58</span> And they sent for Rebekah and said to
her, Are you ready to go with this man? And she said, I am ready.

<span id="an_24:59">24:59</span> So they sent their sister Rebekah and
her servant with Abraham's servant and his men.

<span id="an_24:60">24:60</span> And they gave Rebekah their blessing,
saying, O sister, may you be the mother of thousands and ten thousands;
and may your seed overcome all those who make war against them.

<span id="an_24:61">24:61</span> So Rebekah and her servant-women went
with the man, seated on the camels; and so the servant took Rebekah and
went on his way.

<span id="an_24:62">24:62</span> Now Isaac had come through the waste
land to Beer-lahai-roi; for he was living in the South.

<span id="an_24:63">24:63</span> And when the evening was near, he went
wandering out into the fields, and lifting up his eyes he saw camels
coming.

<span id="an_24:64">24:64</span> And when Rebekah, looking up, saw
Isaac, she got down from her camel,

<span id="an_24:65">24:65</span> And said to the servant, Who is that
man coming to us through the field? And the servant said, It is my
master: then she took her veil, covering her face with it.

<span id="an_24:66">24:66</span> Then the servant gave Isaac the story
of all he had done.

<span id="an_24:67">24:67</span> And Isaac took Rebekah into his tent
and she became his wife; and in his love for her, Isaac was comforted
after his father's death.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Abraham took another wife named
Keturah.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> She became the mother of Zimran and
Jokshan and Medan and Midian and Ishbak and Shuah.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And Jokshan became the father of Sheba
and Dedan. And from Dedan came the Asshurim and Letushim and Leummim.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And from Midian came Ephah and Epher and
Hanoch and Abida and Eldaah. All these were the offspring of Keturah.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Now Abraham gave all his property to
Isaac;

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> But to the sons of his other women he
gave offerings, and sent them away, while he was still living, into the
east country.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Now the years of Abraham's life were a
hundred and seventy-five.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And Abraham came to his death, an old
man, full of years; and he was put to rest with his people.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And Isaac and Ishmael, his sons, put him
to rest in the hollow rock of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, the son
of Zohar the Hittite, near Mamre;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> The same field which Abraham got from
the children of Heth: there Abraham was put to rest with Sarah, his
wife.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Now after the death of Abraham, the
blessing of God was with Isaac, his son.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Now these are the generations of
Ishmael, the son of Abraham, whose mother was Hagar the Egyptian, the
servant of Sarah:

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> These are the names of the sons of
Ishmael by their generations: Ishmael's first son was Nebaioth; then
Kedar and Adbeel and Mibsam

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And Mishma and Dumah and Massa,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Hadad and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and
Kedemah:

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> These are the sons of Ishmael, and
these are their names in their towns and their tent-circles; twelve
chiefs with their peoples.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And the years of Ishmael's life were a
hundred and thirty-seven: and he came to his end, and was put to rest
with his people.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And their country was from Havilah to
Shur which is east of Egypt: they took their place to the east of all
their brothers.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Now these are the generations of
Abraham's son Isaac:

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> Isaac was forty years old when he took
Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Aramaean of Paddan-aram, and the
sister of Laban the Aramaean, to be his wife.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Isaac made prayer to the Lord for his
wife because she had no children; and the Lord gave ear to his prayer,
and Rebekah became with child.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And the children were fighting together
inside her, and she said, If it is to be so, why am I like this? So she
went to put her question to the Lord.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And the Lord said to her, Two nations
are in your body, and two peoples will come to birth from you: the one
will be stronger than the other, and the older will be the servant of
the younger.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And when the time came for her to give
birth, there were two children in her body.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And the first came out red from head to
foot like a robe of hair, and they gave him the name of Esau.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And after him, his brother came out,
gripping Esau's foot; and he was named Jacob: Isaac was sixty years old
when she gave birth to them.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And the boys came to full growth; and
Esau became a man of the open country, an expert bowman; but Jacob was a
quiet man, living in tents.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Now Isaac's love was for Esau, because
Esau's meat was greatly to his taste: but Rebekah had more love for
Jacob.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And one day Jacob was cooking some soup
when Esau came in from the fields in great need of food;

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And Esau said to Jacob, Give me a full
meal of that red soup, for I am overcome with need for food: for this
reason he was named Edom.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And Jacob said, First of all give me
your birthright.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And Esau said, Truly, I am at the point
of death: what profit is the birthright to me?

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And Jacob said, First of all give me
your oath; and he gave him his oath, handing over his birthright to
Jacob.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Then Jacob gave him bread and soup; and
he took food and drink and went away, caring little for his birthright.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Then came a time of great need in the
land, like that which had been before in the days of Abraham. And Isaac
went to Abimelech, king of the Philistines, at Gerar.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> And the Lord came to him in a vision and
said, Do not go down to Egypt; keep in the land of which I will give you
knowledge:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Keep in this land, and I will be with you
and give you my blessing; for to you and to your seed will I give all
these lands, giving effect to the oath which I made to your father
Abraham;

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> I will make your seed like the stars of
heaven in number, and will give them all these lands, and your seed will
be a blessing to all the nations of the earth;

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Because Abraham gave ear to my voice and
kept my words, my rules, my orders, and my laws.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> So Isaac went on living in Gerar;

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And when he was questioned by the men of
the place about his wife, he said, She is my sister; fearing to say, She
is my wife; for, he said, the men of the place may put me to death on
account of Rebekah; because she is very beautiful.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And when he had been there for some time,
Abimelech, king of the Philistines, looking through a window, saw Isaac
playing with Rebekah his wife.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And he said to Isaac, It is clear that
she is your wife: why then did you say, She is my sister? And Isaac
said, For fear that I might be put to death because of her.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Then Abimelech said, What have you done
to us? one of the people might well have had connection with your wife,
and the sin would have been ours.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And Abimelech gave orders to his people
that anyone touching Isaac or his wife was to be put to death.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Now Isaac, planting seed in that land,
got in the same year fruit a hundred times as much, for the blessing of
the Lord was on him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And his wealth became very great,
increasing more and more;

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> For he had great wealth of flocks and
herds and great numbers of servants; so that the Philistines were full
of envy.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Now all the water-holes, which his
father's servants had made in the days of Abraham, had been stopped up
with earth by the Philistines.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And Abimelech said to Isaac, Go away
from us, for you are stronger than we are.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> So Isaac went away from there, and put
up his tents in the valley of Gerar, making his living-place there.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And he made again the water-holes which
had been made in the days of Abraham his father, and which had been
stopped up by the Philistines; and he gave them the names which his
father had given them.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Now Isaac's servants made holes in the
valley, and came to a spring of flowing water.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> But the herdmen of Gerar had a fight
with Isaac's herdmen, for they said, The spring is ours: so he gave the
spring the name of Esek, because there was a fight about it.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> Then they made another water-hole, and
there was a fight about that, so he gave it the name of Sitnah.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Then he went away from there, and made
another water-hole, about which there was no fighting: so he gave it the
name of Rehoboth, for he said, Now the Lord has made room for us, and we
will have fruit in this land.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And from there he went on to
Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> That night the Lord came to him in a
vision, and said, I am the God of your father Abraham: have no fear for
I am with you, blessing you, and your seed will be increased because of
my servant Abraham.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> Then he made an altar there, and gave
worship to the name of the Lord, and he put up his tents there, and
there his servants made a water-hole.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And Abimelech had come to him from
Gerar, with Ahuzzath his friend and Phicol, the captain of his army.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And Isaac said to them, Why have you
come to me, seeing that in your hate for me you sent me away from you?

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And they said, We saw clearly that the
Lord was with you: so we said, Let there be an oath between us and you,
and let us make an agreement with you;

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> That you will do us no damage, even as
we put no hand on you, and did you nothing but good, and sent you away
in peace: and now the blessing of the Lord is on you.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> Then he made a feast for them, and they
all had food and drink.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And early in the morning they took an
oath one to the other: then Isaac sent them away and they went on their
way in peace.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And that day Isaac's servants came to
him and gave him word of the water-hole which they had made, and said to
him, We have come to water.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And he gave it the name of Shibah: so
the name of that town is Beer-sheba to this day.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> And when Esau was forty years old, he
took as his wives Judith, the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and
Basemath, the daughter of Elon the Hittite:

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And Isaac and Rebekah had grief of mind
because of them.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Now when Isaac was old and his eyes had
become clouded so that he was not able to see, he sent for Esau, his
first son, and said to him, My son: and he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And he said, See now, I am old, and my
death may take place at any time:

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> So take your arrows and your bow and go
out to the field and get meat for me;

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And make me food, good to the taste, such
as is pleasing to me, and put it before me, so that I may have a meal
and give you my blessing before death comes to me.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Now Isaac's words to his son were said in
Rebekah's hearing. Then Esau went out to get the meat.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And Rebekah said to Jacob, her son, Your
father said to your brother Esau in my hearing,

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Go and get some roe's meat and make me a
good meal, so that I may be full, and give you my blessing before the
Lord before my death.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Now, my son, do what I say.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Go to the flock and get me two fat young
goats; and I will make of them a meal to your father's taste:

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And you will take it to him, so that he
may have a good meal and give you his blessing before his death.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Jacob said to Rebekah, his mother,
But Esau my brother is covered with hair, while I am smooth:

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> If by chance my father puts his hand on
me, it will seem to him that I am tricking him, and he will put a curse
on me in place of a blessing.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And his mother said, Let the curse be
on me, my son: only do as I say, and go and get them for me.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> So he went and got them and took them
to his mother: and she made a meal to his father's taste.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And Rebekah took the fair robes of her
oldest son, which were with her in the house, and put them on Jacob, her
younger son:

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And she put the skins of the young
goats on his hands and on the smooth part of his neck:

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> And she gave into the hand of Jacob,
her son, the meat and the bread which she had made ready.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And he came to his father, and said, My
father: and he said, Here am I: who are you, my son?

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And Jacob said, I am Esau, your oldest
son; I have done as you said: come now, be seated and take of my meat,
so that you may give me a blessing.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And Isaac said, How is it that you have
got it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the Lord your God made
it come my way.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And Isaac said, Come near so that I may
put my hand on you, my son, and see if you are truly my son Esau or not.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And Jacob went near his father Isaac:
and he put his hands on him; and he said, The voice is Jacob's voice,
but the hands are the hands of Esau.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And he did not make out who he was,
because his hands were covered with hair like his brother Esau's hands:
so he gave him a blessing.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> And he said, Are you truly my son Esau?
And he said, I am.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> And he said, Put it before me and I
will take of my son's meat, so that I may give you a blessing. And he
put it before him and he took it; and he gave him wine, and he had a
drink.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> And his father Isaac said to him, Come
near now, my son, and give me a kiss.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> And he came near and gave him a kiss;
and smelling the smell of his clothing, he gave him a blessing, and
said, See, the smell of my son is like the smell of a field on which the
blessing of the Lord has come:

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> May God give you the dew of heaven, and
the good things of the earth, and grain and wine in full measure:

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> Let peoples be your servants, and
nations go down before you: be lord over your brothers, and let your
mother's sons go down before you: a curse be on everyone by whom you are
cursed, and a blessing on those who give you a blessing.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And when Isaac had come to the end of
blessing Jacob, and Jacob had not long gone away from Isaac his father,
Esau came in from the field.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And he made ready a meal, good to the
taste, and took it to his father, and said to him, Let my father get up
and take of his son's meat, so that you may give me a blessing.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And Isaac his father said to him, Who
are you? And he said, I am your oldest son, Esau.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And in great fear Isaac said, Who then
is he who got meat and put it before me, and I took it all before you
came, and gave him a blessing, and his it will be?

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> And hearing the words of his father,
Esau gave a great and bitter cry, and said to his father, Give a
blessing to me, even to me, O my father!

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And he said, Your brother came with
deceit, and took away your blessing.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> And he said, Is it because he is named
Jacob that he has twice taken my place? for he took away my birthright,
and now he has taken away my blessing. And he said, Have you not kept a
blessing for me?

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And Isaac answering said, But I have
made him your master, and have given him all his brothers for servants;
I have made him strong with grain and wine: what then am I to do for
you, my son?

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And Esau said to his father, Is that
the only blessing you have, my father? give a blessing to me, even me!
And Esau was overcome with weeping.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> Then Isaac his father made answer and
said to him, Far from the fertile places of the earth, and far from the
dew of heaven on high will your living-place be:

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> By your sword will you get your living
and you will be your brother's servant; but when your power is increased
his yoke will be broken from off your neck.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> So Esau was full of hate for Jacob
because of his father's blessing; and he said in his heart, The days of
weeping for my father are near; then I will put my brother Jacob to
death.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> Then Rebekah, hearing what Esau had
said, sent for Jacob, her younger son, and said to him, It seems that
your brother Esau is purposing to put you to death.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> So now, my son, do what I say: go
quickly to Haran, to my brother Laban;

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And be there with him for a little
time, till your brother's wrath is turned away;

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Till the memory of what you have done
to him is past and he is no longer angry: then I will send word for you
to come back; are the two of you to be taken from me in one day?

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> Then Rebekah said to Isaac, My life is
a weariness to me because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob takes a
wife from among the daughters of Heth, such as these, the women of this
land, of what use will my life be to me?

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Then Isaac sent for Jacob, and blessing
him, said, Do not take a wife from among the women of Canaan;

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> But go to Paddan-aram, to the house of
Bethuel, your mother's father, and there get yourself a wife from the
daughters of Laban, your mother's brother.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And may God, the Ruler of all, give you
his blessing, giving you fruit and increase, so that you may become an
army of peoples.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And may God give you the blessing of
Abraham, to you and to your seed, so that the land of your wanderings,
which God gave to Abraham, may be your heritage.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> So Isaac sent Jacob away: and he went to
Paddan-aram, to Laban, son of Bethuel the Aramaean, the brother of
Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> So when Esau saw that Isaac had given
Jacob his blessing, and sent him away to Paddan-aram to get a wife for
himself there, blessing him and saying to him, Do not take a wife from
among the women of Canaan;

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And that Jacob had done as his father and
mother said and had gone to Paddan-aram;

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> It was clear to Esau that his father had
no love for the women of Canaan,

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> So Esau went to Ishmael and took
Mahalath, the daughter of Abraham's son Ishmael, the sister of Nebaioth,
to be his wife in addition to the wives he had.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> So Jacob went out from Beer-sheba to go
to Haran.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And coming to a certain place, he made
it his resting-place for the night, for the sun had gone down; and he
took one of the stones which were there, and putting it under his head
he went to sleep in that place.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And he had a dream, and in his dream he
saw steps stretching from earth to heaven, and the angels of God were
going up and down on them.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And he saw the Lord by his side,
saying, I am the Lord, the God of Abraham your father, and the God of
Isaac: I will give to you and to your seed this land on which you are
sleeping.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Your seed will be like the dust of the
earth, covering all the land to the west and to the east, to the north
and to the south: you and your seed will be a name of blessing to all
the families of the earth.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And truly, I will be with you, and will
keep you wherever you go, guiding you back again to this land; and I
will not give you up till I have done what I have said to you.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And Jacob, awaking from his sleep,
said, Truly, the Lord is in this place and I was not conscious of it.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And fear came on him, and he said, This
is a holy place; this is nothing less than the house of God and the
doorway of heaven.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And early in the morning Jacob took the
stone which had been under his head, and put it up as a pillar and put
oil on it.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> And he gave that place the name of
Beth-el, but before that time the town was named Luz.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Then Jacob took an oath, and said, If
God will be with me, and keep me safe on my journey, and give me food
and clothing to put on,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> So that I come again to my father's
house in peace, then I will take the Lord to be my God,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And this stone which I have put up for
a pillar will be God's house: and of all you give me, I will give a
tenth part to you.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Then Jacob went on his journey till he
came to the land of the children of the East.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And there he saw a water-hole in a field,
and by the side of it three flocks of sheep, for there they got water
for the sheep: and on the mouth of the water-hole there was a great
stone.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And all the flocks would come together
there, and when the stone had been rolled away, they would give the
sheep water, and put the stone back again in its place on the mouth of
the water-hole.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Then Jacob said to the herdmen, My
brothers, where do you come from? And they said, From Haran.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And he said to them, Have you any
knowledge of Laban, the son of Nahor? And they said, We have.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And he said to them, Is he well? And they
said, He is well, and here is Rachel his daughter coming with the sheep.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Then Jacob said, The sun is still high
and it is not time to get the cattle together: get water for the sheep
and go and give them their food.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And they said, We are not able to do so
till all the flocks have come together and the stone has been rolled
away from the mouth of the water-hole; then we will get water for the
sheep.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> While he was still talking with them,
Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she took care of them.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Then when Jacob saw Rachel, the
daughter of Laban, his mother's brother, coming with Laban's sheep, he
came near, and rolling the stone away from the mouth of the hole, he got
water for Laban's flock.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And weeping for joy, Jacob gave Rachel
a kiss.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And Rachel, hearing from Jacob that he
was her father's relation and that he was the son of Rebekah, went
running to give her father news of it.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And Laban, hearing news of Jacob, his
sister's son, came running, and took Jacob in his arms, and kissing him,
made him come into his house. And Jacob gave him news of everything.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> And Laban said to him, Truly, you are
my bone and my flesh. And he kept Jacob with him for the space of a
month.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Then Laban said to Jacob, Because you
are my brother are you to be my servant for nothing? say now, what is
your payment to be?

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Now Laban had two daughters: the name
of the older was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And Leah's eyes were clouded, but
Rachel was fair in face and form.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And Jacob was in love with Rachel; and
he said, I will be your servant seven years for Rachel, your younger
daughter.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And Laban said, It is better for you to
have her than another man: go on living here with me.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> And Jacob did seven years' work for
Rachel; and because of his love for her it seemed to him only a very
little time.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Then Jacob said to Laban, Give me my
wife so that I may have her, for the days are ended.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And Laban got together all the men of
the place and gave a feast.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And in the evening he took Leah, his
daughter, and gave her to him, and he went in to her.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And Laban gave Zilpah, his
servant-girl, to Leah, to be her waiting-woman.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And in the morning Jacob saw that it
was Leah: and he said to Laban, What have you done to me? was I not
working for you so that I might have Rachel? why have you been false to
me?

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And Laban said, In our country we do
not let the younger daughter be married before the older.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> Let the week of the bride-feast come to
its end and then we will give you the other in addition, if you will be
my servant for another seven years.

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And Jacob did so; and when the week was
ended, Laban gave him his daughter Rachel for his wife.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And Laban gave Rachel his servant-girl
Bilhah to be her waiting-woman.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> Then Jacob took Rachel as his wife, and
his love for her was greater than his love for Leah; and he went on
working for Laban for another seven years.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Now the Lord, seeing that Leah was not
loved, gave her a child; while Rachel had no children.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And Leah was with child, and gave birth
to a son to whom she gave the name Reuben: for she said, The Lord has
seen my sorrow; now my husband will have love for me.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> Then she became with child again, and
gave birth to a son; and said, Because it has come to the Lord's ears
that I am not loved, he has given me this son in addition: and she gave
him the name Simeon.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And she was with child again, and gave
birth to a son; and said, Now at last my husband will be united to me,
because I have given him three sons: so he was named Levi.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> And she was with child again, and gave
birth to a son: and she said, This time I will give praise to the Lord:
so he was named Judah; after this she had no more children for a time.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Now Rachel, because she had no children,
was full of envy of her sister; and she said to Jacob, If you do not
give me children I will not go on living.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> But Jacob was angry with Rachel, and
said, Am I in the place of God, who has kept your body from having
fruit?

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> Then she said, Here is my servant Bilhah,
go in to her, so that she may have a child on my knees, and I may have a
family by her.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> So she gave him her servant Bilhah as a
wife, and Jacob went in to her.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And Bilhah became with child, and gave
birth to a son.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Then Rachel said, God has been my judge,
and has given ear to my voice, and has given me a son; so he was named
Dan.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And again Bilhah, Rachel's servant, was
with child, and gave birth to a second son.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And Rachel said, I have had a great fight
with my sister, and I have overcome her: and she gave the child the name
Naphtali.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> When it was clear to Leah that she would
have no more children for a time, she gave Zilpah, her servant, to Jacob
as a wife.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And Zilpah, Leah's servant, gave birth
to a son.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And Leah said, It has gone well for me:
and she gave him the name Gad.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> And Zilpah, Leah's servant, gave birth
to a second son.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And Leah said, Happy am I! and all
women will give witness to my joy: and she gave him the name Asher.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> Now at the time of the grain-cutting,
Reuben saw some love-fruits in the field, and took them to his mother
Leah. And Rachel said to her, Let me have some of your son's
love-fruits.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> But Leah said to her, Is it a small
thing that you have taken my husband from me? and now would you take my
son's love-fruits? Then Rachel said, You may have him tonight in
exchange for your son's love-fruits.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> In the evening, when Jacob came in from
the field, Leah went out to him and said, Tonight you are to come to me,
for I have given my son's love-fruits as a price for you. And he went in
to her that night.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And God gave ear to her and she became
with child, and gave Jacob a fifth son.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Then Leah said, God has made payment to
me for giving my servant-girl to my husband: so she gave her son the
name Issachar.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> And again Leah became with child, and
she gave Jacob a sixth son.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And she said, God has given me a good
bride-price; now at last will I have my husband living with me, for I
have given him six sons: and she gave him the name Zebulun.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> After that she had a daughter, to whom
she gave the name Dinah.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Then God gave thought to Rachel, and
hearing her prayer he made her fertile.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And she was with child, and gave birth
to a son: and she said, God has taken away my shame.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And she gave him the name Joseph,
saying, May the Lord give me another son.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> Now after the birth of Joseph, Jacob
said to Laban, Let me go away to my place and my country.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> Give me my wives and my children, for
whom I have been your servant, and let me go: for you have knowledge of
all the work I have done for you.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> And Laban said, If you will let me say
so, do not go away; for I have seen by the signs that the Lord has been
good to me because of you.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> Say then what your payment is to be and
I will give it.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> Then Jacob said, You have seen what I
have done for you, and how your cattle have done well under my care.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> For before I came you had little, and
it has been greatly increased; and the Lord has given you a blessing in
everything I have done; but when am I to do something for my family?

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And Laban said, What am I to give you?
And Jacob said, Do not give me anything; but I will again take up the
care of your flock if you will only do this for me:

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> Let me go through all your flock today,
taking out from among them all the sheep which are marked or coloured or
black, and all the marked or coloured goats: these will be my payment.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> And so you will be able to put my
honour to the test in time to come; if you see among my flocks any goats
which are not marked or coloured, or any sheep which is not black, you
may take me for a thief.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And Laban said, Let it be as you say.

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> So that day he took all the he-goats
which were banded or coloured, and all the she-goats which were marked
or coloured or had white marks, and all the black sheep, and gave them
into the care of his sons;

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> And sent them three days' journey away:
and Jacob took care of the rest of Laban's flock.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> Then Jacob took young branches of
trees, cutting off the skin so that the white wood was seen in bands.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> And he put the banded sticks in the
drinking-places where the flock came to get water; and they became with
young when they came to the water.

<span id="an_30:39">30:39</span> And because of this, the flock gave
birth to young which were marked with bands of colour.

<span id="an_30:40">30:40</span> These lambs Jacob kept separate; and he
put his flock in a place by themselves and not with Laban's flock.

<span id="an_30:41">30:41</span> And whenever the stronger ones of the
flock became with young, Jacob put the sticks in front of them in the
drinking-places, so that they might become with young when they saw the
sticks.

<span id="an_30:42">30:42</span> But when the flocks were feeble, he did
not put the sticks before them; so that the feebler flocks were Laban's
and the stronger were Jacob's.

<span id="an_30:43">30:43</span> So Jacob's wealth was greatly
increased; he had great flocks and women-servants and men-servants and
camels and asses.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Now it came to the ears of Jacob that
Laban's sons were saying, Jacob has taken away all our father's
property, and in this way he has got all this wealth.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> And Jacob saw that Laban's feeling for
him was no longer what it had been before.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Then the Lord said to Jacob, Go back to
the land of your fathers, and to your relations, and I will be with you.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> And Jacob sent for Rachel and Leah to
come to him in the field among his flock.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And he said to them, It is clear to me
that your father's feeling is no longer what it was to me; but the God
of my father has been with me

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And you have seen how I have done all in
my power for your father,

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> But your father has not kept faith with
me, and ten times he has made changes in my payment; but God has kept
him from doing me damage.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> If he said, All those in the flock which
have marks are to be yours, then all the flock gave birth to marked
young; and if he said, All the banded ones are to be yours, then all the
flock had banded young.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> So God has taken away your father's
cattle and has given them to me.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And at the time when the flock were
with young, I saw in a dream that all the he-goats which were joined
with the she-goats were banded and marked and coloured.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And in my dream the angel of the Lord
said to me, Jacob: and I said, Here am I.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And he said, See how all the he-goats
are banded and marked and coloured: for I have seen what Laban has done
to you.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> I am the God of Beth-el, where you put
oil on the pillar and took an oath to me: now then, come out of this
land and go back to the country of your birth.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Then Rachel and Leah said to him in
answer, What part or heritage is there for us in our father's house?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Are we not as people from a strange
country to him? for he took a price for us and now it is all used up.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> For the wealth which God has taken from
him is ours and our children's; so now, whatever God has said to you,
do.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Then Jacob put his wives and his sons
on camels;

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And sending on before him all his
cattle and his property which he had got together in Paddan-aram, he
made ready to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Now Laban had gone to see to the
cutting of the wool of his sheep; so Rachel secretly took the images of
the gods of her father's house.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> And Jacob went away secretly, without
giving news of his flight to Laban the Aramaean.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> So he went away with all he had, and
went across the River in the direction of the hill-country of Gilead.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> And on the third day Laban had news of
Jacob's flight.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And taking the men of his family with
him, he went after him for seven days and overtook him in the
hill-country of Gilead.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> Then God came to Laban in a dream by
night, and said to him, Take care that you say nothing good or bad to
Jacob.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Now when Laban overtook him, Jacob had
put up his tent in the hill-country; and Laban and his brothers put up
their tents in the hill-country of Gilead.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> And Laban said to Jacob, Why did you go
away secretly, taking my daughters away like prisoners of war?

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Why did you make a secret of your
flight, not giving me word of it, so that I might have sent you away
with joy and songs, with melody and music?

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> You did not even let me give a kiss to
my sons and my daughters. This was a foolish thing to do.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> It is in my power to do you damage: but
the God of your father came to me this night, saying, Take care that you
say nothing good or bad to Jacob.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And now, it seems, you are going
because your heart's desire is for your father's house; but why have you
taken my gods?

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> And Jacob, in answer, said to Laban, My
fear was that you might take your daughters from me by force.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> As for your gods, if anyone of us has
them, let him be put to death: make search before us all for what is
yours, and take it. For Jacob had no knowledge that Rachel had taken
them.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> So Laban went into Jacob's tent and
into Leah's tent, and into the tents of the two servant-women, but they
were not there; and he came out of Leah's tent and went into Rachel's.

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> Now Rachel had taken the images, and
had put them in the camels' basket, and was seated on them. And Laban,
searching through all the tent, did not come across them.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> And she said to her father, Let not my
lord be angry because I do not get up before you, for I am in the common
condition of women. And with all his searching, he did not come across
the images.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> Then Jacob was angry with Laban, and
said, What crime or sin have I done that you have come after me with
such passion?

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Now that you have made search through
all my goods, what have you seen which is yours? Make it clear now
before my people and your people, so that they may be judges between us.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> These twenty years I have been with
you; your sheep and your goats have had young without loss, not one of
your he-goats have I taken for food.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> Anything which was wounded by beasts I
did not take to you, but myself made up for the loss of it; you made me
responsible for whatever was taken by thieves, by day or by night.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> This was my condition, wasted by heat
in the day and by the bitter cold at night; and sleep went from my eyes.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> These twenty years I have been in your
house; I was your servant for fourteen years because of your daughters,
and for six years I kept your flock, and ten times was my payment
changed.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> If the God of my father, the God of
Abraham and the Fear of Isaac, had not been with me, you would have sent
me away with nothing in my hands. But God has seen my troubles and the
work of my hands, and this night he kept you back.

<span id="an_31:43">31:43</span> Then Laban, answering, said, These
women are my daughters and these children my children, the flocks and
all you see are mine: what now may I do for my daughters and for their
children?

<span id="an_31:44">31:44</span> Come, let us make an agreement, you and
I; and let it be for a witness between us.

<span id="an_31:45">31:45</span> Then Jacob took a stone and put it up
as a pillar.

<span id="an_31:46">31:46</span> And Jacob said to his people, Get
stones together; and they did so; and they had a meal there by the
stones.

<span id="an_31:47">31:47</span> And the name Laban gave it was
Jegar-sahadutha: but Jacob gave it the name of Galeed.

<span id="an_31:48">31:48</span> And Laban said, These stones are a
witness between you and me today. For this reason its name was Galeed,

<span id="an_31:49">31:49</span> And Mizpah, for he said, May the Lord
keep watch on us when we are unable to see one another's doings.

<span id="an_31:50">31:50</span> If you are cruel to my daughters, or if
you take other wives in addition to my daughters, then though no man is
there to see, God will be the witness between us.

<span id="an_31:51">31:51</span> And Laban said, See these stones and
this pillar which I have put between you and me;

<span id="an_31:52">31:52</span> They will be witness that I will not go
over these stones to you, and you will not go over these stones or this
pillar to me, for any evil purpose.

<span id="an_31:53">31:53</span> May the God of Abraham and the God of
Nahor, the God of their father, be our judge. Then Jacob took an oath by
the Fear of his father Isaac.

<span id="an_31:54">31:54</span> And Jacob made an offering on the
mountain, and gave orders to his people to take food: so they had a meal
and took their rest that night on the mountain.

<span id="an_31:55">31:55</span> And early in the morning Laban, after
kissing and blessing his daughters, went on his way back to his country.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And on his way Jacob came face to face
with the angels of God.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And when he saw them he said, This is the
army of God: so he gave that place the name of Mahanaim.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Now Jacob sent servants before him to
Esau, his brother, in the land of Seir, the country of Edom;

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And he gave them orders to say these
words to Esau: Your servant Jacob says, Till now I have been living with
Laban:

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And I have oxen and asses and flocks and
men-servants and women-servants: and I have sent to give my lord news of
these things so that I may have grace in his eyes.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> When the servants came back they said, We
have seen your brother Esau and he is coming out to you, and four
hundred men with him.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Then Jacob was in great fear and trouble
of mind: and he put all the people and the flocks and the herds and the
camels into two groups;

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> And said, If Esau, meeting one group,
makes an attack on them, the others will get away safely.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Then Jacob said, O God of my father
Abraham, the God of my father Isaac, the Lord who said to me, Go back to
your country and your family and I will be good to you:

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> I am less than nothing in comparison
with all your mercies and your faith to me your servant; for with only
my stick in my hand I went across Jordan, and now I have become two
armies.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Be my saviour from the hand of Esau, my
brother: for my fear is that he will make an attack on me, putting to
death mother and child.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> And you said, Truly, I will be good to
you, and make your seed like the sand of the sea which may not be
numbered.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Then he put up his tent there for the
night; and from among his goods he took, as an offering for his brother
Esau,

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Two hundred she-goats and twenty
he-goats, two hundred females and twenty males from the sheep,

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Thirty camels with their young ones,
forty cows, ten oxen, twenty asses, and ten young asses.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> These he gave to his servants, every
herd by itself, and he said to his servants, Go on before me, and let
there be a space between one herd and another.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And he gave orders to the first,
saying, When my brother Esau comes to you and says, Whose servant are
you, and where are you going, and whose are these herds?

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Then say to him, These are your servant
Jacob's; they are an offering for my lord, for Esau; and he himself is
coming after us.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And he gave the same orders to the
second and the third and to all those who were with the herds, saying,
This is what you are to say to Esau when you see him;

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And you are to say further, Jacob, your
servant, is coming after us. For he said to himself, I will take away
his wrath by the offering which I have sent on, and then I will come
before him: it may be that I will have grace in his eyes.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> So the servants with the offerings went
on in front, and he himself took his rest that night in the tents with
his people.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And in the night he got up, and taking
with him his two wives and the two servant-women and his eleven
children, he went over the river Jabbok.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> He took them and sent them over the
stream with all he had.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Then Jacob was by himself; and a man
was fighting with him till dawn.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> But when the man saw that he was not
able to overcome Jacob, he gave him a blow in the hollow part of his
leg, so that his leg was damaged.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> And he said to him, Let me go now, for
the dawn is near. But Jacob said, I will not let you go till you have
given me your blessing.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Then he said, What is your name? And he
said, Jacob.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And he said, Your name will no longer
be Jacob, but Israel: for in your fight with God and with men you have
overcome.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Then Jacob said, What is your name? And
he said, What is my name to you? Then he gave him a blessing.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And Jacob gave that place the name of
Peniel, saying, I have seen God face to face, and still I am living.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And while he was going past Peniel, the
sun came up. And he went with unequal steps because of his damaged leg.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For this reason the children of Israel,
even today, never take that muscle in the hollow of the leg as food,
because the hollow of Jacob's leg was touched.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Then Jacob, lifting up his eyes, saw Esau
coming with his four hundred men. So he made a division of the children
between Leah and Rachel and the two women-servants.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> He put the servants and their children in
front, Leah and her children after them, and Rachel and Joseph at the
back.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> And he himself, going before them, went
down on his face to the earth seven times till he came near his brother.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Then Esau came running up to him, and
folding him in his arms, gave him a kiss: and the two of them were
overcome with weeping.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> Then Esau, lifting up his eyes, saw the
women and the children, and said, Who are these with you? And he said,
The children whom God in his mercy has given to your servant.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Then the servants and their children came
near, and went down on their faces.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And Leah came near with her children, and
then Joseph and Rachel, and they did the same.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And he said, What were all those herds
which I saw on the way? And Jacob said, They were an offering so that I
might have grace in my lord's eyes.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> But Esau said, I have enough; keep what
is yours, my brother, for yourself.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And Jacob said, Not so; but if I have
grace in your eyes, take them as a sign of my love, for I have seen your
face as one may see the face of God, and you have been pleased with me.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Take my offering then, with my
blessing; for God has been very good to me and I have enough: so at his
strong request, he took it.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And he said, Let us go on our journey
together, and I will go in front.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> But Jacob said, My lord may see that
the children are only small, and there are young ones in my flocks and
herds: one day's over-driving will be the destruction of all the flock.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Do you, my lord, go on before your
servant; I will come on slowly, at the rate at which the cattle and the
children are able to go, till I come to my lord at Seir.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And Esau said, Then keep some of my men
with you. And he said, What need is there for that, if my lord is
pleased with me?

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> So Esau, turning back that day, went on
his way to Seir.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And Jacob went on to Succoth, where he
made a house for himself and put up tents for his cattle: for this
reason the place was named Succoth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> So Jacob came safely from Paddan-aram
to the town of Shechem in the land of Canaan, and put up his tents near
the town.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And for a hundred bits of money he got
from the children of Hamor, the builder of Shechem, the field in which
he had put up his tents.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And there he put up an altar, naming it
El, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Now Dinah, the daughter whom Leah had by
Jacob, went out to see the women of that country.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And when Shechem, the son of Hamor the
Hivite who was the chief of that land, saw her, he took her by force and
had connection with her.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Then his heart went out in love to Dinah,
the daughter of Jacob, and he said comforting words to her.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And Shechem said to Hamor, his father,
Get me this girl for my wife.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> Now Jacob had word of what Shechem had
done to his daughter; but his sons were in the fields with the cattle,
and Jacob said nothing till they came.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Then Hamor, the father of Shechem, came
out to have a talk with Jacob.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Now the sons of Jacob came in from the
fields when they had news of it, and they were wounded and very angry
because of the shame he had done in Israel by having connection with
Jacob's daughter; and they said, Such a thing is not to be done.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> But Hamor said to them, Shechem, my son,
is full of desire for your daughter: will you then give her to him for a
wife?

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And let our two peoples be joined
together; give your daughters to us, and take our daughters for
yourselves.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Go on living with us, and the country
will be open to you; do trade and get property there.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> And Shechem said to her father and her
brothers, If you will give ear to my request, whatever you say I will
give to you.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> However great you make the bride-price
and payment, I will give it; only let me have the girl for my wife.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> But the sons of Jacob gave a false
answer to Shechem and Hamor his father, because of what had been done to
Dinah their sister.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> And they said, It is not possible for
us to give our sister to one who is without circumcision, for that would
be a cause of shame to us:

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> But on this condition only will we come
to an agreement with you: if every male among you becomes like us and
undergoes circumcision;

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Then we will give our daughters to you
and take your daughters to us and go on living with you as one people.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> But if you will not undergo
circumcision as we say, then we will take our daughter and go.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> And their words were pleasing to Hamor
and his son Shechem.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And without loss of time the young man
did as they said, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter, and he was
the noblest of his father's house.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Then Hamor and Shechem, his son, went
to the meeting-place of their town, and said to the men of the town,

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> It is the desire of these men to be at
peace with us; let them then go on living in this country and doing
trade here, for the country is wide open before them; let us take their
daughters as wives and let us give them our daughters.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> But these men will make an agreement
with us to go on living with us and to become one people, only on the
condition that every male among us undergoes circumcision as they have
done.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Then will not their cattle and their
goods and all their beasts be ours? so let us come to an agreement with
them so that they may go on living with us.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> Then all the men of the town gave ear
to the words of Hamor and Shechem his son; and every male in the town
underwent circumcision.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> But on the third day after, before the
wounds were well, two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's
brothers, took their swords and came into the town by surprise and put
all the males to death.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> And Hamor and his son they put to death
with the sword, and they took Dinah from Shechem's house and went away.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the sons of Jacob came on them when
they were wounded and made waste the town because of what had been done
to their sister;

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> They took their flocks and their herds
and their asses and everything in their town and in their fields,

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And all their wealth and all their
little ones and their wives; everything in their houses they took and
made them waste.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, You
have made trouble for me and given me a bad name among the people of
this country, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and because we
are small in number they will come together against me and make war on
me; and it will be the end of me and all my people.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> But they said, Were we to let him make
use of our sister as a loose woman?

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And God said to Jacob, Go up now to
Beth-el and make your living-place there: and put up an altar there to
the God who came to you when you were in flight from your brother Esau.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Then Jacob said to all his people, Put
away the strange gods which are among you, and make yourselves clean,
and put on a change of clothing:

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And let us go up to Beth-el: and there I
will make an altar to God, who gave me an answer in the day of my
trouble, and was with me wherever I went.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Then they gave to Jacob all the strange
gods which they had, and the rings which were in their ears; and Jacob
put them away under the holy tree at Shechem.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> So they went on their journey: and the
fear of God was on the towns round about, so that they made no attack on
the sons of Jacob.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And Jacob came to Luz in the land of
Canaan (which is the same as Beth-el), he and all his people.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And there he made an altar, naming the
place El-beth-el: because it was there he had the vision of God when he
was in flight from his brother.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And Deborah, the servant who had taken
care of Rebekah from her birth, came to her end, and was put to rest
near Beth-el, under the holy tree: and they gave it the name of
Allon-bacuth.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Now when Jacob was on his way from
Paddan-aram, God came to him again and, blessing him, said,

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Jacob is your name, but it will be so
no longer; from now your name will be Israel; so he was named Israel.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> And God said to him, I am God, the
Ruler of all: be fertile, and have increase; a nation, truly a group of
nations, will come from you, and kings will be your offspring;

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And the land which I gave to Abraham
and Isaac, I will give to you; and to your seed after you I will give
the land.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Then God went up from him in the place
where he had been talking with him.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> And Jacob put up a pillar in the place
where he had been talking with God, and put a drink offering on it, and
oil.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And he gave to the place where God had
been talking with him, the name of Beth-el.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> So they went on from Beth-el; and while
they were still some distance from Ephrath, the pains of birth came on
Rachel and she had a hard time.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> And when her pain was very great, the
woman who was helping her said, Have no fear; for now you will have
another son.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> And in the hour when her life went from
her (for death came to her), she gave the child the name Ben-oni: but
his father gave him the name of Benjamin.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> So Rachel came to her end and was put
to rest on the road to Ephrath (which is Beth-lehem).

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And Jacob put up a pillar on her
resting-place; which is named, The Pillar of the resting-place of
Rachel, to this day.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> And Israel went journeying on and put
up his tents on the other side of the tower of the flock.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> Now while they were living in that
country, Reuben had connection with Bilhah, his father's servant-woman:
and Israel had news of it.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> Now Jacob had twelve sons: the sons of
Leah: Reuben, Jacob's first son, and Simeon and Levi and Judah and
Issachar and Zebulun;

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> The sons of Rachel: Joseph and
Benjamin;

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> The sons of Bilhah, Rachel's servant:
Dan and Naphtali;

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> The sons of Zilpah, Leah's servant: Gad
and Asher; these are the sons whom Jacob had in Paddan-aram.

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And Jacob came to his father Isaac at
Mamre, at Kiriath-arba, that is, Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac had
been living.

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> And Isaac was a hundred and eighty
years old.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> Then Isaac came to his end and was put
to rest with his father's people, an old man after a long life: and
Jacob and Esau, his sons, put him in his last resting-place.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Now these are the generations of Esau,
that is to say, Edom.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Esau's wives were women of Canaan: Adah,
the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah,
the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And Basemath, Ishmael's daughter, the
sister of Nebaioth.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Adah had a son Eliphaz; and Basemath was
the mother of Reuel;

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Oholibamah was the mother of Jeush,
Jalam, and Korah; these are the sons of Esau, whose birth took place in
the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Esau took his wives and his sons and his
daughters, and all the people of his house, and his beasts and his
cattle and all his goods which he had got together in the land of
Canaan, and went into the land of Seir, away from his brother Jacob.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For their wealth was so great that the
land was not wide enough for the two of them and all their cattle.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> So Esau made his living-place in the
hill-country of Seir (Esau is Edom).

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And these are the generations of Esau,
the father of the Edomites in the hill-country of Seir:

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> These are the names of Esau's sons:
Eliphaz, the son of Esau's wife Adah, and Reuel, the son of Esau's wife
Basemath.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> The sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar,
Zepho, Gatam, and Kenaz.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And Eliphaz, the son of Esau, had
connection with a woman named Timna, who gave birth to Amalek: all these
were the children of Esau's wife Adah.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And these are the sons of Reuel:
Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: they were the children of Esau's
wife Basemath.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And these are the sons of Esau's wife
Oholibamah, the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon: she was the
mother of Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> These were the chiefs among the sons of
Esau: the sons of Eliphaz, Esau's first son: Teman, Omar, Zepho, Kenaz,

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Korah, Gatam, Amalek: all these were
chiefs in the land of Edom, the offspring of Eliphaz, the seed of Adah.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And these are the sons of Esau's son
Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, Mizzah: these were the chiefs of Reuel in
the land of Edom, the children of Esau's wife Basemath.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And these are the sons of Esau's wife
Oholibamah: Jeush, Jalam, and Korah: these were the chiefs who came from
Esau's wife Oholibamah, daughter of Anah.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> These were the sons of Esau (that is,
Edom), and these were their chiefs.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> These are the sons of Seir the Horite
who were living in that country; Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan: these are the
chiefs of the Horites, offspring of Seir in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> The children of Lotan were Hori and
Hemam; Lotan's sister was Timna.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And these are the children of Shobal:
Alvan, Manahath, Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And these are the children of Zibeon:
Aiah and Anah; that same Anah who made the discovery of the
water-springs in the waste land, when he was looking after the asses of
his father Zibeon.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And these are the children of Anah:
Dishon and Oholibamah his daughter.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> These are the children of Dishon:
Hemdan, Eshban, Ithran, and Keran.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> These are the children of Ezer: Bilhan,
Zaavan, and Akan.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> These are the children of Dishan: Uz
and Aran.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> These were the Horite chiefs: Lotan,
Shobal, Zibeon, Anah,

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan. Such were the
Horite chiefs in their order in the land of Seir.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And these are the kings who were ruling
in the land of Edom before there was any king over the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Bela, son of Beor, was king in Edom,
and the name of his chief town was Dinhabah.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> At his death, Jobab, son of Zerah of
Bozrah, became king in his place.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And at the death of Jobab, Husham, from
the country of the Temanites, became king in his place.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And at the death of Husham, Hadad, son
of Bedad, who overcame the Midianites in the field of Moab, became king;
his chief town was named Avith.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And at the death of Hadad, Samlah of
Masrekah became king.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And at the death of Samlah, Shaul of
Rehoboth by the River became king in his place.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> And at the death of Shaul, Baal-hanan,
son of Achbor, became king.

<span id="an_36:39">36:39</span> And at the death of Baal-hanan, Hadar
became king in his place; his chief town was named Pau, and his wife's
name was Mehetabel; she was the daughter of Matred, the daughter of
Me-zahab.

<span id="an_36:40">36:40</span> These are the names of the chiefs of
Esau in the order of their families and their places: Timna, Alvah,
Jetheth,

<span id="an_36:41">36:41</span> Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon,

<span id="an_36:42">36:42</span> Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar,

<span id="an_36:43">36:43</span> Magdiel, Iram; these are the Edomite
chiefs, in their places in their heritage; this is Esau, the father of
the Edomites.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> Now Jacob was living in the land where
his father had made a place for himself, in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> These are the generations of Jacob:
Joseph, a boy seventeen years old, was looking after the flock, together
with his brothers, the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's wives;
and Joseph gave their father a bad account of them.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> Now the love which Israel had for Joseph
was greater than his love for all his other children, because he got him
when he was an old man: and he had a long coat made for him.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And because his brothers saw that Joseph
was dearer to his father than all the others, they were full of hate for
him, and would not say a kind word to him.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Now Joseph had a dream, and he gave his
brothers an account of it, which made their hate greater than ever.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he said to them, Let me give you the
story of my dream.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> We were in the field, getting the grain
stems together, and my grain kept upright, and yours came round and went
down on the earth before mine.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And his brothers said to him, Are you to
be our king? will you have authority over us? And because of his dream
and his words, their hate for him became greater than ever.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Then he had another dream, and gave his
brothers an account of it, saying, I have had another dream: the sun and
the moon and eleven stars gave honour to me.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And he gave word of it to his father
and his brothers; but his father protesting said, What sort of a dream
is this? am I and your mother and your brothers to go down on our faces
to the earth before you?

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And his brothers were full of envy; but
his father kept his words in mind.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Now his brothers went to keep watch
over their father's flock in Shechem.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And Israel said to Joseph, Are not your
brothers with the flock in Shechem? come, I will send you to them. And
he said to him, Here am I.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And he said to him, Go now, and see if
your brothers are well and how the flock is; then come back and give me
word. So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, and he came to
Shechem.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And a man saw him wandering in the
country, and said to him, What are you looking for?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And he said, I am looking for my
brothers; please give me word of where they are keeping their flock.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And the man said, They have gone away
from here, for they said in my hearing, Let us go to Dothan. So Joseph
went after them and came up with them at Dothan.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> But they saw him when he was a long way
off, and before he came near them they made a secret design against him
to put him to death;

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Saying to one another, See, here comes
this dreamer.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Let us now put him to death and put his
body into one of these holes, and we will say, An evil beast has put him
to death: then we will see what becomes of his dreams.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> But Reuben, hearing these words, got
him out of their hands, saying, Let us not take his life.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Do not put him to a violent death, but
let him be placed in one of the holes; this he said to keep him safe
from their hands, with the purpose of taking him back to his father
again.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> So when Joseph came to his brothers,
they took off his long coat which he had on;

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> And they took him and put him in the
hole: now the hole had no water in it.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> Then seating themselves, they took
their meal: and looking up, they saw a travelling band of Ishmaelites,
coming from Gilead on their way to Egypt, with spices and perfumes on
their camels.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And Judah said to his brothers, What
profit is there in putting our brother to death and covering up his
blood?

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> Let us give him to these Ishmaelites
for a price, and let us not put violent hands on him, for he is our
brother, our flesh. And his brothers gave ear to him.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And some traders from Midian went by;
so pulling Joseph up out of the hole, they gave him to the Ishmaelites
for twenty bits of silver, and they took him to Egypt.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> Now when Reuben came back to the hole,
Joseph was not there; and giving signs of grief,

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> He went back to his brothers, and said,
The child is gone; what am I to do?

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> Then they took Joseph's coat, and put
on it some of the blood from a young goat which they had put to death,

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> And they took the coat to their father,
and said, We came across this; is it your son's coat or not?

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> And he saw that it was, and said, It is
my son's coat; an evil beast has put him to death; without doubt Joseph
has come to a cruel end.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> Then Jacob, giving signs of grief, put
on haircloth, and went on weeping for his son day after day.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> And all his sons and all his daughters
came to give him comfort, but he would not be comforted, saying with
weeping, I will go down to the underworld to my son. So great was his
father's sorrow for him.

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> And in Egypt the men of Midian gave him
for a price to Potiphar, a captain of high position in Pharaoh's house.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> Now at that time, Judah went away from
his brothers and became the friend of a man of Adullam named Hirah.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And there he saw the daughter of a
certain man of Canaan named Shua, and took her as his wife.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And she gave birth to a son, and he gave
him the name Er.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And again she gave birth to a son, and he
gave him the name Onan.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Then she had another son, to whom she
gave the name Shelah; she was at Chezib when the birth took place.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And Judah took a wife for his first son
Er, and her name was Tamar.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Now Er, Judah's first son, did evil in
the eyes of the Lord, so that he put him to death.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Then Judah said to Onan, Go in to your
brother's wife and do what it is right for a husband's brother to do;
make her your wife and get offspring for your brother.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> But Onan, seeing that the offspring would
not be his, went in to his brother's wife, but let his seed go on to the
earth, so that he might not get offspring for his brother.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> And what he did was evil in the eyes of
the Lord, so that he put him to death, like his brother.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> Then Judah said to Tamar, his
daughter-in-law, Go back to your father's house and keep yourself as a
widow till my son Shelah becomes a man: for he had in his mind the
thought that death might come to him as it had come to his brothers. So
Tamar went back to her father's house.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And after a time, Bath-shua, Judah's
wife, came to her end; and after Judah was comforted for her loss, he
went to Timnah, where they were cutting the wool of his sheep, and his
friend Hirah of Adullam went with him.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And when Tamar had news that her
father-in-law was going up to Timnah to the wool-cutting,

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> She took off her widow's clothing, and
covering herself with her veil, she took her seat near Enaim on the road
to Timnah; for she saw that Shelah was now a man, but she had not been
made his wife.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> When Judah saw her he took her to be a
loose woman of the town, because her face was covered.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> And turning to her by the roadside, he
said to her, Let me come in to you; for he had no idea that she was his
daughter-in-law. And she said, What will you give me as my price?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And he said, I will give you a young
goat from the flock. And she said, What will you give me as a sign till
you send it?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And he said, What would you have? And
she said, Your ring and its cord and the stick in your hand. So he gave
them to her and went in to her, and she became with child by him.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Then she got up and went away and took
off her veil and put on her widow's clothing.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> Then Judah sent his friend Hirah with
the young goat, to get back the things which he had given as a sign to
the woman: but she was not there.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> And he put questions to the men of the
place, saying, Where is the loose woman who was in Enaim by the wayside?
And they said, There was no such woman there.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> So he went back to Judah, and said, I
have not seen her, and the men of the place say that there is no such
woman there.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And Judah said, Let her keep the
things, so that we may not be shamed; I sent the young goat, but you did
not see the woman.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> Now about three months after this, word
came to Judah that Tamar, his daughter-in-law, had been acting like a
loose woman and was with child. And Judah said, Take her out and let her
be burned.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And while she was being taken out, she
sent word to her father-in-law, saying, The man whose property these
things are, is the father of my child: say then, whose are this ring and
this cord and this stick?

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> Then Judah said openly that they were
his, and said, She is more upright than I am, for I did not give her to
Shelah my son. And he had no more connection with her.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And when the time came for her to give
birth, it was clear that there were two children in her body.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And while she was in the act of giving
birth, one of them put out his hand; and the woman who was with her put
a red thread round his hand, saying, This one came out first.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> But then he took his hand back again,
and his brother came first to birth: and the woman said, What an opening
you have made for yourself! So he was named Perez.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> And then his brother came out, with the
red thread round his hand, and he was named Zerah.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Now Joseph was taken down to Egypt; and
Potiphar the Egyptian, a captain of high position in Pharaoh's house,
got him for a price from the Ishmaelites who had taken him there.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And the Lord was with Joseph, and he did
well; and he was living in the house of his master the Egyptian.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And his master saw that the Lord was with
him, making everything he did go well.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And having a high opinion of Joseph as
his servant, he made him the overseer of his house and gave him control
over all he had.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And from the time when he made him
overseer and gave him control of all his property, the blessing of the
Lord was with the Egyptian, because of Joseph; the blessing of the Lord
was on all he had, in the house and in the field.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And he gave Joseph control of all his
property, keeping no account of anything, but only the food which was
put before him. Now Joseph was very beautiful in form and face.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And after a time, his master's wife,
looking on Joseph with desire, said to him, Be my lover.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> But he would not, and said to her, You
see that my master keeps no account of what I do in his house, and has
put all his property in my control;

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> So that no one has more authority in this
house than I have; he has kept nothing back from me but you, because you
are his wife; how then may I do this great wrong, sinning against God?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And day after day she went on
requesting Joseph to come to her and be her lover, but he would not give
ear to her.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Now one day he went into the house to
do his work; and not one of the men of the house was inside.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And pulling at his coat, she said, Come
to my bed; but slipping out of his coat, he went running away.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> And when she saw that he had got away,
letting her keep his coat,

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> She sent for the men of her house and
said to them, See, he has let a Hebrew come here and make sport of us;
he came to my bed, and I gave a loud cry;

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And hearing it he went running out
without his coat.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And she kept his coat by her, till his
master came back.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> Then she gave him the same story,
saying, The Hebrew servant whom you have taken into our house came in to
make sport of me;

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> And when I gave a loud cry he went
running out without his coat.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And hearing his wife's account of what
his servant had done, he became very angry.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And Joseph's master took him and put
him in prison, in the place where the king's prisoners were kept in
chains, and he was there in the prison-house.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> But the Lord was with Joseph, and was
good to him, and made the keeper of the prison his friend.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And the keeper of the prison put all
the prisoners under Joseph's control, and he was responsible for
whatever was done there.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And the keeper of the prison gave no
attention to anything which was under his care, because the Lord was
with him; and the Lord made everything he did go well.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> Now after these things the chief servant
who had the care of the wine, and the chief bread-maker in Pharaoh's
house, did something against Pharaoh's orders;

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> And Pharaoh was angry with his two
servants, with the chief wine-servant and the chief bread-maker;

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And he put them in prison under the care
of the captain of the army, in the same prison where Joseph himself was
shut up.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And the captain put them in Joseph's
care, and he did what was needed for them; and they were kept in prison
for some time.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And these two had a dream on the same
night; the chief wine-servant and the chief bread-maker of the king of
Egypt, who were in prison, the two of them had dreams with a special
sense.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And in the morning when Joseph came to
them he saw that they were looking sad.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And he said to the servants of Pharaoh
who were in prison with him, Why are you looking so sad?

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Then they said to him, We have had a
dream, and no one is able to give us the sense. And Joseph said, Does
not the sense of dreams come from God? what was your dream?

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Then the chief wine-servant gave Joseph
an account of his dream, and said, In my dream I saw a vine before me;

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And on the vine were three branches;
and it seemed as if it put out buds and flowers, and from them came
grapes ready for cutting.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I
took the grapes and crushing them into Pharaoh's cup, gave the cup into
Pharaoh's hand.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Then Joseph said, This is the sense of
your dream: the three branches are three days;

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> After three days Pharaoh will give you
honour, and put you back into your place, and you will give him his cup
as you did before, when you were his wine-servant.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> But keep me in mind when things go well
for you, and be good to me and say a good word for me to Pharaoh and get
me out of this prison:

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> For truly I was taken by force from the
land of the Hebrews; and I have done nothing for which I might be put in
prison.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> Now when the chief bread-maker saw that
the first dream had a good sense, he said to Joseph, I had a dream; and
in my dream there were three baskets of white bread on my head;

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And in the top basket were all sorts of
cooked meats for Pharaoh; and the birds were taking them out of the
baskets on my head.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> Then Joseph said, This is the sense of
your dream: the three baskets are three days;

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> After three days Pharaoh will take you
out of prison, hanging you on a tree, so that your flesh will be food
for birds.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> Now the third day was Pharaoh's
birthday, and he gave a feast for all his servants; and he gave honour
to the chief wine-servant and the chief bread-maker among the others.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And he put the chief wine-servant back
in his old place; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> But the chief bread-maker was put to
death by hanging, as Joseph had said.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> But the wine-servant did not keep
Joseph in mind or give a thought to him.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Now after two years had gone by, Pharaoh
had a dream; and in his dream he was by the side of the Nile;

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> And out of the Nile came seven cows,
good-looking and fat, and their food was the river-grass.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> And after them seven other cows came out
of the Nile, poor-looking and thin; and they were by the side of the
other cows.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> And the seven thin cows made a meal of
the seven fat cows. Then Pharaoh came out of his sleep.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> But he went to sleep again and had a
second dream, in which he saw seven heads of grain, full and good, all
on one stem.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> And after them came up seven other heads,
thin and wasted by the east wind.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> And the seven thin heads made a meal of
the good heads. And when Pharaoh was awake he saw it was a dream.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> And in the morning his spirit was
troubled; and he sent for all the wise men of Egypt and all the holy
men, and put his dream before them, but no one was able to give him the
sense of it.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Then the chief wine-servant said to
Pharaoh, The memory of my sin comes back to me now;

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Pharaoh had been angry with his
servants, and had put me in prison in the house of the captain of the
army, together with the chief bread-maker;

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> And we had a dream on the same night,
the two of us, and the dreams had a special sense.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> And there was with us a young Hebrew,
the captain's servant, and when we put our dreams before him, he gave us
the sense of them.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> And it came about as he said: I was put
back in my place, and the bread-maker was put to death by hanging.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Then Pharaoh sent for Joseph, and they
took him quickly out of prison; and when his hair had been cut and his
dress changed, he came before Pharaoh.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I have had
a dream, and no one is able to give me the sense of it; now it has come
to my ears that you are able to give the sense of a dream when it is put
before you.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Then Joseph said, Without God there
will be no answer of peace for Pharaoh.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> Then Pharaoh said, In my dream I was by
the side of the Nile:

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> And out of the Nile came seven cows,
fat and good-looking, and their food was the river-grass;

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> Then after them came seven other cows,
very thin and poor-looking, worse than any I ever saw in the land of
Egypt;

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> And the thin cows made a meal of the
seven fat cows who came up first;

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> And even with the fat cows inside them
they seemed as bad as before. And so I came out of my sleep.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> And again in a dream I saw seven heads
of grain, full and good, coming up on one stem:

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> And then I saw seven other heads, dry,
thin, and wasted by the east wind, coming up after them:

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> And the seven thin heads made a meal of
the seven good heads; and I put this dream before the wise men, but not
one of them was able to give me the sense of it.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> Then Joseph said, These two dreams have
the same sense: God has made clear to Pharaoh what he is about to do.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> The seven fat cows are seven years, and
the seven good heads of grain are seven years: the two have the same
sense.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> The seven thin and poor-looking cows
who came up after them are seven years; and the seven heads of grain,
dry and wasted by the east wind, are seven years when there will be no
food.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> As I said to Pharaoh before, God has
made clear to him what he is about to do.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Seven years are coming in which there
will be great wealth of grain in Egypt;

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> And after that will come seven years
when there will not be enough food; and the memory of the good years
will go from men's minds; and the land will be made waste by the bad
years;

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> And men will have no memory of the good
time because of the need which will come after, for it will be very
bitter.

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> And this dream came to Pharaoh twice,
because this thing is certain, and God will quickly make it come about.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> And now let Pharaoh make search for a
man of wisdom and good sense, and put him in authority over the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> Let Pharaoh do this, and let him put
overseers over the land of Egypt to put in store a fifth part of the
produce of the land in the good years.

<span id="an_41:35">41:35</span> And let them get together all the food
in those good years and make a store of grain under Pharaoh's control
for the use of the towns, and let them keep it.

<span id="an_41:36">41:36</span> And let that food be kept in store for
the land till the seven bad years which are to come in Egypt; so that
the land may not come to destruction through need of food.

<span id="an_41:37">41:37</span> And this seemed good to Pharaoh and to
all his servants.

<span id="an_41:38">41:38</span> Then Pharaoh said to his servants,
Where may we get such a man as this, a man in whom is the spirit of God?

<span id="an_41:39">41:39</span> And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Seeing that
God has made all this clear to you, there is no other man of such wisdom
and good sense as you:

<span id="an_41:40">41:40</span> You, then, are to be over my house, and
all my people will be ruled by your word: only as king will I be greater
than you.

<span id="an_41:41">41:41</span> And Pharaoh said to Joseph, See, I have
put you over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:42">41:42</span> Then Pharaoh took off his ring from his
hand and put it on Joseph's hand, and he had him clothed with the best
linen, and put a chain of gold round his neck;

<span id="an_41:43">41:43</span> And he made him take his seat in the
second of his carriages; and they went before him crying, Make way! So
he made him ruler over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:44">41:44</span> Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, I am
Pharaoh; and without your order no man may do anything in all the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:45">41:45</span> And Pharaoh gave Joseph the name of
Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera,
the priest of On, to be his wife. So Joseph went through all the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_41:46">41:46</span> Now Joseph was thirty years old when he
came before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from before the
face of Pharaoh and went through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:47">41:47</span> Now in the seven good years the earth
gave fruit in masses.

<span id="an_41:48">41:48</span> And Joseph got together all the food of
those seven years, and made a store of food in the towns: the produce of
the fields round every town was stored up in the town.

<span id="an_41:49">41:49</span> So he got together a store of grain
like the sand of the sea; so great a store that after a time he gave up
measuring it, for it might not be measured.

<span id="an_41:50">41:50</span> And before the time of need, Joseph had
two sons, to whom Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera, priest of On,
gave birth.

<span id="an_41:51">41:51</span> And to the first he gave the name
Manasseh, for he said, God has taken away from me all memory of my hard
life and of my father's house.

<span id="an_41:52">41:52</span> And to the second he gave the name
Ephraim, for he said, God has given me fruit in the land of my sorrow.

<span id="an_41:53">41:53</span> And so the seven good years in Egypt
came to an end.

<span id="an_41:54">41:54</span> Then came the first of the seven years
of need as Joseph had said: and in every other land they were short of
food; but in the land of Egypt there was bread.

<span id="an_41:55">41:55</span> And when all the land of Egypt was in
need of food, the people came crying to Pharaoh for bread; and Pharaoh
said to the people, Go to Joseph, and whatever he says to you, do it.

<span id="an_41:56">41:56</span> And everywhere on the earth they were
short of food; then Joseph, opening all his store-houses, gave the
people of Egypt grain for money; so great was the need of food in the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_41:57">41:57</span> And all lands sent to Egypt, to Joseph,
to get grain, for the need was great over all the earth.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Now Jacob, hearing that there was grain
in Egypt, said to his sons, Why are you looking at one another?

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> And he said, I have had news that there
is grain in Egypt: go down there and get grain for us, so that life and
not death may be ours.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> So Joseph's ten brothers went down to get
grain from Egypt.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> But Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph's
brother, with them, for fear, as he said, that some evil might come to
him.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> And the sons of Israel came with all the
others to get grain: for they were very short of food in the land of
Canaan.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Now Joseph was ruler over all the land,
and it was he who gave out the grain to all the people of the land; and
Joseph's brothers came before him and went down on their faces to the
earth.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And when Joseph saw his brothers, it was
clear to him who they were, but he made himself strange to them, and
talking roughly to them, said, Where do you come from? And they said,
From the land of Canaan, to get food.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> Now though Joseph saw that these were his
brothers, they had no idea who he was.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> Then the memory of his dreams about them
came back to Joseph, and he said to them, You have come secretly to see
how poor the land is.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> And they said to him, Not so, my lord:
your servants have come with money to get food.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> We are all one man's sons, we are true
men; we have not come with any secret purpose.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And he said to them, No, but you have
come to see how poor the land is.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> Then they said, We your servants are
twelve brothers, sons of one man in the land of Canaan; the youngest of
us is now with our father, and one is dead.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> And Joseph said, It is as I said; you
have come with some secret purpose;

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> But in this way will you be put to the
test: by the life of Pharaoh, you will not go away from this place till
your youngest brother comes here.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> Send one of your number to get your
brother, and the rest of you will be kept in prison, so that your words
may be tested to see if you are true; if not, by the life of Pharaoh,
your purpose is certainly secret.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> So he put them in prison for three
days.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> And on the third day Joseph said to
them, Do this, if you would keep your lives: for I am a god-fearing man:

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> If you are true men, let one of you be
kept in prison, while you go and take grain for the needs of your
families;

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> And come back to me with your youngest
brother, so that your words may be seen to be true, and you will not be
put to death. This is what you are to do.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> And they said to one another, Truly, we
did wrong to our brother, for we saw his grief of mind, and we did not
give ear to his prayers; that is why this trouble has come on us.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> And Reuben said to them, Did I not say
to you, Do the child no wrong? but you gave no attention; so now,
punishment has come on us for his blood.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> They were not conscious that the sense
of their words was clear to Joseph, for he had been talking to them
through one who had knowledge of their language.

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> And turning away from them, he was
overcome with weeping; then he went on talking to them again and took
Simeon and put chains on him before their eyes.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> Then Joseph gave orders for their bags
to be made full of grain, and for every man's money to be put back into
his bag, and for food to be given them for the journey: which was done.

<span id="an_42:26">42:26</span> Then they put the bags of grain on
their asses and went away.

<span id="an_42:27">42:27</span> Now at their night's resting-place one
of them, opening his bag to give his ass some food, saw his money in the
mouth of the bag.

<span id="an_42:28">42:28</span> And he said to his brothers, My money
has been given back: it is in my bag; then their hearts became full of
fear, and turning to one another they said, What is this which God has
done to us?

<span id="an_42:29">42:29</span> So when they came to Jacob their
father, in the land of Canaan, they gave him an account of all their
experiences, saying,

<span id="an_42:30">42:30</span> The man who is the ruler of the country
was rough with us and put us in prison, saying that we had come with a
secret evil purpose.

<span id="an_42:31">42:31</span> And we said to him, We are true men, we
have no evil designs;

<span id="an_42:32">42:32</span> We are twelve brothers, sons of our
father; one is dead, and the youngest is now with our father in the land
of Canaan.

<span id="an_42:33">42:33</span> And the ruler of the land said, In this
way I may be certain that you are true men; let one of you be kept here
with me, while you go and take grain for the needs of your families;

<span id="an_42:34">42:34</span> And come back to me with your youngest
brother: then I will be certain that you are true men, and I will give
your brother back to you and let you do trade in the land.

<span id="an_42:35">42:35</span> And when they took the grain out of
their bags, it was seen that every man's parcel of money was in his bag;
and when they and their father saw the money, they were full of fear.

<span id="an_42:36">42:36</span> And Jacob their father said to them,
You have taken my children from me: Joseph is gone and Simeon is gone,
and now you would take Benjamin away; all these things have come on me.

<span id="an_42:37">42:37</span> And Reuben said, Put my two sons to
death if I do not come back to you with him; let him be in my care and I
will give him safely back to you.

<span id="an_42:38">42:38</span> And he said, I will not let my son go
down with you; for his brother is dead and he is all I have: if evil
overtakes him on the journey, then through you will my grey head go down
to the underworld in sorrow.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> Now the land was in bitter need of food.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> And when the grain which they had got in
Egypt was all used up, their father said to them, Go again and get us a
little food.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> And Judah said to him, The man said to us
with an oath, You are not to come before me again without your brother.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> If you will let our brother go with us,
we will go down and get food:

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> But if you will not send him, we will not
go down: for the man said to us, You are not to come before me if your
brother is not with you.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> And Israel said, Why were you so cruel to
me as to say to him that you had a brother?

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And they said, The man put a number of
questions to us about ourselves and our family, saying, Is your father
still living? have you another brother? And we had to give him answers;
how were we to have any idea that he would say, Come back with your
brother?

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Then Judah said to Israel, his father,
Send the boy with me, and let us be up and going, so that we and you and
our little ones may not come to destruction.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Put him into my care and make me
responsible for him: if I do not give him safely back to you, let mine
be the sin for ever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> Truly, if we had not let the time go
by, we might have come back again by now.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> Then their father Israel said to them,
If it has to be so, then do this: take of the best fruits of the land in
your vessels to give the man, perfumes and honey and spices and nuts:

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> And take twice as much money with you;
that is to say, take back the money which was put in your bags, for it
may have been an error;

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And take your brother and go back to
the man:

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> And may God, the Ruler of all, give you
mercy before the man, so that he may give you back your other brother
and Benjamin. If my children are to be taken from me; there is no help
for it.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> So they took what their father said for
the man, and twice as much money in their hands, and Benjamin, and went
on their journey to Egypt, and came before Joseph.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> And when Joseph saw Benjamin, he said
to his chief servant, Take these men into my house, and make ready a
meal, for they will take food with me in the middle of the day.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> And the servant did as Joseph said, and
took the men into Joseph's house.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> Now the men were full of fear because
they had been taken into Joseph's house and they said, It is because of
the money which was put back in our bags the first time; he is looking
for something against us, so that he may come down on us and take us and
our asses for his use.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> So they went up to Joseph's chief
servant at the door of the house,

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> And said, O my lord, we only came down
the first time to get food;

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> And when we came to our night's
resting-place, on opening our bags we saw that every man's money was in
the mouth of his bag, all our money in full weight: and we have it with
us to give it back;

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> As well as more money, with which to
get food: we have no idea who put our money in our bags.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> Then the servant said, Peace be with
you: have no fear: your God, even the God of your father, has put wealth
in your bags for you: I had your money. Then he let Simeon come out to
them.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> And the servant took them into Joseph's
house, and gave them water for washing their feet; and he gave their
asses food.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> And they got ready the things for
Joseph before he came in the middle of the day: for word was given to
them that they were to have a meal there.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> And when Joseph came in, they gave him
the things which they had for him, and went down to the earth before
him.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> And he said, How are you? is your
father well, the old man of whom you were talking to me? is he still
living?

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> And they said, Your servant, our
father, is well, he is still living. And they went down on their faces
before him.

<span id="an_43:29">43:29</span> Then, lifting up his eyes, he saw
Benjamin, his brother, his mother's son, and he said, Is this your
youngest brother of whom you gave me word? And he said, God be good to
you, my son.

<span id="an_43:30">43:30</span> Then Joseph's heart went out to his
brother, and he went quickly into his room, for he was overcome with
weeping.

<span id="an_43:31">43:31</span> Then, after washing his face, he came
out, and controlling his feelings said, Put food before us.

<span id="an_43:32">43:32</span> And they put a meal ready for him by
himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians who were with
him by themselves; because the Egyptians may not take food with the
Hebrews, for that would make them unclean.

<span id="an_43:33">43:33</span> And they were all given their seats
before him in order of birth, from the oldest to the youngest: so that
they were looking at one another in wonder.

<span id="an_43:34">43:34</span> And Joseph sent food to them from his
table, but he sent five times as much to Benjamin as to any of the
others. And they took wine freely with him.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> Then he gave orders to the servant who
was over his house, saying, Put as much food into the men's bags as will
go into them, and put every man's money in the mouth of his bag;

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> And put my cup, my silver cup, in the
youngest one's bag, with his money. So he did as Joseph said.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> And at dawn the men, with their asses,
were sent away.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And when they had gone only a little way
out of the town, Joseph said to the servant who was over his house, Go
after them; and when you overtake them, say to them, Why have you done
evil in reward for good?

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> Is not this the cup from which my lord
takes wine and by which he gets knowledge of the future? Truly, you have
done evil.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> So he overtook them and said these words
to them.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> And they said to him, Why does my lord
say such words as these? far be it from your servants to do such a
thing:

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> See, the money which was in the mouth of
our bags we gave back to you when we came again from Canaan: how then
might we take silver or gold from your lord's house?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> If it comes to light that any of your
servants has done this, let him be put to death, and we will be your
lord's servants.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> And he said, Let it be as you say: he
in whose bag it is seen will become my servant; and you will not be
responsible.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Then every man quickly got his bag down
and undid it.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> And he made a search, starting with the
oldest and ending with the youngest; and the cup was in Benjamin's bag.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> Then in bitter grief they put the bags
on the asses again and went back to the town.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> So Judah and his brothers came to
Joseph's house; and he was still there: and they went down on their
faces before him.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> And Joseph said, What is this thing
which you have done? had you no thought that such a man as I would have
power to see what is secret?

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> And Judah said, What are we to say to
my lord? how may we put ourselves right in his eyes? God has made clear
the sin of your servants: now we are in your hands, we and the man in
whose bag your cup was seen.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> Then he said, Far be it from me to do
so: but the man who had my cup will be my servant; and you may go back
to your father in peace.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> Then Judah came near him, and said, Let
your servant say a word in my lord's ears, and let not your wrath be
burning against your servant: for you are in the place of Pharaoh to us.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> My lord said to his servants, Have you
a father or a brother?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> And we said to my lord, We have an old
father and a young child, whom he had when he was old; his brother is
dead and he is the only son of his mother, and is very dear to his
father.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> And you said to your servants, Let him
come down to me with you, so that I may see him.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> And we said to my lord, His father will
not let him go; for if he went away his father would come to his death.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> But you said to your servants, If your
youngest brother does not come with you, you will not see my face again.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> And when we went back to your servant,
our father, we gave him an account of my lord's words.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> And our father said, Go again and get
us a little food.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> And we said, Only if our youngest
brother goes with us will we go down; for we may not see the man's face
again if our youngest brother is not with us.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> And our father said to us, You have
knowledge that my wife gave me two sons;

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> The one went away from me, and I said,
Truly he has come to a violent death; and from that time I have not seen
him,

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> If now you take this one from me, and
some evil comes to him, you will make my grey head go down in sorrow to
the underworld.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> If then I go back to your servant, my
father, without the boy, because his life and the boy's life are one,

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> When he sees that the boy is not with
us, he will come to his death, and our father's grey head will go down
in sorrow to the underworld.

<span id="an_44:32">44:32</span> For I made myself responsible for the
boy to my father, saying, If I do not give him safely back to you, let
mine be the sin for ever.

<span id="an_44:33">44:33</span> So now let me be my lord's servant here
in place of the boy, and let him go back with his brothers.

<span id="an_44:34">44:34</span> For how may I go back to my father
without the boy, and see the evil which will come on my father?

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Then Joseph, unable to keep back his
feelings before those who were with him, gave orders for everyone to be
sent away, and no one was present when he made clear to his brothers who
he was.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> And so loud was his weeping, that it came
to the ears of the Egyptians and all Pharaoh's house.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And Joseph said to his brothers, I am
Joseph: is my father still living? But his brothers were not able to
give him an answer for they were troubled before him.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> Then Joseph said to his brothers, Come
near to me. And they came near, And he said, I am Joseph your brother,
whom you sent into Egypt.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> Now do not be troubled or angry with
yourselves for sending me away, because God sent me before you to be the
saviour of your lives.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> For these two years have been years of
need, and there are still five more years to come in which there will be
no ploughing or cutting of grain.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> God sent me before you to keep you and
yours living on earth so that you might become a great nation.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> So now it was not you who sent me here,
but God: and he has made me as a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his
house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Now go quickly to my father, and say to
him, Your son Joseph says, God has made me ruler over all the land of
Egypt: come down to me straight away:

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> The land of Goshen will be your
living-place, and you will be near me; you and your children and your
children's children, and your flocks and herds and all you have:

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> And there I will take care of you, so
that you and your family may not be in need, for there are still five
bad years to come.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> Now truly, your eyes see, and the eyes
of my brother Benjamin see, that it is my mouth which says these things
to you.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> Give my father word of all my glory in
Egypt and of all you have seen; and come back quickly with my father.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> Then, weeping, he took Benjamin in his
arms, and Benjamin himself was weeping on Joseph's neck.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> Then he gave a kiss to all his
brothers, weeping over them; and after that his brothers had no fear of
talking to him.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> And news of these things went through
Pharaoh's house, and it was said that Joseph's brothers were come; and
it seemed good to Pharaoh and his servants.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Say to your
brothers, Put your goods on your beasts and go back to the land of
Canaan;

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> And get your father and your families
and come back to me: and I will give you all the good things of Egypt,
and the fat of the land will be your food.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> And say to them, This you are to do:
take carts from the land of Egypt for your little ones and for your
wives, and get your father and come back.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> And take no thought for your goods, for
the best of all the land of Egypt is yours.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> And the children of Israel did as he
said; and Joseph gave them carts as had been ordered by Pharaoh, and
food for their journey.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> To every one of them he gave three
changes of clothing; but to Benjamin he gave three hundred bits of
silver and five changes of clothing.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> And to his father he sent ten asses
with good things from Egypt on their backs, and ten she-asses with grain
and bread and food for his father on the journey.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> And he sent his brothers on their way,
and said to them, See that you have no argument on the road.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> So they went up from Egypt and came to
the land of Canaan, to their father Jacob.

<span id="an_45:26">45:26</span> And they said to him, Joseph is living,
and is ruler over all the land of Egypt. And at this word Jacob was
quite overcome, for he had no faith in it.

<span id="an_45:27">45:27</span> And they gave him an account of
everything Joseph had said to them; and when he saw the carts which
Joseph had sent for them, his spirit came back to him:

<span id="an_45:28">45:28</span> And Israel said, It is enough: Joseph
my son is still living; I will go and see him before my death.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> And Israel went on his journey with all
he had, and came to Beer-sheba, where he made offerings to the God of
his father Isaac.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> And God said to Israel in a night-vision,
Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> And he said, I am God, the God of your
father: go down to Egypt without fear, for I will make a great nation of
you there:

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> I will go down with you to Egypt, and I
will see that you come back again, and at your death Joseph will put his
hands on your eyes.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Then Jacob went on from Beer-sheba; and
the sons of Jacob took their father and their little ones and their
wives in the carts which Pharaoh had sent for them.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> And they took their cattle and all the
goods which they had got in the land of Canaan, and came to Egypt, even
Jacob and all his seed:

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> His sons and his sons' sons, his
daughters and his daughters' sons and all his family he took with him
into Egypt.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> And these are the names of the children
of Israel who came into Egypt, even Jacob and all his sons: Reuben,
Jacob's oldest son;

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> And the sons of Reuben: Hanoch and Pallu
and Hezron and Carmi;

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel and
Jamin and Ohad and Jachin and Zohar and Shaul, the son of a woman of
Canaan;

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> And the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath,
and Merari;

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> And the sons of Judah: Er and Onan and
Shelah and Perez and Zerah: but Er and Onan had come to their death in
the land of Canaan; and the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> And the sons of Issachar: Tola and Puah
and Job and Shimron;

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> And the sons of Zebulun: Sered and Elon
and Jahleel;

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> All these, together with his daughter
Dinah, were the children of Leah, whom Jacob had by her in Paddan-aram;
they were thirty-three in number.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> And the sons of Gad: Ziphion and Haggi,
Shuni and Ezbon, Eri and Arodi and Areli;

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> And the sons of Asher: Jimnah and
Ishvah and Ishvi and Beriah, and Sarah, their sister; and the sons of
Beriah: Heber and Malchiel.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> These are the children of Zilpah, whom
Laban gave to his daughter Leah, and Jacob had these sixteen children by
her.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> The sons of Jacob's wife Rachel: Joseph
and Benjamin.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> And Joseph had Manasseh and Ephraim in
the land of Egypt, by Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera, priest of On.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> And the sons of Benjamin were Belah and
Becher and Ashbel, Gera and Naaman, Ehi and Rosh, Muppim and Huppim and
Ard.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> All these were the children of Rachel
whom Jacob had by her, fourteen persons.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> And the son of Dan was Hushim.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> And the sons of Naphtali: Jahzeel and
Guni and Jezer and Shillem.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> These were the children of Bilhah, whom
Laban gave to his daughter Rachel, seven persons.

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> All the persons who came with Jacob
into Egypt, the offspring of his body, were sixty-six, without taking
into account the wives of Jacob's sons.

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> And the sons of Joseph whom he had in
Egypt were two. Seventy persons of the family of Jacob came into Egypt.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> Now he had sent Judah before him to
Goshen, to get word from Joseph; and so they came to the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_46:29">46:29</span> And Joseph got his carriage ready and
went to Goshen for the meeting with his father; and when he came before
him, he put his arms round his neck, weeping.

<span id="an_46:30">46:30</span> And Israel said to Joseph, Now that I
have seen you living again, I am ready for death.

<span id="an_46:31">46:31</span> And Joseph said to his brothers and to
his father's people, I will go and give the news to Pharaoh, and say to
him, My brothers and my father's people, from the land of Canaan, have
come to me;

<span id="an_46:32">46:32</span> And these men are keepers of sheep and
owners of cattle, and have with them their flocks and their herds and
all they have.

<span id="an_46:33">46:33</span> Now when Pharaoh sends for you and
says, What is your business?

<span id="an_46:34">46:34</span> You are to say, Your servants have been
keepers of cattle from our early days up to now, like our fathers; in
this way you will be able to have the land of Goshen for yourselves;
because keepers of sheep are unclean in the eyes of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Then Joseph went to Pharaoh, and said, My
father and my brothers with their flocks and their herds and all they
have, are come from Canaan, and are now in the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> And he took five of his brothers to
Pharaoh.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> And Pharaoh said to them, What is your
business? And they said, Your servants are keepers of sheep, as our
fathers were before us.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> And they said to Pharaoh, We have come to
make a living in this land, because we have no grass for our flocks in
the land of Canaan; so now let your servants make a place for themselves
in the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Let them have
the land of Goshen; and if there are any able men among them, put them
over my cattle.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> And Jacob and his sons came to Joseph in
Egypt, and when word of it came to the ears of Pharaoh, king of Egypt,
he said to Joseph, Your father and brothers have come to you; all the
land of Egypt is before you; let your father and your brothers have the
best of the land for their resting-place.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> Then Joseph made his father Jacob come
before Pharaoh, and Jacob gave him his blessing.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And Pharaoh said to him, How old are you?

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> And Jacob said, The years of my
wanderings have been a hundred and thirty; small in number and full of
sorrow have been the years of my life, and less than the years of the
wanderings of my fathers.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And Jacob gave Pharaoh his blessing,
and went out from before him.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> And Joseph made a place for his father
and his brothers, and gave them a heritage in the land of Egypt, in the
best of the land, the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had given orders.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> And Joseph took care of his father and
his brothers and all his father's people, giving them food for the needs
of their families.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Now there was no food to be had in all
the land, so that all Egypt and Canaan were wasted from need of food.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> And all the money in Egypt and in the
land of Canaan which had been given for grain, came into the hands of
Joseph: and he put it in Pharaoh's house.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> And when all the money in Egypt and
Canaan was gone, the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said, Give us bread;
would you have us come to destruction before your eyes? for we have no
more money.

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> And Joseph said, Give me your cattle; I
will give you grain in exchange for your cattle if your money is all
gone.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> So they took their cattle to Joseph and
he gave them bread in exchange for their horses and flocks and herds and
asses, so all that year he gave them food in exchange for their cattle.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> And when that year was ended, they came
to him in the second year, and said, We may not keep it from our lord's
knowledge that all our money is gone, and all the herds of cattle are my
lord's; there is nothing more to give my lord but our bodies and our
land;

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> Are we to come to destruction before
your eyes, we and our land? take us and our land and give us bread; and
we and our land will be servants to Pharaoh; and give us seed so that we
may have life and the land may not become waste.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> So Joseph got all the land in Egypt for
Pharaoh; for every Egyptian gave up his land in exchange for food,
because of their great need; so all the land became Pharaoh's.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> And as for the people, he made servants
of them, town by town, from one end of Egypt to the other.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> Only he did not take the land of the
priests, for the priests had their food given them by Pharaoh, and
having what Pharaoh gave them, they had no need to give up their land.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> Then Joseph said to the people, I have
made you and your land this day the property of Pharaoh; here is seed
for you to put in your fields.

<span id="an_47:24">47:24</span> And when the grain is cut, you are to
give a fifth part to Pharaoh, and four parts will be yours for seed and
food, and for your families and your little ones.

<span id="an_47:25">47:25</span> And they said to him, Truly you have
kept us from death; may we have grace in your eyes, and we will be
Pharaoh's servants.

<span id="an_47:26">47:26</span> Then Joseph made a law which is in
force to this day, that Pharaoh was to have the fifth part; only the
land of the priests did not become his.

<span id="an_47:27">47:27</span> And so Israel was living among the
Egyptians in the land of Goshen; and they got property there, and became
very great in numbers and in wealth.

<span id="an_47:28">47:28</span> And Jacob was living in the land of
Goshen for seventeen years; so the years of his life were a hundred and
forty-seven.

<span id="an_47:29">47:29</span> And the time of his death came near,
and he sent for his son Joseph and said to him, If now I am dear to you,
put your hand under my leg and take an oath that you will not put me to
rest in Egypt;

<span id="an_47:30">47:30</span> But when I go to my fathers, you are to
take me out of Egypt and put me to rest in their last resting-place. And
he said, I will do so.

<span id="an_47:31">47:31</span> And he said, Take an oath to me; and he
took an oath to him: and Israel gave worship on the bed's head.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Now after these things, word came to
Joseph that his father was ill: and he took with him his sons Manasseh
and Ephraim.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> And when they said to Jacob, Your son
Joseph is coming to see you: then Israel, getting all his strength
together, had himself lifted up in his bed.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> And Jacob said to Joseph, God, the Ruler
of all, came to me in a vision at Luz in the land of Canaan, and gave me
his blessing,

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> And said to me, Truly, I will make you
fertile and give you increase and will make of you a great family of
nations: and I will give this land to your seed after you to be their
heritage for ever.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> And now your two sons who came to birth
in Egypt before I came to you here, are mine; Ephraim and Manasseh will
be mine, in the same way as Reuben and Simeon are.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> And any other offspring which you have
after them, will be yours, and will be named after their brothers in
their heritage.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> And as for me, when I came from Paddan,
death overtook Rachel on the way, when we were still some distance from
Ephrath; and I put her to rest there on the road to Ephrath, which is
Beth-lehem.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Then Israel, looking at Joseph's sons,
said, Who are these?

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> And Joseph said to his father, They are
my sons, whom God has given me in this land. And he said, Let them come
near me, and I will give them a blessing.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Now because Israel was old, his eyes
were no longer clear, and he was not able to see. So he made them come
near to him, and he gave them a kiss, folding them in his arms.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> And Israel said to Joseph, I had no
hope of seeing your face again, but God in his mercy has let me see you
and your children.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Then Joseph took them from between his
knees, and went down on his face to the earth.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> Then taking Ephraim with his right
hand, Joseph put him at Israel's left side, and with his left hand he
put Manasseh at Israel's right side, placing them near him.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> And Israel, stretching out his right
hand, put it on the head of Ephraim, the younger, and his left hand on
the head of Manasseh, crossing his hands on purpose, for Manasseh was
the older.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> And he gave Joseph a blessing, saying,
May the God to whom my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, gave worship, the God
who has taken care of me all my life till this day,

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> The angel who has been my saviour from
all evil, send his blessing on these children: and let my name and the
name of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac, be given to them; and let them
become a great nation in the earth.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> Now when Joseph saw that his father had
put his right hand on the head of Ephraim, it did not seem right to him;
and lifting his father's hand he would have put it on the head of
Manasseh.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> And Joseph said to his father, Not so,
my father, for this is the older; put your right hand on his head.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> But his father would not, saying, I am
doing it on purpose, my son; he will certainly become a nation and a
great one; but his younger brother will be greater than he, and his seed
will become a great family of nations.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> So he gave them his blessing that day,
saying, You will be the sign of blessing in Israel, for they will say,
May God make you like Ephraim and Manasseh; and he put Ephraim before
Manasseh.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> Then Israel said to Joseph, Now my
death is near; but God will be with you, guiding you back to the land of
your fathers.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> And I have given you more than your
brothers, even Shechem as your heritage, which I took from the Amorites
with my sword and my bow.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> And Jacob sent for his sons, and said,
Come together, all of you, so that I may give you news of your fate in
future times.

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Come near, O sons of Jacob, and give ear
to the words of Israel your father.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Reuben, you are my oldest son, the
first-fruit of my strength, first in pride and first in power:

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> But because you were uncontrolled, the
first place will not be yours; for you went up to your father's bed,
even his bride-bed, and made it unclean.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Simeon and Levi are brothers; deceit and
force are their secret designs.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> Take no part in their secrets, O my soul;
keep far away, O my heart, from their meetings; for in their wrath they
put men to death, and for their pleasure even oxen were wounded.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> A curse on their passion for it was
bitter; and on their wrath for it was cruel. I will let their heritage
in Jacob be broken up, driving them from their places in Israel.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> To you, Judah, will your brothers give
praise: your hand will be on the neck of your haters; your father's sons
will go down to the earth before you.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> Judah is a young lion; like a lion full
of meat you have become great, my son; now he takes his rest like a lion
stretched out and like an old lion; by whom will his sleep be broken?

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> The rod of authority will not be taken
from Judah, and he will not be without a law-giver, till he comes who
has the right to it, and the peoples will put themselves under his rule.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Knotting his ass's cord to the vine,
and his young ass to the best vine; washing his robe in wine, and his
clothing in the blood of grapes:

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> His eyes will be dark with wine, and
his teeth white with milk.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> The resting-place of Zebulun will be by
the sea, and he will be a harbour for ships; the edge of his land will
be by Zidon.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> Issachar is a strong ass stretched out
among the flocks:

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> And he saw that rest was good and the
land was pleasing; so he let them put weights on his back and became a
servant.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Dan will be the judge of his people, as
one of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> May Dan be a snake in the way, a horned
snake by the road, biting the horse's foot so that the horseman has a
fall.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> I have been waiting for your salvation,
O Lord.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Gad, an army will come against him, but
he will come down on them in their flight.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Asher's bread is fat; he gives delicate
food for kings.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> Naphtali is a roe let loose, giving
fair young ones.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Joseph is a young ox, whose steps are
turned to the fountain;

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> He was troubled by the archers; they
sent out their arrows against him, cruelly wounding him:

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> But their bows were broken by a strong
one, and the cords of their arms were cut by the Strength of Jacob, by
the name of the Stone of Israel:

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> Even by the God of your father, who
will be your help, and by the Ruler of all, who will make you full with
blessings from heaven on high, blessings of the deep stretched out under
the earth, blessings of the breasts and of the fertile body:

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> Blessings of sons, old and young, to
the father: blessings of the oldest mountains and the fruit of the
eternal hills: let them come on the head of Joseph, on the crown of him
who was separate from his brothers.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> Benjamin is a wolf, searching for meat:
in the morning he takes his food, and in the evening he makes division
of what he has taken.

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> These are the twelve tribes of Israel:
and these are the words their father said to them, blessing them; to
every one he gave his blessing.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> And he gave orders to them, saying, Put
me to rest with my people and with my fathers, in the hollow of the rock
in the field of Ephron the Hittite,

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> In the rock in the field of Machpelah,
near Mamre in the land of Canaan, which Abraham got from Ephron the
Hittite, to be his resting-place.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> There Abraham and Sarah his wife were
put to rest, and there they put Isaac and Rebekah his wife, and there I
put Leah to rest.

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> In the rock in the field which was got
for a price from the people of Heth.

<span id="an_49:33">49:33</span> And when Jacob had come to the end of
these words to his sons, stretching himself on his bed, he gave up his
spirit, and went the way of his people.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> And Joseph put his head down on his
father's face, weeping and kissing him.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> And Joseph gave orders to his servants
who had the necessary knowledge, to make his father's body ready,
folding it in linen with spices, and they did so.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> And the forty days needed for making the
body ready went by: and there was weeping for him among the Egyptians
for seventy days.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> And when the days of weeping for him were
past, Joseph said to the servants of Pharaoh, If now you have love for
me, say these words to Pharaoh:

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> My father made me take an oath, saying,
When I am dead, put me to rest in the place I have made ready for myself
in the land of Canaan. So now let me go and put my father in his last
resting-place, and I will come back again.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> And Pharaoh said, Go up and put your
father to rest, as you gave your oath to him.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> So Joseph went up to put his father in
his last resting-place; and with him went all the servants of Pharaoh,
and the chief men of his house and all the chiefs of the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> And all the family of Joseph, and his
brothers and his father's people: only their little ones and their
flocks and herds they did not take with them from the land of Goshen.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> And carriages went up with him and
horsemen, a great army.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> And they came to the grain-floor of
Atad on the other side of Jordan, and there they gave the last honours
to Jacob, with great and bitter sorrow, weeping for their father for
seven days.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> And when the people of the land, the
people of Canaan, at the grain-floor of Atad, saw their grief, they
said, Great is the grief of the Egyptians: so the place was named
Abel-mizraim, on the other side of Jordan.

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> So his sons did as he had given them
orders to do:

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> For they took him into the land of
Canaan and put him to rest in the hollow rock in the field of Machpelah,
which Abraham got with the field, for a resting-place, from Ephron the
Hittite at Mamre.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> And when his father had been put to
rest, Joseph and his brothers and all who had gone with him, went back
to Egypt.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> Now after the death of their father,
Joseph's brothers said to themselves, It may be that Joseph's heart will
be turned against us, and he will give us punishment for all the evil
which we did to him.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> So they sent word to Joseph, saying,
Your father, before his death, gave us orders, saying,

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> You are to say to Joseph, Let the
wrongdoing of your brothers be overlooked, and the evil they did to you:
now, if it is your pleasure, let the sin of the servants of your
father's God have forgiveness. And at these words, Joseph was overcome
with weeping.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> Then his brothers went, and falling at
his feet, said, Truly, we are your servants.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> And Joseph said, Have no fear: am I in
the place of God?

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> As for you, it was in your mind to do
me evil, but God has given a happy outcome, the salvation of numbers of
people, as you see today.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> So now, have no fear: for I will take
care of you and your little ones. So he gave them comfort with kind
words.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> Now Joseph and all his father's family
went on living in Egypt: and the years of Joseph's life were a hundred
and ten.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of
the third generation: and the children of Machir, the son of Manasseh,
came to birth on Joseph's knees.

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> Then Joseph said to his brothers, The
time of my death has come; but God will keep you in mind and take you
out of this land into the land which he gave by his oath to Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> Then Joseph made the children of Israel
take an oath, saying, God will certainly give effect to his word, and
you are to take my bones away from here.

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> So Joseph came to his death, being a
hundred and ten years old: and they made his body ready, and he was put
in a chest in Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus](exo)
