[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dan)  [Next](joe) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Hosea

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the Lord which came to Hosea,
the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah,
kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The start of the word of the Lord by Hosea:
And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take for yourself a wife of loose ways,
and children of the same, for the land has been untrue to the Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So he took as his wife Gomer, the daughter
of Diblaim, and she gave birth to a son.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the Lord said to him, Give him the name
of Jezreel, for after a little time I will send punishment for the blood
of Jezreel on the line of Jehu, and put an end to the kingdom of Israel.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And in that day I will let the bow of
Israel be broken in the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And after that she gave birth to a
daughter. And the Lord said, Give her the name Lo-ruhamah; for I will
not again have mercy on Israel, to give them forgiveness.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But I will have mercy on Judah and will
give them salvation by the Lord their God, but not by the bow or the
sword or by fighting or by horses or horsemen.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now when Lo-ruhamah had been taken from the
breast, the woman gave birth to a son.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And the Lord said, Give him the name
Lo-ammi; for you are not my people, and I will not be your God.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But still the number of the children of
Israel will be like the sand of the sea, which may not be measured or
numbered; and in place of its being said to them, You are not my people,
it will be said to them, You are the sons of the living God

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And the children of Israel and the
children of Judah will come together and take for themselves one head,
and will go up from the land, for great will be the day of Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Say to your brothers, Ammi; and to your
sisters, Ruhamah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Take up the cause against your mother, take
it up, for she is not my wife, and I am not her husband; let her put
away her loose ways from her face, and her false ways from between her
breasts;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For fear that I may take away her robe from
her, making her uncovered as in the day of her birth; making her like a
waste place and a dry land, causing her death through need of water.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And I will have no mercy on her children,
for they are the children of her loose ways.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For their mother has been untrue; she who
gave them birth has done things of shame, for she said, I will go after
my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my wool and my linen, my
oil and my wine.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For this cause I will put thorns in her
road, building up a wall round her so that she may not go on her way.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And if she goes after her lovers she will
not overtake them; if she makes search for them she will not see them;
then will she say, I will go back to my first husband, for then it was
better for me than now.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For she had no knowledge that it was I who
gave her the grain and the wine and the oil, increasing her silver and
gold which they gave to the Baal.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> So I will take away again my grain in its
time and my wine, and I will take away my wool and my linen with which
her body might have been covered.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And now I will make her shame clear
before the eyes of her lovers, and no one will take her out of my hand.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And I will put an end to all her joy, her
feasts, her new moons, and her Sabbaths, and all her regular meetings.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I will make waste her vines and her
fig-trees, of which she has said, These are the payments which my lovers
have made to me; and I will make them a waste of trees, and the beasts
of the field will take them for food.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I will give her punishment for the
days of the Baals, to whom she has been burning perfumes, when she made
herself fair with her nose-rings and her jewels, and went after her
lovers, giving no thought to me, says the Lord.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For this cause I will make her come into
the waste land and will say words of comfort to her.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And I will give her vine-gardens from
there, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she will give her
answer there as in the days when she was young, and as in the time when
she came up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And in that day, says the Lord, you will
say to me, Ishi; and you will never again give me the name of Baali;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For I will take away the names of the
Baals out of her mouth, and never again will she say their names.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And in that day I will make an agreement
for them with the beasts of the field and the birds of heaven and the
things which go low on the earth; I will put an end to the bow and the
sword and war in all the land, and will make them take their rest in
peace.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will take you as my bride for ever;
truly, I will take you as my bride in righteousness and in right
judging, in love and in mercies.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I will take you as my bride in good
faith, and you will have knowledge of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it will be, in that day, says the
Lord, that I will give an answer to the heavens, and the heavens to the
earth;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the earth will give its answer to the
grain and the wine and the oil, and they will give an answer to Jezreel;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will put her as seed in the earth,
and I will have mercy on her to whom no mercy was given; and I will say
to those who were not my people, You are my people, and they will say,
My God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And the Lord said to me, Give your love
again to a woman who has a lover and is false to her husband, even as
the Lord has love for the children of Israel, though they are turned to
other gods and are lovers of grape-cakes.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I got her for myself for fifteen shekels
of silver and a homer and a half of barley;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And I said to her, You are to be mine for a
long space of time; you are not to be false to me, and no other man is
to have you for his wife; and so will I be to you.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For the children of Israel will for a long
time be without king and without ruler, without offerings and without
pillars, and without ephod or images.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And after that, the children of Israel will
come back and go in search of the Lord their God and David their king;
and they will come in fear to the Lord and to his mercies in the days to
come.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Give ear to the word of the Lord, O
children of Israel; for the Lord has a cause against the people of this
land, because there is no good faith in it, and no mercy and no
knowledge of God in the land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> There is cursing and broken faith, violent
death and attacks on property, men are untrue in married life, houses
are broken into, and there is blood touching blood.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Because of this the land will be dry, and
everyone living in it will be wasted away, with the beasts of the field
and the birds of heaven; even the fishes of the sea will be taken away.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Let no man go to law or make protests, for
your people are like those who go to law with a priest.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> You will not be able to keep on your feet
by day, and by night the prophet will be falling down with you, and I
will give your mother to destruction.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Destruction has overtaken my people because
they have no knowledge; because you have given up knowledge, I will give
you up, so that you will be no priest to me, because you have not kept
in mind the law of your God, I will not keep your children in my memory.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Even while they were increasing in number
they were sinning against me; I will let their glory be changed into
shame.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> The sin of my people is like food to them;
and their desire is for their wrongdoing.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And the priest will be like the people; I
will give them punishment for their evil ways, and the reward of their
acts.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> They will have food, but they will not be
full; they will be false to me, but they will not be increased, because
they no longer give thought to the Lord.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Loose ways and new wine take away wisdom.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My people get knowledge from their tree,
and their rod gives them news; for a false spirit is the cause of their
wandering, and they have been false to their God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> They make offerings on the tops of
mountains, burning perfumes in high places, under trees of every sort,
because their shade is good: and so your daughters are given up to loose
ways and your brides are false to their husbands.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I will not give punishment to your
daughters or your brides for their evil behaviour; for they make
themselves separate with loose women, and make offerings with those who
are used for sex purposes in the worship of the gods: the people who
have no wisdom will be sent away.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Do not you, O Israel, come into error; do
not you, O Judah, come to Gilgal, or go up to Beth-aven, or take an
oath, By the living Lord.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For Israel is uncontrolled, like a cow
which may not be controlled; now will the Lord give them food like a
lamb in a wide place.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Ephraim is joined to false gods; let him
be.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Their drink has become bitter; they are
completely false; her rulers take pleasure in shame.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> They are folded in the skirts of the
wind; they will be shamed because of their offerings.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Give ear to this, O priests; give
attention, O Israel, and you, family of the king; for you are to be
judged; you have been a deceit at Mizpah and a net stretched out on
Tabor.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> They have gone deep in the evil ways of
Shittim, but I am the judge of all.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have knowledge of Ephraim, and Israel is
not secret from me; for now, O Ephraim, you have been false to me,
Israel has become unclean.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Their works will not let them come back to
their God, for a false spirit is in them and they have no knowledge of
the Lord.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the pride of Israel gives an answer to
his face; and Ephraim will have a fall through his sins, and the fall of
Judah will be the same as theirs.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They will go, with their flocks and their
herds, in search of the Lord, but they will not see him; he has taken
himself out of their view.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They have been false to the Lord; they have
given birth to strange children; now the new moon will make them waste
with their fields.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Let the horn be sounded in Gibeah and in
Ramah; give a loud cry in Beth-aven, They are after you, O Benjamin.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Ephraim will become a waste in the day of
punishment; I have given knowledge among the tribes of Israel of what is
certain.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The rulers of Judah are like those who
take away a landmark; I will let loose my wrath on them like flowing
water.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Ephraim is troubled; he is crushed by his
judges, because he took pleasure in walking after deceit.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And so to Ephraim I am like a wasting
insect, and a destruction to the children of Judah.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> When Ephraim saw his disease and Judah
his wound, then Ephraim went to Assyria and sent to the great king; but
he is not able to make you well or give you help for your wound.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For I will be to Ephraim as a lion, and
as a young lion to the children of Judah; I, even I, will give him
wounds and go away; I will take him away, and there will be no helper.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I will go back to my place till they are
made waste; in their trouble they will go after me early and will make
search for me.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Come, let us go back to the Lord; for he
has given us wounds and he will make us well; he has given blows and he
will give help.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> After two days he will give us life, and on
the third day he will make us get up, and we will be living before him.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And let us have knowledge, let us go after
the knowledge of the Lord; his going out is certain as the dawn, his
decisions go out like the light; he will come to us like the rain, like
the spring rain watering the earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> O Ephraim, what am I to do to you? O Judah,
what am I to do to you? For your love is like a morning cloud, and like
the dew which goes early away.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> So I have had it cut in stones; I gave them
teaching by the words of my mouth;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Because my desire is for mercy and not
offerings; for the knowledge of God more than for burned offerings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But like a man, they have gone against the
agreement; there they were false to me.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Gilead is a town of evil-doers, marked with
blood.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And like a band of thieves waiting for a
man, so are the priests watching secretly the way of those going quickly
to Shechem, for they are working with an evil design.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> In Israel I have seen a very evil thing;
there false ways are seen in Ephraim, Israel is unclean;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And Judah has put up disgusting images
for himself.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When my desire was for the fate of my
people to be changed and to make Israel well, then the sin of Ephraim
was made clear, and the evil-doing of Samaria; for their ways are false,
and the thief comes into the house, while the band of outlaws takes
property by force in the streets.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And they do not say to themselves that I
keep in mind all their sin; now their evil acts come round them on every
side; they are before my face.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> In their sin they make a king for
themselves, and rulers in their deceit.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> They are all untrue; they are like a
burning oven; the bread-maker does not make up the fire from the time
when the paste is mixed till it is leavened.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> On the day of our king, the rulers made him
ill with the heat of wine; his hand was stretched out with the men of
pride.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For they have made their hearts ready like
an oven, while they are waiting secretly; their wrath is sleeping all
night; in the morning it is burning like a flaming fire.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> They are all heated like an oven, and they
put an end to their judges; all their kings have been made low; not one
among them makes prayer to me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ephraim is mixed with the peoples; Ephraim
is a cake not turned.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Men from other lands have made waste his
strength, and he is not conscious of it; grey hairs have come on him
here and there, and he has no knowledge of it.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the pride of Israel gives an answer
to his face; but for all this, they have not gone back to the Lord their
God, or made search for him.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Ephraim is like a foolish dove,
without wisdom; they send out their cry to Egypt, they go to Assyria.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When they go, my net will be stretched
out over them; I will take them like the birds of heaven, I will give
them punishment, I will take them away in the net for their sin.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> May trouble be theirs! for they have gone
far away from me; and destruction, for they have been sinning against
me; I was ready to be their saviour, but they said false words against
me.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And they have not made prayer to me in
their hearts, but they make loud cries on their beds; they are cutting
themselves for food and wine, they are turned against me.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Though I have given training and strength
to their arms, they have evil designs against me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They have gone to what is of no value;
they are like a false bow; their captains will come to destruction by
the sword, and their ruler by my wrath; for this, the land of Egypt will
make sport of them.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Put the horn to your mouth. He comes like
an eagle against the house of the Lord; because they have gone against
my agreement, they have not kept my law.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> They will send up to me a cry for help: We,
Israel, have knowledge of you, O God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Israel has given up what is good; his
haters will go after him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They have put up kings, but not by me; they
have made princes, but I had no knowledge of it; they have made images
of silver and gold, so that they may be cut off.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> I will have nothing to do with your young
ox, O Samaria; my wrath is burning against them; how long will it be
before the children of Israel make themselves clean?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> The workman made it, it is no god; the ox
of Samaria will be broken into bits.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For they have been planting the wind, and
their fruit will be the storm; his grain has no stem, it will give no
meal, and if it does, a strange nation will take it.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Israel has come to destruction; now they
are among the nations like a cup in which there is no pleasure.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For they have gone up to Assyria like an
ass going by himself; Ephraim has given money to get lovers.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> But though they give money to the nations
for help, still I will send them in all directions; and in a short time
they will be without a king and rulers.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because Ephraim has been increasing
altars for sin, altars have become a cause of sin to him.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Though I put my law in writing for him in
ten thousand rules, they are to him as a strange thing.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> He gives the offerings of his lovers, and
takes the flesh for food; but the Lord has no pleasure in them; now he
will keep in mind their evil-doing and give them the punishment of their
sins; they will go back to Egypt.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For Israel has no memory of his Maker,
and has put up the houses of kings; and Judah has made great the number
of his walled towns. But I will send a fire on his towns and put an end
to his great houses.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Have no joy, O Israel, and do not be glad
like the nations; for you have been untrue to your God; your desire has
been for the loose woman's reward on every grain-floor.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The grain-floor and the place where the
grapes are crushed will not give them food; there will be no new wine
for them.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They will have no resting-place in the
Lord's land, but Ephraim will go back to Egypt, and they will take
unclean food in Assyria.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> They will give no wine offering to the
Lord, they will not make offerings ready for him; their bread will be
like the bread of those in sorrow; all who take it will be unclean,
because their bread will be only for their desire, it will not come into
the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> What will you do on the day of worship, and
on the day of the feast of the Lord?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For see, they are going away into Assyria;
Egypt will get them together, Memphis will be their last resting-place;
their fair silver vessels will be covered over with field plants, and
thorns will come up in their tents.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The days of punishment, the days of reward
are come; Israel will be put to shame; the prophet is foolish, the man
who has the spirit is off his head, because of your great sin.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> There is great hate against the watchman of
Ephraim, the people of my God; as for the prophet, there is a net in all
his ways, and hate in the house of his God.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They have gone deep in evil as in the days
of Gibeah; he will keep in mind their wrongdoing, he will give them
punishment for their sins.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> I made discovery of Israel as of grapes
in the waste land; I saw your fathers as the first-fruits of the
fig-tree in her early fruit time; but they came to Baal-peor, and made
themselves holy to the thing of shame, and became disgusting like that
to which they gave their love.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As for Ephraim, their glory will go in
flight like a bird: there will be no birth and no one with child and no
giving of life.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Even though their children have come to
growth I will take them away, so that not a man will be there; for their
evil-doing will be complete and they will be put to shame because of it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> As I have seen a beast whose young have
been taken from her, so Ephraim will give birth to children only for
them to be put to death.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> O Lord, what will you give them? Give
them bodies which may not give birth and breasts without milk.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> All their evil-doing is in Gilgal; there
I had hate for them; because of their evil-doing I will send them out of
my house; they will no longer be dear to me; all their rulers are
uncontrolled.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> The rod has come on Ephraim, their root
is dry, let them have no fruit; even though they give birth, I will put
to death the dearest fruit of their bodies.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> My God will give them up because they did
not give ear to him; they will be wandering among the nations.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Israel is a branching vine, full of
fruit; as his fruit is increased, so the number of his altars is
increased; as the land is fair, so they have made fair pillars.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Their mind is taken away; now they will
be made waste: he will have their altars broken down, he will give their
pillars to destruction.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Now, truly, they will say, We have no
king, we have no fear of the Lord; and the king, what is he able to do
for us?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Their words are foolish; they make
agreements with false oaths, so punishment will come up like a
poison-plant in a ploughed field.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The people of Samaria will be full of
fear because of the ox of Beth-aven; its people will have sorrow for it,
and its priests will give cries of grief for its glory, for the glory
has gone in flight.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And they will take it to Assyria and give
it to the great king; shame will come on Ephraim, and Israel will be
shamed because of its image.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> As for Samaria, her king is cut off, like
mist on the water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the high places of Aven, the sin of
Israel, will come to destruction; thorns and waste plants will come up
on their altars; they will say to the mountains, Be a cover over us; and
to the hills, Come down on us.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> O Israel, you have done evil from the
days of Gibeah; there they took up their position, so that the fighting
against the children of evil might not overtake them in Gibeah.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> I will come and give them punishment;
and the peoples will come together against them when I give them the
reward of their two sins.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Ephraim is a trained cow, taking
pleasure in crushing the grain; but I have put a yoke on her fair neck;
I will put a horseman on the back of Ephraim; Judah will be working the
plough, Jacob will be turning up the earth.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Put in the seed of righteousness, get
in your grain in mercy, let your unploughed earth be turned up: for it
is time to make search for the Lord, till he comes and sends
righteousness on you like rain.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> You have been ploughing sin, you have
got in a store of evil, the fruit of deceit has been your food: for you
put faith in your way, in the number of your men of war.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> So a great outcry will go up from among
your people, and all your strong places will be broken, as Beth-arbel
was broken by Shalman in the day of war, as the mother was broken on the
rocks with her children.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So will Beth-el do to you because of
your evil-doing; at dawn will the king of Israel be cut off completely.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> When Israel was a child he was dear to
me; and I took my son out of Egypt.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> When I sent for them, then they went away
from me; they made offerings to the Baals, burning perfumes to images.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I was guiding Ephraim's footsteps; I
took them up in my arms, but they were not conscious that I was ready to
make them well.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> I made them come after me with the cords
of a man, with the bands of love; I was to them as one who took the yoke
from off their mouths, putting meat before them.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> He will go back to the land of Egypt and
the Assyrian will be his king, because they would not come back to me.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the sword will go through his towns,
wasting his children and causing destruction because of their evil
designs.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> My people are given up to sinning against
me; though their voice goes up on high, no one will be lifting them up.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> How may I give you up, O Ephraim? how may
I be your saviour, O Israel? how may I make you like Admah? how may I do
to you as I did to Zeboim? My heart is turned in me, it is soft with
pity.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will not put into effect the heat of my
wrath; I will not again send destruction on Ephraim; for I am God and
not man, the Holy One among you; I will not put an end to you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They will go after the Lord; his cry
will be like that of a lion; his cry will be loud, and the children will
come from the west, shaking with fear;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Shaking with fear like a bird, they
will come out of Egypt, like a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I
will give them rest in their houses, says the Lord.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> The deceit of Ephraim and the false
words of Israel are about me on every side. ...

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Ephraim's food is the wind, and he goes
after the east wind: deceit and destruction are increasing day by day;
they make an agreement with Assyria, and take oil into Egypt.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> The Lord has a cause against Judah, and
will give punishment to Jacob for his ways; he will give him the reward
of his acts.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> In the body of his mother he took his
brother by the foot, and in his strength he was fighting with God;

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> He had a fight with the angel and
overcame him; he made request for grace to him with weeping; he came
face to face with him in Beth-el and there his words came to him;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Even the Lord, the God of armies; the
Lord is his name.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> So then, come back to your God; keep
mercy and right, and be waiting at all times on your God.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> As for Canaan, the scales of deceit are
in his hands; he takes pleasure in twisted ways.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And Ephraim said, Now I have got wealth
and much property; in all my works no sin may be seen in me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> But I am the Lord your God from the land
of Egypt; I will give you tents for your living-places again as in the
days of the holy meeting.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> My word came to the ears of the
prophets and I gave them visions in great number, and by the mouths of
the prophets I made use of comparisons.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> In Gilead there is evil. They are quite
without value; in Gilgal they make offerings of oxen; truly their altars
are like masses of stones in the hollows of a ploughed field.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Jacob went in flight into the field
of Aram, and Israel became a servant for a wife, and for a wife he kept
sheep.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And by a prophet the Lord made Israel
come up out of Egypt, and by a prophet he was kept safe.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> I have been bitterly moved to wrath by
Ephraim; so that his blood will be on him, and the Lord will make his
shame come back on him.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> When the words of my law came from
Ephraim, he was lifted up in Israel; but when he did evil through the
Baal, death overtook him.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And now their sins are increased; they
have made themselves a metal image, false gods from their silver, after
their designs, all of them the work of the metal-workers; they say of
them, Let them give offerings, let men give kisses to the oxen.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> So they will be like the morning cloud,
like the dew which goes early away, like the dust of the grain which the
wind is driving out of the crushing-floor, like smoke going up from the
fireplace.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> But I am the Lord your God, from the land
of Egypt; you have knowledge of no other God and there is no saviour but
me.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I had knowledge of you in the waste land
where no water was.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> When I gave them food they were full, and
their hearts were full of pride, and they did not keep me in mind.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> So I will be like a lion to them; as a
cruel beast I will keep watch by the road;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> I will come face to face with them like a
bear whose young ones have been taken from her, and their inmost hearts
will be broken; there the dogs will make a meal of them; they will be
wounded by the beasts of the field.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> I have sent destruction on you, O Israel;
who will be your helper?

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Where is your king, that he may be your
saviour? and all your rulers, that they may take up your cause? of whom
you said, Give me a king and rulers.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> I have given you a king, because I was
angry, and have taken him away in my wrath.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The wrongdoing of Ephraim is shut up;
his sin is put away in secret.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The pains of a woman in childbirth will
come on him: he is an unwise son, for at this time it is not right for
him to keep his place when children come to birth.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will give the price to make them free
from the power of the underworld, I will be their saviour from death: O
death! where are your pains? O underworld! where is your destruction? my
eyes will have no pity.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he gives fruit among his
brothers, an east wind will come, the wind of the Lord coming up from
the waste land, and his spring will become dry, his fountain will be
without water: it will make waste the store of all the vessels of his
desire.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Samaria will be made waste, for she has
gone against her God: they will be cut down by the sword, their little
children will be broken on the rocks, their women who are with child
will be cut open.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> O Israel, come back to the Lord your God;
for your evil-doing has been the cause of your fall.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Take with you words, and come back to the
Lord; say to him, Let there be forgiveness for all wrongdoing, so that
we may take what is good, and give in payment the fruit of our lips.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Assyria will not be our salvation; we
will not go on horses; we will not again say to the work of our hands,
You are our gods; for in you there is mercy for the child who has no
father.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> I will put right their errors; freely
will my love be given to them, for my wrath is turned away from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I will be as the dew to Israel; he will
put out flowers like a lily, and send out his roots like Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> His branches will be stretched out, he
will be beautiful as the olive-tree and sweet-smelling as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> They will come back and have rest in his
shade; their life will be made new like the grain, and they will put out
flowers like the vine; his name will be like the wine of Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> As for Ephraim, what has he to do with
false gods any longer? I have given an answer and I will keep watch over
him; I am like a branching fir-tree, from me comes your fruit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> He who is wise will see these things; he
who has good sense will have knowledge of them. For the ways of the Lord
are straight, and the upright will go in them, but sinners will be
falling in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel](joe)
