[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](est)  [Next](psa) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Job

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> There was a man in the land of Uz whose
name was Job. He was without sin and upright, fearing God and keeping
himself far from evil.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And he had seven sons and three daughters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And of cattle he had seven thousand sheep
and goats, and three thousand camels, and a thousand oxen, and five
hundred she-asses, and a very great number of servants. And the man was
greater than any of the sons of the east.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> His sons regularly went to one another's
houses, and every one on his day gave a feast: and at these times they
sent for their three sisters to take part in their feasts with them.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And at the end of their days of feasting,
Job sent and made them clean, getting up early in the morning and
offering burned offerings for them all. For, Job said, It may be that my
sons have done wrong and said evil of God in their hearts. And Job did
this whenever the feasts came round.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And there was a day when the sons of the
gods came together before the Lord, and the Satan came with them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, Where do
you come from? And the Satan said in answer, From wandering this way and
that on the earth, and walking about on it.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, Have you
taken note of my servant Job, for there is no one like him on the earth,
a man without sin and upright, fearing God and keeping himself far from
evil?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And the Satan said in answer to the Lord,
Is it for nothing that Job is a god-fearing man?

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Have you yourself not put a wall round
him and his house and all he has on every side, blessing the work of his
hands, and increasing his cattle in the land?

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But now, put out your hand against all he
has, and he will be cursing you to your face.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, See, I
give all he has into your hands, only do not put a finger on the man
himself. And the Satan went out from before the Lord.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And there was a day when his sons and
daughters were feasting in the house of their oldest brother,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And a man came to Job, and said, The oxen
were ploughing, and the asses were taking their food by their side:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the men of Sheba came against them
and took them away, putting the young men to the sword, and I was the
only one who got away safe to give you the news.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And this one was still talking when
another came, and said, The fire of God came down from heaven, burning
up the sheep and the goats and the young men completely, and I was the
only one who got away safe to give you the news.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And this one was still talking when
another came, and said, The Chaldaeans made themselves into three bands,
and came down on the camels and took them away, putting the young men to
the sword, and I was the only one who got away safe to give you the
news.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And this one was still talking when
another came, and said, Your sons and your daughters were feasting
together in their oldest brother's house,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> When a great wind came rushing from the
waste land against the four sides of the house, and it came down on the
young men, and they are dead; and I was the only one who got away safe
to give you the news.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Then Job got up, and after parting his
clothing and cutting off his hair, he went down on his face to the
earth, and gave worship, and said,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> With nothing I came out of my mother's
body, and with nothing I will go back there; the Lord gave and the Lord
has taken away; let the Lord's name be praised.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> In all this Job did no sin, and did not
say that God's acts were foolish.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there was a day when the sons of the
gods came together before the Lord, and the Satan came with them.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, Where do
you come from? And the Satan said in answer, From wandering this way and
that on the earth, and walking about on it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, Have you
taken note of my servant Job, for there is no one like him on the earth,
a man without sin and upright, fearing God and keeping himself far from
evil? and he still keeps his righteousness, though you have been moving
me to send destruction on him without cause.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the Satan said in answer to the Lord,
Skin for skin, all a man has he will give for his life.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But now, if you only put your hand on his
bone and his flesh, he will certainly be cursing you to your face.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the Lord said to the Satan, See, he is
in your hands, only do not take his life.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the Satan went out from before the
Lord, and sent on Job an evil disease covering his skin from his feet to
the top of his head.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he took a broken bit of a pot, and,
seated in the dust, was rubbing himself with the sharp edge of it.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And his wife said to him, Are you still
keeping your righteousness? Say a curse against God, and put an end to
yourself.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he said to her, You are talking like
one of the foolish women. If we take the good God sends us, are we not
to take the evil when it comes? In all this Job kept his lips from sin.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And Job's three friends had word of all
this evil which had come on him. And they came every one from his place,
Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite.
So they came together to a meeting-place, in order that they might go
and make clear to Job their grief for him, and give him comfort.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And lifting up their eyes when they were
still far off, it did not seem that the man they saw was Job because of
the change in him. And they gave way to bitter weeping, with signs of
grief, and put dust on their heads.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And they took their seats on the earth by
his side for seven days and seven nights: but no one said a word to him,
for they saw that his pain was very great.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then, opening his mouth, and cursing the
day of his birth,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let destruction take the day of my birth,
and the night on which it was said, A man child has come into the world.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> That day--let it be dark; let not God take
note of it from on high, and let not the light be shining on it;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Let the dark and the black night take it
for themselves; let it be covered with a cloud; let the dark shades of
day send fear on it.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That night--let the thick dark take it; let
it not have joy among the days of the year; let it not come into the
number of the months.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> As for that night, let it have no fruit;
let no voice of joy be sounded in it;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Let it be cursed by those who put a curse
on the day; who are ready to make Leviathan awake.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Let its morning stars be dark; let it be
looking for light, but may it not have any; let it not see the eyes of
the dawn.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because it did not keep the doors of my
mother's body shut, so that trouble might be veiled from my eyes.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Why did death not take me when I came out
of my mother's body, why did I not, when I came out, give up my last
breath?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Why did the knees take me, or why the
breasts that they might give me milk?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For then I might have gone to my rest in
quiet, and in sleep have been in peace,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> With kings and the wise ones of the
earth, who put up great houses for themselves;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Or with rulers who had gold, and whose
houses were full of silver;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Or as a child dead at birth I might never
have come into existence; like young children who have not seen the
light.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> There the passions of the evil are over,
and those whose strength has come to an end have rest.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> There the prisoners are at peace
together; the voice of the overseer comes not again to their ears.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The small and the great are there, and
the servant is free from his master.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Why does he give light to him who is in
trouble, and life to the bitter in soul;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> To those whose desire is for death, but
it comes not; who are searching for it more than for secret wealth;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Who are glad with great joy, and full of
delight when they come to their last resting-place;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> To a man whose way is veiled, and who is
shut in by God?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> In place of my food I have grief, and
cries of sorrow come from me like water.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For I have a fear and it comes on me, and
my heart is greatly troubled.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> I have no peace, no quiet, and no rest;
nothing but pain comes on me.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite made answer and
said,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> If one says a word, will it be a weariness
to you? but who is able to keep from saying what is in his mind?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Truly, you have been a helper to others,
and you have made feeble hands strong;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> He who was near to falling has been lifted
up by your words, and you have given strength to bent knees.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But now it has come on you and it is a
weariness to you; you are touched by it and your mind is troubled.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Is not your fear of God your support, and
your upright way of life your hope?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Have you ever seen destruction come to an
upright man? or when were the god-fearing ever cut off?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> What I have seen is that those by whom
trouble has been ploughed, and evil planted, get the same for
themselves.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> By the breath of God destruction takes
them, and by the wind of his wrath they are cut off.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Though the noise of the lion and the
sounding of his voice, may be loud, the teeth of the young lions are
broken.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The old lion comes to his end for need of
food, and the young of the she-lion go wandering in all directions.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> A word was given to me secretly, and the
low sound of it came to my ears.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In troubled thoughts from visions of the
night, when deep sleep comes on men,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Fear came on me and shaking, and my bones
were full of trouble;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And a breath was moving over my face; the
hair of my flesh became stiff:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Something was present before me, but I
was not able to see it clearly; there was a form before my eyes: a quiet
voice came to my ears, saying:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> May a man be upright before God? or a man
be clean before his Maker?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Truly, he puts no faith in his servants,
and he sees error in his angels;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> How much more those living in houses of
earth, whose bases are in the dust! They are crushed more quickly than
an insect;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Between morning and evening they are
completely broken; they come to an end for ever, and no one takes note.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> If their tent-cord is pulled up, do they
not come to an end, and without wisdom?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Give now a cry for help; is there anyone
who will give you an answer? and to which of the holy ones will you make
your prayer?

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For wrath is the cause of death to the
foolish, and he who has no wisdom comes to his end through passion.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have seen the foolish taking root, but
suddenly the curse came on his house.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Now his children have no safe place, and
they are crushed before the judges, for no one takes up their cause.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Their produce is taken by him who has no
food, and their grain goes to the poor, and he who is in need of water
gets it from their spring.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For evil does not come out of the dust, or
trouble out of the earth;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> But trouble is man's fate from birth, as
the flames go up from the fire.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But as for me, I would make my prayer to
God, and I would put my cause before him:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Who does great things outside our
knowledge, wonders without number:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who gives rain on the earth, and sends
water on the fields:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Lifting up those who are low, and putting
the sad in a safe place;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Who makes the designs of the wise go
wrong, so that they are unable to give effect to their purposes.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> He takes the wise in their secret
designs, and the purposes of the twisted are cut off suddenly.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> In the daytime it becomes dark for them,
and in the sunlight they go feeling about as if it was night.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But he keeps safe from their sword those
who have no father, and the poor from the power of the strong.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So the poor man has hope, and the mouth
of the evil-doer is stopped.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Truly, that man is happy who has training
from the hand of God: so do not let your heart be shut to the teaching
of the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For after his punishment he gives
comfort, and after wounding, his hands make you well.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> He will keep you safe from six troubles,
and in seven no evil will come near you.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> When there is need of food he will keep
you from death, and in war from the power of the sword.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> He will keep you safe from the evil
tongue; and you will have no fear of wasting when it comes.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> You will make sport of destruction and
need, and will have no fear of the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For you will be in agreement with the
stones of the earth, and the beasts of the field will be at peace with
you.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And you will be certain that your tent is
at peace, and after looking over your property you will see that nothing
is gone.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> You will be certain that your seed will
be great, and your offspring like the plants of the earth.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> You will come to your last resting-place
in full strength, as the grain is taken up to the crushing-floor in its
time.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> See, we have made search with care, and
it is so; it has come to our ears; see that you take note of it for
yourself.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> If only my passion might be measured, and
put into the scales against my trouble!

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For then its weight would be more than the
sand of the seas: because of this my words have been uncontrolled.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For the arrows of the Ruler of all are
present with me, and their poison goes deep into my spirit: his army of
fears is put in order against me.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Does the ass of the fields give out his
voice when he has grass? or does the ox make sounds over his food?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Will a man take food which has no taste
without salt? or is there any taste in the soft substance of purslain?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> My soul has no desire for such things, they
are as disease in my food.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> If only I might have an answer to my
prayer, and God would give me my desire!

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> If only he would be pleased to put an end
to me; and would let loose his hand, so that I might be cut off!

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So I would still have comfort, and I
would have joy in the pains of death, for I have not been false to the
words of the Holy One.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Have I strength to go on waiting, or have
I any end to be looking forward to?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Is my strength the strength of stones, or
is my flesh brass?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I have no help in myself, and wisdom is
completely gone from me.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> He whose heart is shut against his friend
has given up the fear of the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> My friends have been false like a stream,
like streams in the valleys which come to an end:

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Which are dark because of the ice, and
the snow falling into them;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Under the burning sun they are cut off,
and come to nothing because of the heat.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The camel-trains go out of their way;
they go up into the waste and come to destruction.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> The camel-trains of Tema were searching
with care, the bands of Sheba were waiting for them:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They were put to shame because of their
hope; they came and their hope was gone.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> So have you now become to me; you see my
sad condition and are in fear.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Did I say, Give me something? or, Make a
payment for me out of your wealth?

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Or, Get me out of the power of my hater?
or, Give money so that I may be free from the power of the cruel ones?

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Give me teaching and I will be quiet; and
make me see my error.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> How pleasing are upright words! but what
force is there in your arguments?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> My words may seem wrong to you, but the
words of him who has no hope are for the wind.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Truly, you are such as would give up the
child of a dead man to his creditors, and would make a profit out of
your friend.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Now then, let your eyes be turned to me,
for truly I will not say what is false to your face.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Let your minds be changed, and do not
have an evil opinion of me; yes, be changed, for my righteousness is
still in me.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Is there evil in my tongue? is not the
cause of my trouble clear to me?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Has not man his ordered time of trouble on
the earth? and are not his days like the days of a servant working for
payment?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> As a servant desiring the shades of
evening, and a workman looking for his payment:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So I have for my heritage months of pain to
no purpose, and nights of weariness are given to me.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> When I go to my bed, I say, When will it be
time to get up? but the night is long, and I am turning from side to
side till morning light.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> My flesh is covered with worms and dust; my
skin gets hard and then is cracked again.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> My days go quicker than the cloth-worker's
thread, and come to an end without hope.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> O, keep in mind that my life is wind: my
eye will never again see good.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The eye of him who sees me will see me no
longer: your eyes will be looking for me, but I will be gone.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> A cloud comes to an end and is gone; so he
who goes down into the underworld comes not up again.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> He will not come back to his house, and
his place will have no more knowledge of him.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> So I will not keep my mouth shut; I will
let the words come from it in the pain of my spirit, my soul will make a
bitter outcry.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Am I a sea, or a sea-beast, that you put
a watch over me?

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> When I say, In my bed I will have
comfort, there I will get rest from my disease;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then you send dreams to me, and visions
of fear;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So that a hard death seems better to my
soul than my pains.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have no desire for life, I would not be
living for ever! Keep away from me, for my days are as a breath.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> What is man, that you have made him
great, and that your attention is fixed on him,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And that your hand is on him every
morning, and that you are testing him every minute?

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> How long will it be before your eyes are
turned away from me, so that I may have a minute's breathing-space?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> If I have done wrong, what have I done to
you, O keeper of men? why have you made me a mark for your blows, so
that I am a weariness to myself?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And why do you not take away my sin, and
let my wrongdoing be ended? for now I go down to the dust, and you will
be searching for me with care, but I will be gone.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then Bildad the Shuhite made answer and
said,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> How long will you say these things, and how
long will the words of your mouth be like a strong wind?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Does God give wrong decisions? or is the
Ruler of all not upright in his judging?

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If your children have done evil against
him, then their punishment is from his hand.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> If you will make search for God with care,
and put your request before the Ruler of all;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> If you are clean and upright; then he will
certainly be moved to take up your cause, and will make clear your
righteousness by building up your house again.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And though your start was small, your end
will be very great.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Put the question now to the past
generations, and give attention to what has been searched out by their
fathers:

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> (For we are but of yesterday, and have no
knowledge, because our days on earth are gone like a shade:)

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Will they not give you teaching, and say
words of wisdom to you?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Will the river-plant come up in its pride
without wet earth? will the grass get tall without water?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> When it is still green, without being cut
down, it becomes dry and dead before any other plant.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So is the end of all who do not keep God
in mind; and the hope of the evil-doer comes to nothing:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Whose support is cut off, and whose hope
is no stronger than a spider's thread.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He is looking to his family for support,
but it is not there; he puts his hope in it, but it comes to nothing.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> He is full of strength before the sun,
and his branches go out over his garden.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> His roots are twisted round the stones,
forcing their way in between them.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> If he is taken away from his place, then
it will say, I have not seen you.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Such is the joy of his way, and out of
the dust another comes up to take his place.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Truly, God will not give up him who is
without sin, and will not take evil-doers by the hand.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> The time will come when your mouth will
be full of laughing, and cries of joy will come from your lips.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Your haters will be clothed with shame,
and the tent of the sinner will not be seen again.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Truly, I see that it is so: and how is it
possible for a man to get his right before God?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> If a man was desiring to go to law with
him, he would not be able to give him an answer to one out of a thousand
questions.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> He is wise in heart and great in strength:
who ever made his face hard against him, and any good came of it?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> It is he who takes away the mountains
without their knowledge, overturning them in his wrath:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Who is moving the earth out of its place,
so that its pillars are shaking:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Who gives orders to the sun, and it does
not give its light; and who keeps the stars from shining.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> By whose hand the heavens were stretched
out, and who is walking on the waves of the sea:

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Who made the Bear and Orion, and the
Pleiades, and the store-houses of the south:

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Who does great things not to be searched
out; yes, wonders without number.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> See, he goes past me and I see him not:
he goes on before, but I have no knowledge of him.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If he puts out his hand to take, by whom
may it be turned back? who may say to him, What are you doing?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> God's wrath may not be turned back; the
helpers of Rahab were bent down under him.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> How much less may I give an answer to
him, using the right words in argument with him?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Even if my cause was good, I would not be
able to give an answer; I would make request for grace from him who was
against me.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> If I had sent for him to be present, and
he had come, I would have no faith that he would give ear to my voice.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For I would be crushed by his storm, my
wounds would be increased without cause.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> He would not let me take my breath, but I
would be full of bitter grief.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> If it is a question of strength, he says,
Here I am! and if it is a question of a cause at law, he says, Who will
give me a fixed day?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Though I was in the right, he would say
that I was in the wrong; I have done no evil; but he says that I am a
sinner.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> I have done no wrong; I give no thought
to what becomes of me; I have no desire for life.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> It is all the same to me; so I say, He
puts an end to the sinner and to him who has done no wrong together.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> If death comes suddenly through disease,
he makes sport of the fate of those who have done no wrong.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> The land is given into the power of the
evil-doer; the faces of its judges are covered; if not by him, then who
has done it?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> My days go quicker than a post-runner:
they go in flight, they see no good.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They go rushing on like reed-boats, like
an eagle dropping suddenly on its food.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> If I say, I will put my grief out of
mind, I will let my face be sad no longer and I will be bright;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> I go in fear of all my pains; I am
certain that I will not be free from sin in your eyes.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> You will not let me be clear of sin! why
then do I take trouble for nothing?

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> If I am washed with snow water, and make
my hands clean with soap;

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Then you will have me pushed into the
dust, so that I will seem disgusting to my very clothing.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> For he is not a man as I am, that I might
give him an answer, that we might come together before a judge.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> There is no one to give a decision
between us, who might have control over us.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Let him take away his rod from me and not
send his fear on me:

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Then I would say what is in my mind
without fear of him; for there is no cause of fear in myself.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> My soul is tired of life; I will let my
sad thoughts go free in words; my soul will make a bitter outcry.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I will say to God, Do not put me down as
a sinner; make clear to me what you have against me.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> What profit is it to you to be cruel, to
give up the work of your hands, looking kindly on the design of
evil-doers?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Have you eyes of flesh, or do you see as
man sees?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Are your days as the days of man, or your
years like his,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> That you take note of my sin, searching
after my wrongdoing,

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Though you see that I am not an
evil-doer; and there is no one who is able to take a man out of your
hands?

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Your hands made me, and I was formed by
you, but then, changing your purpose, you gave me up to destruction.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> O keep in mind that you made me out of
earth; and will you send me back again to dust?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Was I not drained out like milk,
becoming hard like cheese?

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> By you I was clothed with skin and
flesh, and joined together with bones and muscles.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> You have been kind to me, and your
grace has been with me, and your care has kept my spirit safe.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But you kept these things in the secret
of your heart; I am certain this was in your thoughts:

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> That, if I did wrong, you would take
note of it, and would not make me clear from sin:

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> That, if I was an evil-doer, the curse
would come on me; and if I was upright, my head would not be lifted up,
being full of shame and overcome with trouble.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And that if there was cause for pride,
you would go after me like a lion; and again put out your wonders
against me:

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> That you would send new witnesses
against me, increasing your wrath against me, and letting loose new
armies on me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Why then did you make me come out of my
mother's body? It would have been better for me to have taken my last
breath, and for no eye to have seen me,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And for me to have been as if I had not
been; to have been taken from my mother's body straight to my last
resting-place.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Are not the days of my life small in
number? Let your eyes be turned away from me, so that I may have a
little pleasure,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Before I go to the place from which I
will not come back, to the land where all is dark and black,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> A land of thick dark, without order,
where the very light is dark.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Then Zophar the Naamathite made answer
and said,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Are all these words to go unanswered? and
is a man seen to be right because he is full of talk?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Are your words of pride to make men keep
quiet? and are you to make sport, with no one to put you to shame?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> You may say, My way is clean, and I am
free from sin in your eyes.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> But if only God would take up the word,
opening his lips in argument with you;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And would make clear to you the secrets
of wisdom, and the wonders of his purpose!

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Are you able to take God's measure, to
make discovery of the limits of the Ruler of all?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> They are higher than heaven; what is
there for you to do? deeper than the underworld, and outside your
knowledge;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Longer in measure than the earth, and
wider than the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> If he goes on his way, shutting a man
up and putting him to death, who may make him go back from his purpose?

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> For in his eyes men are as nothing; he
sees evil and takes note of it.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And so a hollow-minded man will get
wisdom, when a young ass of the field gets teaching.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> But if you put your heart right,
stretching out your hands to him;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If you put far away the evil of your
hands, and let no wrongdoing have a place in your tent;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Then truly your face will be lifted up,
with no mark of sin, and you will be fixed in your place without fear:

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For your sorrow will go from your
memory, like waters flowing away:

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And your life will be brighter than
day; though it is dark, it will become like the morning.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And you will be safe because there is
hope; after looking round, you will take your rest in quiet;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Sleeping with no fear of danger; and
men will be desiring to have grace in your eyes;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But the eyes of the evil-doers will be
wasting away; their way of flight is gone, and their only hope is the
taking of their last breath.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> No doubt you have knowledge, and wisdom
will come to an end with you.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But I have a mind as well as you; I am
equal to you: yes, who has not knowledge of such things as these?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> It seems that I am to be as one who is a
cause of laughing to his neighbour, one who makes his prayer to God and
is answered! the upright man who has done no wrong is to be made sport
of!

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> In the thought of him who is in comfort
there is no respect for one who is in trouble; such is the fate of those
whose feet are slipping.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> There is wealth in the tents of those who
make destruction, and those by whom God is moved to wrath are safe; even
those whose god is their strength.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But put now a question to the beasts, and
get teaching from them; or to the birds of the heaven, and they will
make it clear to you;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Or to the things which go flat on the
earth, and they will give you wisdom; and the fishes of the sea will
give you news of it.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Who does not see by all these that the
hand of the Lord has done this?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In whose hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the breath of all flesh of man.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Are not words tested by the ear, even
as food is tasted by the mouth?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Old men have wisdom, and a long life
gives knowledge.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> With him there is wisdom and strength;
power and knowledge are his.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Truly, there is no building up of what
is pulled down by him; when a man is shut up by him, no one may let him
loose.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Truly, he keeps back the waters and
they are dry; he sends them out and the earth is overturned.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> With him are strength and wise designs;
he who is guided into error, together with his guide, are in his hands;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He takes away the wisdom of the wise
guides, and makes judges foolish;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> He undoes the chains of kings, and puts
his band on them;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He makes priests prisoners, overturning
those in safe positions;

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> He makes the words of responsible
persons without effect, and takes away the good sense of the old;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> He puts shame on chiefs, and takes away
the power of the strong;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Uncovering deep things out of the dark,
and making the deep shade bright;

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Increasing nations, and sending
destruction on them; making wide the lands of peoples, and then giving
them up.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> He takes away the wisdom of the rulers
of the earth, and sends them wandering in a waste where there is no way.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> They go feeling about in the dark
without light, wandering without help like those overcome with wine.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Truly, my eye has seen all this, word of
it has come to my ear, and I have knowledge of it.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> The same things are in my mind as in
yours; I am equal to you.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> But I would have talk with the Ruler of
all, and my desire is to have an argument with God.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> But you put a false face on things; all
your attempts to put things right are of no value.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> If only you would keep quiet, it would be
a sign of wisdom!

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Give ear to the argument of my mouth, and
take note of the words of my lips.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Will you say in God's name what is not
right, and put false words into his mouth?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Will you have respect for God's person in
this cause, and put yourselves forward as his supporters?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Will it be good for you to be searched
out by him, or have you the thought that he may be guided into error
like a man?

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> He will certainly put you right, if you
have respect for persons in secret.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Will not his glory put you in fear, so
that your hearts will be overcome before him?

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Your wise sayings are only dust, and
your strong places are only earth.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Keep quiet, and let me say what is in
my mind, whatever may come to me.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will take my flesh in my teeth, and
put my life in my hand.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Truly, he will put an end to me; I have
no hope; but I will not give way in argument before him;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And that will be my salvation, for an
evil-doer would not come before him,

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Give ear with care to my words, and
keep what I say in your minds.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> See now, I have put my cause in order,
and I am certain that I will be seen to be right.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Is any one able to take up the argument
against me? If so, I would keep quiet and give up my breath.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Only two things do not do to me, then I
will come before your face:

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Take your hand far away from me; and
let me not be overcome by fear of you.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Then at the sound of your voice I will
give answer; or let me put forward my cause for you to give me an
answer.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> What is the number of my evil-doings
and my sins? give me knowledge of them.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Why is your face veiled from me, as if
I was numbered among your haters?

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Will you be hard on a leaf in flight
before the wind? will you make a dry stem go more quickly on its way?

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> For you put bitter things on record
against me, and send punishment on me for the sins of my early years;

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And you put chains on my feet, watching
all my ways, and making a limit for my steps;

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Though a man comes to nothing like a
bit of dead wood, or like a robe which has become food for the worm.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> As for man, the son of woman, his days
are short and full of trouble.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He comes out like a flower, and is cut
down: he goes in flight like a shade, and is never seen again.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Is it on such a one as this that your
eyes are fixed, with the purpose of judging him?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> If only a clean thing might come out of
an unclean! But it is not possible.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> If his days are ordered, and you have
knowledge of the number of his months, having given him a fixed limit
past which he may not go;

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Let your eyes be turned away from him,
and take your hand from him, so that he may have pleasure at the end of
his day, like a servant working for payment.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For there is hope of a tree; if it is cut
down, it will come to life again, and its branches will not come to an
end.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Though its root may be old in the earth,
and its cut-off end may be dead in the dust;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Still, at the smell of water, it will
make buds, and put out branches like a young plant.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But man comes to his death and is gone:
he gives up his spirit, and where is he?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The waters go from a pool, and a river
becomes waste and dry;

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So man goes down to his last
resting-place and comes not again: till the heavens come to an end, they
will not be awake or come out of their sleep.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> If only you would keep me safe in the
underworld, putting me in a secret place till your wrath is past, giving
me a fixed time when I might come to your memory again!

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If death takes a man, will he come to
life again? All the days of my trouble I would be waiting, till the time
came for me to be free.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> At the sound of your voice I would give
an answer, and you would have a desire for the work of your hands.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> For now my steps are numbered by you,
and my sin is not overlooked.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> My wrongdoing is corded up in a bag,
and my sin is shut up safe.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> But truly a mountain falling comes to
dust, and a rock is moved from its place;

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The stones are crushed small by the
force of the waters; the dust of the earth is washed away by their
overflowing: and so you put an end to the hope of man.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> You overcome him for ever, and he is
gone; his face is changed in death, and you send him away.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> His sons come to honour, and he has no
knowledge of it; they are made low, but he is not conscious of it.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Only his flesh still has pain, and his
soul is sad.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite made answer and
said,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Will a wise man make answer with
knowledge of no value, or will he give birth to the east wind?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Will he make arguments with words in
which is no profit, and with sayings which have no value?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Truly, you make the fear of God without
effect, so that the time of quiet worship before God is made less by
your outcry.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For your mouth is guided by your sin, and
you have taken the tongue of the false for yourself.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> It is by your mouth, even yours, that you
are judged to be in the wrong, and not by me; and your lips give witness
against you.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Were you the first man to come into the
world? or did you come into being before the hills?

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Were you present at the secret meeting of
God? and have you taken all wisdom for yourself?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> What knowledge have you which we have
not? is there anything in your mind which is not in ours?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> With us are men who are grey-haired and
full of years, much older than your father.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Are the comforts of God not enough for
you, and the gentle word which was said to you?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Why is your heart uncontrolled, and why
are your eyes lifted up;

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> So that you are turning your spirit
against God, and letting such words go out of your mouth?

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> What is man, that he may be clean? and
how may the son of woman be upright?

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Truly, he puts no faith in his holy
ones, and the heavens are not clean in his eyes;

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> How much less one who is disgusting and
unclean, a man who takes in evil like water!

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Take note and give ear to my words; and
I will say what I have seen:

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> (The things which wise men have got
from their fathers, and have not kept secret from us;

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For only to them was the land given,
and no strange people were among them:)

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> The evil man is in pain all his days,
and the number of the years stored up for the cruel is small.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> A sound of fear is in his ears; in time
of peace destruction will come on him:

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> He has no hope of coming safe out of
the dark, and his fate will be the sword;

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He is wandering about in search of
bread, saying, Where is it? and he is certain that the day of trouble is
ready for him:

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> He is greatly in fear of the dark day,
trouble and pain overcome him:

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Because his hand is stretched out
against God, and his heart is lifted up against the Ruler of all,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Running against him like a man of war,
covered by his thick breastplate; even like a king ready for the fight,

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Because his face is covered with fat,
and his body has become thick;

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And he has made his resting-place in
the towns which have been pulled down, in houses where no man had a
right to be, whose fate was to become masses of broken walls.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> He does not get wealth for himself, and
is unable to keep what he has got; the heads of his grain are not bent
down to the earth.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> He does not come out of the dark; his
branches are burned by the flame, and the wind takes away his bud.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Let him not put his hope in what is
false, falling into error: for he will get deceit as his reward.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> His branch is cut off before its time,
and his leaf is no longer green.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He is like a vine whose grapes do not
come to full growth, or an olive-tree dropping its flowers.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> For the band of the evil-doers gives no
fruit, and the tents of those who give wrong decisions for reward are
burned with fire.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Evil has made them with child, and they
give birth to trouble; and the fruit of their body is shame for
themselves.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Such things have frequently come to my
ears: you are comforters who only give trouble.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> May words which are like the wind be
stopped? or what is troubling you to make answer to them?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> It would not be hard for me to say such
things if your souls were in my soul's place; joining words together
against you, and shaking my head at you:

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> I might give you strength with my mouth,
and not keep back the comfort of my lips.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> If I say what is in my mind, my pain
becomes no less: and if I keep quiet, how much of it goes from me?

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But now he has overcome me with weariness
and fear, and I am in the grip of all my trouble.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> It has come up as a witness against me,
and the wasting of my flesh makes answer to my face.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> I am broken by his wrath, and his hate
has gone after me; he has made his teeth sharp against me: my haters are
looking on me with cruel eyes;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Their mouths are open wide against me;
the blows of his bitter words are falling on my face; all of them come
together in a mass against me.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> God gives me over to the power of
sinners, sending me violently into the hands of evil-doers.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I was in comfort, but I have been
broken up by his hands; he has taken me by the neck, shaking me to bits;
he has put me up as a mark for his arrows.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> His bowmen come round about me; their
arrows go through my body without mercy; my life is drained out on the
earth.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> I am broken with wound after wound; he
comes rushing on me like a man of war.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> I have made haircloth the clothing of
my skin, and my horn is rolled in the dust.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> My face is red with weeping, and my
eyes are becoming dark;

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Though my hands have done no violent
acts, and my prayer is clean.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> O earth, let not my blood be covered,
and let my cry have no resting-place!

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Even now my witness is in heaven, and
the supporter of my cause is on high.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> My friends make sport of me; to God my
eyes are weeping,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> So that he may give decision for a man
in his cause with God, and between a son of man and his neighbour.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> For in a short time I will take the
journey from which I will not come back.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> My spirit is broken, my days are ended,
the last resting-place is ready for me.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Truly, those who make sport of me are
round about me, and my eyes become dark because of their bitter
laughing.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Be pleased, now, to be responsible for me
to yourself; for there is no other who will put his hand in mine.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> You have kept their hearts from wisdom:
for this cause you will not give them honour.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> As for him who is false to his friend for
a reward, light will be cut off from the eyes of his children.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> He has made me a word of shame to the
peoples; I have become a mark for their sport.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> My eyes have become dark because of my
pain, and all my body is wasted to a shade.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The upright are surprised at this, and he
who has done no wrong is troubled because of the evil-doers.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Still the upright keeps on his way, and
he who has clean hands gets new strength.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> But come back, now, all of you, come;
and I will not see a wise man among you.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> My days are past, my purposes are
broken off, even the desires of my heart.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> They are changing night into day; they
say, The light is near the dark.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> If I am waiting for the underworld as
my house, if I have made my bed in the dark;

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> If I say to the earth, You are my
father; and to the worm, My mother and my sister;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Where then is my hope? and who will see
my desire?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Will they go down with me into the
underworld? Will we go down together into the dust?

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Then Bildad the Shuhite made answer and
said,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> How long will it be before you have done
talking? Get wisdom, and then we will say what is in our minds.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Why do we seem as beasts in your eyes,
and as completely without knowledge?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> But come back, now, come: you who are
wounding yourself in your passion, will the earth be given up because of
you, or a rock be moved out of its place?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For the light of the sinner is put out,
and the flame of his fire is not shining.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The light is dark in his tent, and the
light shining over him is put out.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The steps of his strength become short,
and by his design destruction overtakes him.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> His feet take him into the net, and he
goes walking into the cords.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> His foot is taken in the net; he comes
into its grip.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The twisted cord is put secretly in the
earth to take him, and the cord is placed in his way.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> He is overcome by fears on every side,
they go after him at every step.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> His strength is made feeble for need of
food, and destruction is waiting for his falling footstep.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> His skin is wasted by disease, and his
body is food for the worst of diseases.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> He is pulled out of his tent where he
was safe, and he is taken away to the king of fears.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> In his tent will be seen that which is
not his, burning stone is dropped on his house.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Under the earth his roots are dry, and
over it his branch is cut off.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> His memory is gone from the earth, and
in the open country there is no knowledge of his name.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> He is sent away from the light into the
dark; he is forced out of the world.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> He has no offspring or family among his
people, and in his living-place there is no one of his name.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> At his fate those of the west are
shocked, and those of the east are overcome with fear.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Truly, these are the houses of the
sinner, and this is the place of him who has no knowledge of God.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> How long will you make my life bitter,
crushing me with words?

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Ten times now you have made sport of me;
it gives you no sense of shame to do me wrong.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And, truly, if I have been in error, the
effect of my error is only on myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> If you make yourselves great against me,
using my punishment as an argument against me,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Be certain that it is God who has done me
wrong, and has taken me in his net.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Truly, I make an outcry against the
violent man, but there is no answer: I give a cry for help, but no one
takes up my cause.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> My way is walled up by him so that I may
not go by: he has made my roads dark.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He has put off my glory from me, and
taken the crown from my head.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> I am broken down by him on every side,
and I am gone; my hope is uprooted like a tree.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> His wrath is burning against me, and I
am to him as one of his haters.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His armies come on together, they make
their road high against me, and put up their tents round mine.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> He has taken my brothers far away from
me; they have seen my fate and have become strange to me.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> My relations and my near friends have
given me up, and those living in my house have put me out of their
minds.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> I am strange to my women-servants, and
seem to them as one from another country.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> At my cry my servant gives me no
answer, and I have to make a prayer to him.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> My breath is strange to my wife, and I
am disgusting to the offspring of my mother's body.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Even young children have no respect for
me; when I get up their backs are turned on me.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> All the men of my circle keep away from
me; and those dear to me are turned against me.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> My bones are joined to my skin, and I
have got away with my flesh in my teeth.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Have pity on me, have pity on me, O my
friends! for the hand of God is on me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Why are you cruel to me, like God, for
ever saying evil against me?

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> If only my words might be recorded! if
they might be put in writing in a book!

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And with an iron pen and lead be cut
into the rock for ever!

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> But I am certain that he who will take
up my cause is living, and that in time to come he will take his place
on the dust;

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And ... without my flesh I will see
God;

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Whom I will see on my side, and not as
one strange to me. My heart is broken with desire.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> If you say, How cruel we will be to
him! because the root of sin is clearly in him:

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Be in fear of the sword, for the sword
is the punishment for such things, so that you may be certain that there
is a judge.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Then Zophar the Naamathite made answer
and said,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> For this cause my thoughts are troubling
me and driving me on.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> I have to give ear to arguments which put
me to shame, and your answers to me are wind without wisdom.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Have you knowledge of this from early
times, when man was placed on the earth,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> That the pride of the sinner is short,
and the joy of the evil-doer but for a minute?

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Though he is lifted up to the heavens,
and his head goes up to the clouds;

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Like the waste from his body he comes to
an end for ever: those who have seen him say, Where is he?

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> He is gone like a dream, and is not seen
again; he goes in flight like a vision of the night.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> The eye which saw him sees him no longer;
and his place has no more knowledge of him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> His children are hoping that the poor
will be kind to them, and his hands give back his wealth.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> His bones are full of young strength,
but it will go down with him into the dust.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Though evil-doing is sweet in his
mouth, and he keeps it secretly under his tongue;

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Though he takes care of it, and does
not let it go, but keeps it still in his mouth;

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> His food becomes bitter in his stomach;
the poison of snakes is inside him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> He takes down wealth as food, and sends
it up again; it is forced out of his stomach by God.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> He takes the poison of snakes into his
mouth, the tongue of the snake is the cause of his death.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Let him not see the rivers of oil, the
streams of honey and milk.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> He is forced to give back the fruit of
his work, and may not take it for food; he has no joy in the profit of
his trading.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Because he has been cruel to the poor,
turning away from them in their trouble; because he has taken a house by
force which he did not put up;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> There is no peace for him in his
wealth, and no salvation for him in those things in which he took
delight.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> He had never enough for his desire; for
this cause his well-being will quickly come to an end.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Even when his wealth is great, he is
full of care, for the hand of everyone who is in trouble is turned
against him.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> God gives him his desire, and sends the
heat of his wrath on him, making it come down on him like rain.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> He may go in flight from the iron
spear, but the arrow from the bow of brass will go through him;

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> He is pulling it out, and it comes out
of his back; and its shining point comes out of his side; he is overcome
by fears.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> All his wealth is stored up for the
dark: a fire not made by man sends destruction on him, and on everything
in his tent.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The heavens make clear his sin, and the
earth gives witness against him.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> The produce of his house is taken away
into another country, like things given into the hands of others in the
day of wrath.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> This is the reward of the evil man, and
the heritage given to him by God.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Then Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Give attention with care to my words; and
let this be your comfort.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Let me say what is in my mind, and after
that, go on making sport of me.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> As for me, is my outcry against man? is
it then to be wondered at if my spirit is troubled?

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Take note of me and be full of wonder,
put your hand on your mouth.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> At the very thought of it my flesh is
shaking with fear.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Why is life given to the evil-doers? why
do they become old and strong in power?

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Their children are ever with them, and
their offspring before their eyes.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Their houses are free from fear, and the
rod of God does not come on them.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Their ox is ready at all times to give
seed; their cow gives birth, without dropping her young.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> They send out their young ones like a
flock, and their children have pleasure in the dance,

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They make songs to the instruments of
music, and are glad at the sound of the pipe.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Their days come to an end without
trouble, and suddenly they go down to the underworld.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Though they said to God, Go away from
us, for we have no desire for the knowledge of your ways.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> What is the Ruler of all, that we may
give him worship? and what profit is it to us to make prayer to him?

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Truly, is not their well-being in their
power? (The purpose of the evil-doers is far from me.)

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> How frequently is the light of the
evil-doers put out, or does trouble come on them? how frequently does
his wrath take them with cords?

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> How frequently are they as dry stems
before the wind, or as grass taken away by the storm-wind?

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> You say, God keeps punishment stored up
for his children. Let him send it on the man himself, so that he may
have the punishment of it!

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Let his eyes see his trouble, and let
him be full of the wrath of the Ruler of all!

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For what interest has he in his house
after him, when the number of his months is ended?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Is anyone able to give teaching to God?
for he is the judge of those who are on high.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> One comes to his end in complete
well-being, full of peace and quiet:

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> His buckets are full of milk, and there
is no loss of strength in his bones.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And another comes to his end with a
bitter soul, without ever tasting good.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Together they go down to the dust, and
are covered by the worm.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> See, I am conscious of your thoughts,
and of your violent purposes against me;

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For you say, Where is the house of the
ruler, and where is the tent of the evil-doer?

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Have you not put the question to the
travellers, and do you not take note of their experience?

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> How the evil man goes free in the day
of trouble, and has salvation in the day of wrath?

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Who will make his way clear to his
face? and if he has done a thing, who gives him punishment for it?

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> He is taken to his last resting-place,
and keeps watch over it.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> The earth of the valley covering his
bones is sweet to him, and all men come after him, as there were
unnumbered before him.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> Why then do you give me comfort with
words in which there is no profit, when you see that there is nothing in
your answers but deceit?

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Temanite made answer and
said,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Is it possible for a man to be of profit
to God? No, for a man's wisdom is only of profit to himself.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Is it of any interest to the Ruler of all
that you are upright? or is it of use to him that your ways are without
sin?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Is it because you give him honour that he
is sending punishment on you and is judging you?

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Is not your evil-doing great? and there
is no end to your sins.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For you have taken your brother's goods
when he was not in your debt, and have taken away the clothing of those
who have need of it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> You do not give water to the tired
traveller, and from him who has no food you keep back bread.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> For it was the man with power who had the
land, and the man with an honoured name who was living in it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> You have sent widows away without hearing
their cause, and you have taken away the support of the child who has no
father.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> For this cause nets are round your
feet, and you are overcome with sudden fear.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Your light is made dark so that you are
unable to see, and you are covered by a mass of waters.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Is not God as high as heaven? and see
the stars, how high they are!

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And you say, What knowledge has God? is
he able to give decisions through the deep dark?

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Thick clouds are covering him, so that
he is unable to see; and he is walking on the arch of heaven.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Will you keep the old way by which evil
men went?

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Who were violently taken away before
their time, who were overcome by the rush of waters:

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Who said to God, Go away from us; and,
What is the Ruler of all able to do to us?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Though he made their houses full of
good things: but the purpose of the evil-doers is far from me!

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> The upright saw it and were glad: and
those who had done no wrong made sport of them,

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Saying, Truly, their substance is cut
off, and their wealth is food for the fire.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Put yourself now in a right relation
with him and be at peace: so will you do well in your undertakings.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Be pleased to take teaching from his
mouth, and let his words be stored up in your heart.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If you come back to the Ruler of all,
making yourself low before him; if you put evil far away from your
tents;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And put your gold in the dust, even
your gold of Ophir among the rocks of the valleys;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Then the Ruler of all will be your
gold, and his teaching will be your silver;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> For then you will have delight in the
Ruler of all, and your face will be lifted up to God.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> You will make your prayer to him, and
be answered; and you will give effect to your oaths.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Your purposes will come about, and
light will be shining on your ways.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> For God makes low those whose hearts
are lifted up, but he is a saviour to the poor in spirit.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> He makes safe the man who is free from
sin, and if your hands are clean, salvation will be yours.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Even today my outcry is bitter; his hand
is hard on my sorrow.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> If only I had knowledge of where he might
be seen, so that I might come even to his seat!

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I would put my cause in order before him,
and my mouth would be full of arguments.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> I would see what his answers would be,
and have knowledge of what he would say to me.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Would he make use of his great power to
overcome me? No, but he would give attention to me.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> There an upright man might put his cause
before him; and I would be free for ever from my judge.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> See, I go forward, but he is not there;
and back, but I do not see him;

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> I am looking for him on the left hand,
but there is no sign of him; and turning to the right, I am not able to
see him.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For he has knowledge of the way I take;
after I have been tested I will come out like gold.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> My feet have gone in his steps; I have
kept in his way, without turning to one side or to the other.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> I have never gone against the orders of
his lips; the words of his mouth have been stored up in my heart.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> But his purpose is fixed and there is
no changing it; and he gives effect to the desire of his soul.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For what has been ordered for me by him
will be gone through to the end: and his mind is full of such designs.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> For this cause I am in fear before him,
my thoughts of him overcome me.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> For God has made my heart feeble, and
my mind is troubled before the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> For I am overcome by the dark, and by
the black night which is covering my face.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Why are times not stored up by the Ruler
of all, and why do those who have knowledge of him not see his days?

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> The landmarks are changed by evil men,
they violently take away flocks, together with their keepers.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> They send away the ass of him who has no
father, they take the widow's ox for debt.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The crushed are turned out of the way;
all the poor of the earth go into a secret place together.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Like asses in the waste land they go out
to their work, looking for food with care; from the waste land they get
bread for their children.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> They get mixed grain from the field, and
they take away the late fruit from the vines of those who have wealth.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> They take their rest at night without
clothing, and have no cover in the cold.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> They are wet with the rain of the
mountains, and get into the cracks of the rock for cover.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The child without a father is forced from
its mother's breast, and they take the young children of the poor for
debt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Others go about without clothing, and
though they have no food, they get in the grain from the fields.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Between the lines of olive-trees they
make oil; though they have no drink, they are crushing out the grapes.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> From the town come sounds of pain from
those who are near death, and the soul of the wounded is crying out for
help; but God does not take note of their prayer.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Then there are those who are haters of
the light, who have no knowledge of its ways, and do not go in them.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> He who is purposing death gets up
before day, so that he may put to death the poor and those in need.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And the man whose desire is for the
wife of another is waiting for the evening, saying, No eye will see me;
and he puts a cover on his face. And in the night the thief goes about;

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> In the dark he makes holes in the walls
of houses: in the daytime they are shutting themselves up, they have no
knowledge of the light.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> For the middle of the night is as
morning to them, they are not troubled by the fear of the dark.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> They go quickly on the face of the
waters; their heritage is cursed in the earth; the steps of the crusher
of grapes are not turned to their vine-garden.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Snow waters become dry with the heat:
so do sinners go down into the underworld.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The public place of his town has no
more knowledge of him, and his name has gone from the memory of men: he
is rooted up like a dead tree.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> He is not kind to the widow, and he has
no pity for her child.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> But God by his power gives long life to
the strong; he gets up again, though he has no hope of life.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> He takes away his fear of danger and
gives him support; and his eyes are on his ways.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For a short time they are lifted up;
then they are gone; they are made low, they are pulled off like fruit,
and like the heads of grain they are cut off.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And if it is not so, now, who will make
it clear that my words are false, and that what I say is of no value?

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Then Bildad the Shuhite made answer and
said,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Rule and power are his; he makes peace in
his high places.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Is it possible for his armies to be
numbered? and on whom is not his light shining?

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> How then is it possible for man to be
upright before God? or how may he be clean who is a son of woman?

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> See, even the moon is not bright, and the
stars are not clean in his eyes:

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> How much less man who is an insect, and
the son of man who is a worm!

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Then Job made answer and said,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> How have you given help to him who has no
power! how have you been the salvation of the arm which has no strength!

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> How have you given teaching to him who
has no wisdom, and fully made clear true knowledge!

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> To whom have your words been said? and
whose spirit came out from you?

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> The shades in the underworld are shaking;
the waters and those living in them.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> The underworld is uncovered before him,
and Destruction has no veil.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> By his hand the north is stretched out in
space, and the earth is hanging on nothing.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> By him the waters are shut up in his
thick clouds, and the cloud does not give way under them.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> By him the face of his high seat is
veiled, and his cloud stretched out over it.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> By him a circle is marked out on the
face of the waters, to the limits of the light and the dark.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> The pillars of heaven are shaking, and
are overcome by his sharp words.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> By his power the sea was made quiet;
and by his wisdom Rahab was wounded.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> By his wind the heavens become bright:
by his hand the quickly moving snake was cut through.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> See, these are only the outskirts of
his ways; and how small is that which comes to our ears about him! But
the thunder of his acts of power is outside all knowledge.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And Job again took up the word and said,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> By the life of God, who has taken away my
right; and of the Ruler of all, who has made my soul bitter;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> (For all my breath is still in me, and
the spirit of God is my life;)

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Truly, there is no deceit in my lips, and
my tongue does not say what is false.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Let it be far from me! I will certainly
not say that you are right! I will come to death before I give up my
righteousness.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> I will keep it safe, and will not let it
go: my heart has nothing to say against any part of my life.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Let my hater be like the evil man, and
let him who comes against me be as the sinner.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For what is the hope of the sinner when
he is cut off, when God takes back his soul?

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Will his cry come to the ears of God when
he is in trouble?

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Will he take delight in the Ruler of
all, and make his prayer to God at all times?

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> I will give you teaching about the hand
of God; I will not keep secret from you what is in the mind of the Ruler
of all.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Truly, you have all seen it yourselves;
why then have you become completely foolish?

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> This is the punishment of the evil-doer
from God, and the heritage given to the cruel by the Ruler of all.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> If his children are increased, it is
for the sword; and his offspring have not enough bread.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> When those of his house who are still
living come to their end by disease, they are not put into the earth,
and their widows are not weeping for them.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Though he may get silver together like
dust, and make ready great stores of clothing;

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> He may get them ready, but the upright
will put them on, and he who is free from sin will take the silver for a
heritage.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> His house has no more strength than a
spider's thread, or a watchman's tent.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> He goes to rest full of wealth, but
does so for the last time: on opening his eyes, he sees it there no
longer.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Fears overtake him like rushing waters;
in the night the storm-wind takes him away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The east wind takes him up and he is
gone; he is forced violently out of his place.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> God sends his arrows against him
without mercy; he goes in flight before his hand.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Men make signs of joy because of him,
driving him from his place with sounds of hissing.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Truly there is a mine for silver, and a
place where gold is washed out.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Iron is taken out of the earth, and stone
is changed into brass by the fire.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Man puts an end to the dark, searching
out to the farthest limit the stones of the deep places of the dark.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> He makes a deep mine far away from those
living in the light of day; when they go about on the earth, they have
no knowledge of those who are under them, who are hanging far from men,
twisting from side to side on a cord.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> As for the earth, bread comes out of it;
but under its face it is turned up as if by fire.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Its stones are the place of sapphires,
and it has dust of gold.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> No bird has knowledge of it, and the
hawk's eye has never seen it.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The great beasts have not gone over it,
and the cruel lion has not taken that way.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Man puts out his hand on the hard rock,
overturning mountains by the roots.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> He makes deep ways, cut through the
rock, and his eye sees everything of value.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> He keeps back the streams from flowing,
and makes the secret things come out into the light.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> But where may wisdom be seen? and where
is the resting-place of knowledge?

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Man has not seen the way to it, and it
is not in the land of the living.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> The deep waters say, It is not in me:
and the sea says, It is not with me.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Gold may not be given for it, or a
weight of silver in payment for it.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It may not be valued with the gold of
Ophir, with the onyx of great price, or the sapphire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Gold and glass are not equal to it in
price, and it may not be exchanged for jewels of the best gold.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> There is no need to say anything about
coral or crystal; and the value of wisdom is greater than that of
pearls.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> The topaz of Ethiopia is not equal to
it, and it may not be valued with the best gold.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> From where then does wisdom come, and
where is the resting-place of knowledge?

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For it is kept secret from the eyes of
all living, unseen by the birds of the air.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Destruction and Death say, We have only
had word of it with our ears.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> God has knowledge of the way to it, and
of its resting-place;

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> For his eyes go to the ends of the
earth, and he sees everything under heaven.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> When he made a weight for the wind,
measuring out the waters;

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> When he made a law for the rain, and a
way for the thunder-flames;

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Then he saw it, and put it on record;
he gave it its fixed form, searching it out completely.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And he said to man, Truly the fear of
the Lord is wisdom, and to keep from evil is the way to knowledge.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And Job again took up the word and said,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> If only I might again be as I was in the
months which are past, in the days when God was watching over me!

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> When his light was shining over my head,
and when I went through the dark by his light.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> As I was in my flowering years, when my
tent was covered by the hand of God;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> While the Ruler of all was still with me,
and my children were round me;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> When my steps were washed with milk, and
rivers of oil were flowing out of the rock for me.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When I went out of my door to go up to
the town, and took my seat in the public place,

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> The young men saw me, and went away, and
the old men got up from their seats;

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> The rulers kept quiet, and put their
hands on their mouths;

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The chiefs kept back their words, and
their tongues were joined to the roofs of their mouths.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> For when it came to their ears, men
said that I was truly happy; and when their eyes saw, they gave witness
to me;

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> For I was a saviour to the poor when he
was crying for help, to the child with no father, and to him who had no
supporter.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The blessing of him who was near to
destruction came on me, and I put a song of joy into the widow's heart.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> I put on righteousness as my clothing,
and was full of it; right decisions were to me a robe and a head-dress.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> I was eyes to the blind, and feet to
him who had no power of walking.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> I was a father to the poor, searching
out the cause of him who was strange to me.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> By me the great teeth of the evil-doer
were broken, and I made him give up what he had violently taken away.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Then I said, I will come to my end with
my children round me, my days will be as the sand in number;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> My root will be open to the waters, and
the night mist will be on my branches,

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> My glory will be ever new, and my bow
will be readily bent in my hand.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Men gave ear to me, waiting and keeping
quiet for my suggestions.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> After I had said what was in my mind,
they were quiet and let my words go deep into their hearts;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> They were waiting for me as for the
rain, opening their mouths wide as for the spring rains.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> I was laughing at them when they had no
hope, and the light of my face was never clouded by their fear.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> I took my place as a chief, guiding
them on their way, and I was as a king among his army. ...

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> But now those who are younger than I make
sport of me; those whose fathers I would not have put with the dogs of
my flocks.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Of what use is the strength of their
hands to me? all force is gone from them.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> They are wasted for need of food, biting
the dry earth; their only hope of life is in the waste land.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> They are pulling off the salt leaves from
the brushwood, and making a meal of roots.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> They are sent out from among their
townsmen, men are crying after them as thieves

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> They have to get a resting-place in the
hollows of the valleys, in holes of the earth and rocks.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> They make noises like asses among the
brushwood; they get together under the thorns.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> They are sons of shame, and of men
without a name, who have been forced out of the land.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And now I have become their song, and I
am a word of shame to them.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> I am disgusting to them; they keep away
from me, and put marks of shame on me.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For he has made loose the cord of my
bow, and put me to shame; he has sent down my flag to the earth before
me.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> The lines of his men of war put
themselves in order, and make high their ways of destruction against me:

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> They have made waste my roads, with a
view to my destruction; his bowmen come round about me;

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> As through a wide broken place in the
wall they come on, I am overturned by the shock of their attack.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Fears have come on me; my hope is gone
like the wind, and my well-being like a cloud.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> But now my soul is turned to water in
me, days of trouble overtake me:

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The flesh is gone from my bones, and
they give me no rest; there is no end to my pains.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> With great force he takes a grip of my
clothing, pulling me by the neck of my coat.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Truly God has made me low, even to the
earth, and I have become like dust.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> You give no answer to my cry, and take
no note of my prayer.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> You have become cruel to me; the
strength of your hand is hard on me.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Lifting me up, you make me go on the
wings of the wind; I am broken up by the storm.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> For I am certain that you will send me
back to death, and to the meeting-place ordered for all living.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> Has not my hand been stretched out in
help to the poor? have I not been a saviour to him in his trouble?

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> Have I not been weeping for the
crushed? and was not my soul sad for him who was in need?

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> For I was looking for good, and evil
came; I was waiting for light, and it became dark.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> My feelings are strongly moved, and
give me no rest; days of trouble have overtaken me.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> I go about in dark clothing,
uncomforted; I get up in the public place, crying out for help.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> I have become a brother to the jackals,
and go about in the company of ostriches.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> My skin is black and dropping off me;
and my bones are burning with the heat of my disease.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And my music has been turned to sorrow,
and the sound of my pipe into the noise of weeping.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> I made an agreement with my eyes; how
then might my eyes be looking on a virgin?

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> For what is God's reward from on high, or
the heritage given by the Ruler of all from heaven?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Is it not trouble for the sinner, and
destruction for the evil-doers?

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Does he not see my ways, and are not my
steps all numbered?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> If I have gone in false ways, or my foot
has been quick in working deceit;

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> (Let me be measured in upright scales,
and let God see my righteousness:)

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> If my steps have been turned out of the
way, or if my heart went after my eyes, or if the property of another is
in my hands;

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Let me put seed in the earth for another
to have the fruit of it, and let my produce be uprooted.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> If my heart went after another man's
wife, or if I was waiting secretly at my neighbour's door;

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Then let my wife give pleasure to
another man and let others make use of her body.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For that would be a crime; it would be
an act for which punishment would be measured out by the judges:

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> It would be a fire burning even to
destruction, and taking away all my produce.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> If I did wrong in the cause of my
man-servant, or my woman-servant, when they went to law with me;

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> What then will I do when God comes as
my judge? and what answer may I give to his questions?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Did not God make him as well as me? did
he not give us life in our mothers' bodies?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> If I kept back the desire of the poor;
if the widow's eye was looking for help to no purpose;

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> If I kept my food for myself, and did
not give some of it to the child with no father;

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> (For I was cared for by God as by a
father from my earliest days; he was my guide from the body of my
mother;)

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> If I saw one near to death for need of
clothing, and that the poor had nothing covering him;

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> If his back did not give me a blessing,
and the wool of my sheep did not make him warm;

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> If my hand had been lifted up against
him who had done no wrong, when I saw that I was supported by the
judges;

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> May my arm be pulled from my body, and
be broken from its base.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> For the fear of God kept me back, and
because of his power I might not do such things.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> If I made gold my hope, or if I ever
said to the best gold, I have put my faith in you;

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> If I was glad because my wealth was
great, and because my hand had got together a great store;

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> If, when I saw the sun shining, and the
moon moving on its bright way,

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> A secret feeling of worship came into
my heart, and my hand gave kisses from my mouth;

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> That would have been another sin to be
rewarded with punishment by the judges; for I would have been false to
God on high.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> If I was glad at the trouble of my
hater, and gave cries of joy when evil overtook him;

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> (For I did not let my mouth give way to
sin, in putting a curse on his life;)

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> If the men of my tent did not say, Who
has not had full measure of his meat?

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> The traveller did not take his night's
rest in the street, and my doors were open to anyone on a journey;

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> If I kept my evil doings covered, and
my sin in the secret of my breast,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> For fear of the great body of people,
or for fear that families might make sport of me, so that I kept quiet,
and did not go out of my door;

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> If only God would give ear to me, and
the Ruler of all would give me an answer! or if what he has against me
had been put in writing!

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> Truly I would take up the book in my
hands; it would be to me as a crown;

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> I would make clear the number of my
steps, I would put it before him like a prince! The words of Job are
ended.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> If my land has made an outcry against
me, or the ploughed earth has been in sorrow;

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> If I have taken its produce without
payment, causing the death of its owners;

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Then in place of grain let thorns come
up, and in place of barley evil-smelling plants.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> So these three men gave no more answers
to Job, because he seemed to himself to be right.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Elihu, the son of Barachel the
Buzite, of the family of Ram, was angry, burning with wrath against Job,
because he seemed to himself more right than God;

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And he was angry with his three friends,
because they had been unable to give him an answer, and had not made
Job's sin clear.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> Now Elihu had kept quiet while Job was
talking, because they were older than he;

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And when Elihu saw that there was no
answer in the mouth of the three men, he was very angry.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Elihu, the son of Barachel the
Buzite, made answer and said, I am young, and you are very old, so I was
in fear, and kept myself from putting my knowledge before you.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> I said to myself, It is right for the old
to say what is in their minds, and for those who are far on in years to
give out wisdom.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But truly it is the spirit in man, even
the breath of the Ruler of all, which gives them knowledge.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> It is not the old who are wise, and those
who are full of years have not the knowledge of what is right.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> So I say, Give ear to me, and I will
put forward my knowledge.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> I was waiting for your words, I was
giving ear to your wise sayings; while you were searching out what to
say,

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> I was taking note; and truly not one of
you was able to make clear Job's error, or to give an answer to his
words.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Take care that you do not say, Wisdom
is here; God may overcome him, but not man.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> I will not put forward words like
these, or make use of your sayings in answer to him.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Fear has overcome them, they have no
more answers to give; they have come to an end of words.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And am I to go on waiting while they
have nothing to say? while they keep quiet and give no more answers?

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> I will give my answer; I will put
forward my knowledge:

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> For I am full of words, I am unable to
keep in my breath any longer:

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> My stomach is like wine which is unable
to get out; like skins full of new wine, it is almost burst.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Let me say what is in my mind, so that
I may get comfort; let me give answer with open mouth.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> Let me not give respect to any man, or
give names of honour to any living.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For I am not able to give names of
honour to any man; and if I did, my Maker would quickly take me away.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And now, O Job, give ear to my words, and
take note of all I say.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> See, now my mouth is open, my tongue
gives out words.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> My heart is overflowing with knowledge,
my lips say what is true.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> The spirit of God has made me, and the
breath of the Ruler of all gives me life.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> If you are able, give me an answer; put
your cause in order, and come forward.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> See, I am the same as you are in the eyes
of God; I was cut off from the same bit of wet earth.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Fear of me will not overcome you, and my
hand will not be hard on you.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> But you said in my hearing, and your
voice came to my ears:

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> I am clean, without sin; I am washed, and
there is no evil in me:

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> See, he is looking for something
against me; in his eyes I am as one of his haters;

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> He puts chains on my feet; he is
watching all my ways.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Truly, in saying this you are wrong;
for God is greater than man.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Why do you put forward your cause
against him, saying, He gives no answer to any of my words?

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> For God gives his word in one way, even
in two, and man is not conscious of it:

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In a dream, in a vision of the night,
when deep sleep comes on men, while they take their rest on their beds;

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> Then he makes his secrets clear to men,
so that they are full of fear at what they see;

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> In order that man may be turned from
his evil works, and that pride may be taken away from him;

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> To keep back his soul from the
underworld, and his life from destruction.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> Pain is sent on him as a punishment,
while he is on his bed; there is no end to the trouble in his bones;

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> He has no desire for food, and his soul
is turned away from delicate meat;

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> His flesh is so wasted away, that it
may not be seen, and his bones. ...

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And his soul comes near to the
underworld, and his life to the angels of death.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> If now there may be an angel sent to
him, one of the thousands which there are to be between him and God, and
to make clear to man what is right for him;

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And if he has mercy on him, and says,
Let him not go down to the underworld, I have given the price for his
life:

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Then his flesh becomes young again, and
he comes back to the days of his early strength;

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> He makes his prayer to God, and he has
mercy on him; he sees God's face with cries of joy; he gives news of his
righteousness to men;

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> He makes a song, saying, I did wrong,
turning from the straight way, but he did not give me the reward of my
sin.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> He kept my soul from the underworld,
and my life sees the light in full measure.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Truly, God does all these things to
man, twice and three times,

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> Keeping back his soul from the
underworld, so that he may see the light of life.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> Take note O Job, give ear to me; keep
quiet, while I say what is in my mind.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> If you have anything to say, give me an
answer; for it is my desire that you may be judged free from sin.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> If not, give attention to me, and keep
quiet, and I will give you wisdom.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Elihu made answer and said,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Give ear, you wise, to my words; and you
who have knowledge, give attention to me;

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For words are tested by the ear, as food
is tasted by the mouth.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Let us make the decision for ourselves as
to what is right; let us have the knowledge among ourselves of what is
good.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For Job has said, I am upright, and it is
God who has taken away my right;

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Though I am right, still I am in pain; my
wound may not be made well, though I have done no wrong.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> What man is like Job, a man who freely
makes sport of God,

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And goes in the company of evil-doers,
walking in the way of sinners?

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> For he has said, It is no profit to a man
to take delight in God.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Now then, you wise, take note; you men
of knowledge, give ear to me. Let it be far from God to do evil, and
from the Ruler of all to do wrong.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For he gives to every man the reward of
his work, and sees that he gets the fruit of his ways.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Truly, God does not do evil, and the
Ruler of all is not a false judge.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Who put the earth into his care, or
made him responsible for the world?

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> If he made his spirit come back to him,
taking his breath into himself again,

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> All flesh would come to an end
together, and man would go back to the dust.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> If you are wise, take note of this;
give ear to the voice of my words.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> How may a hater of right be a ruler?
and will you say that the upright Ruler of all is evil?

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> He who says to a king, You are an
evil-doer; and to rulers, You are sinners;

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> Who has no respect for rulers, and who
gives no more attention to those who have wealth than to the poor, for
they are all the work of his hands.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Suddenly they come to an end, even in
the middle of the night: the blow comes on the men of wealth, and they
are gone, and the strong are taken away without the hand of man.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> For his eyes are on the ways of a man,
and he sees all his steps.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> There is no dark place, and no thick
cloud, in which the workers of evil may take cover.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> For he does not give man a fixed time
to come before him to be judged.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> He sends the strong to destruction
without searching out their cause, and puts others in their place.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> For he has knowledge of their works,
overturning them in the night, so that they are crushed.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> The evil-doers are broken by his wrath,
he puts his hand on them with force before the eyes of all onlookers.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Because they did not go after him, and
took no note of his ways,

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> So that the cry of the poor might come
up to him, and the prayer of those in need come to his ears.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> ...

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> ...

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> ...

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> ...

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> ...

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> Men of knowledge, and all wise men,
hearing me, will say,

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> Job's words do not come from knowledge;
they are not the fruit of wisdom.

<span id="an_34:36">34:36</span> May Job be tested to the end, because
his answers have been like those of evil men.

<span id="an_34:37">34:37</span> For in addition to his sin, he is
uncontrolled in heart; before our eyes he makes sport of God, increasing
his words against him.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Elihu made answer and said,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Does it seem to you to be right, and
righteousness before God, to say,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> What profit is it to me, and how am I
better off than if I had done wrong?

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will make answer to you and to your
friends:

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Let your eyes be turned to the heavens,
and lifted up to see the skies; they are higher than you.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> If you have done wrong, is he any the
worse for it? and if your sins are great in number, what is it to him?

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> If you are upright, what do you give to
him? or what does he take from your hand?

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> Your evil-doing may have an effect on a
man like yourself, or your righteousness on a son of man.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Because the hand of the cruel is hard on
them, men are making sounds of grief; they are crying out for help
because of the arm of the strong.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> But no one has said, Where is God my
Maker, who gives songs in the night;

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Who gives us more knowledge than the
beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the birds of the heaven?

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> There they are crying out because of
the pride of the evil-doers, but he gives them no answer.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> But God will not give ear to what is
false, or the Ruler of all take note of it;

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> How much less when you say that you do
not see him; that the cause is before him, and you are waiting for him.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And now ... ;

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> And Job's mouth is open wide to give
out what is of no profit, increasing words without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And Elihu went on to say,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Give me a little more time, and I will
make it clear to you; for I have still something to say for God.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> I will get my knowledge from far, and I
will give righteousness to my Maker.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For truly my words are not false; one who
has all knowledge is talking with you.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Truly, God gives up the hard-hearted, and
will not give life to the sinner.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> His eyes are ever on the upright, and he
gives to the crushed their right;

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Lifting them up to the seat of kings, and
making them safe for ever.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And if they have been prisoned in chains,
and taken in cords of trouble,

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Then he makes clear to them what they
have done, even their evil works in which they have taken pride.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> Their ear is open to his teaching, and
he gives them orders so that their hearts may be turned from evil.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> If they give ear to his voice, and do
his word, then he gives them long life, and years full of pleasure.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> But if not, they come to their end, and
give up their breath without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Those who have no fear of God keep
wrath stored up in their hearts; they give no cry for help when they are
made prisoners.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> They come to their end while they are
still young, their life is short like that of those who are used for sex
purposes in the worship of their gods.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> He makes the wrong done to the poor the
way of their salvation, opening their ears by their trouble.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> ...

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> ...

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> ...

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> ...

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> ...

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Take care not to be turned to sin, for
you have taken evil for your part in place of sorrow.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Truly God is lifted up in strength; who
is a ruler like him?

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Who ever gave orders to him, or said to
him, You have done wrong?

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> See that you give praise to his work,
about which men make songs.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> All people are looking on it; man sees
it from far.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> Truly, God is great, greater than all
our knowledge; the number of his years may not be searched out.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> For he takes up the drops from the sea;
he sends them through his mist as rain,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Flowing down from the sky, and dropping
on the peoples.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And who has knowledge of how the clouds
are stretched out, or of the thunders of his tent?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> See, he is stretching out his mist,
covering the tops of the mountains with it.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> For by these he gives food to the
peoples, and bread in full measure.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> He takes the light in his hands,
sending it against the mark.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> The thunder makes clear his passion,
and the storm gives news of his wrath.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> At this my heart is shaking; it is moved
out of its place.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Give ear to the rolling noise of his
voice; to the hollow sound which goes out of his mouth.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> He sends it out through all the heaven,
and his thunder-flame to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> After it a voice is sounding, thundering
out the word of his power; he does not keep back his thunder-flames;
from his mouth his voice is sounding.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> He does wonders, more than may be
searched out; great things of which we have no knowledge;

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> For he says to the snow, Make the earth
wet; and to the rain-storm, Come down.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> He puts an end to the work of every man,
so that all may see his work.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> Then the beasts go into their holes, and
take their rest.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Out of its place comes the storm-wind,
and the cold out of its store-houses.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> By the breath of God ice is made, and
the wide waters are shut in.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> The thick cloud is weighted with
thunder-flame, and the cloud sends out its light;

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And it goes this way and that, round
about, turning itself by his guiding, to do whatever he gives orders to
be done, on the face of his world of men,

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> For a rod, or for a curse, or for
mercy, causing it to come on the mark.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Give ear to this, O Job, and keep quiet
in your place; and take note of the wonders worked by God.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> Have you knowledge of God's ordering of
his works, how he makes the light of his cloud to be seen?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Have you knowledge of the balancings of
the clouds, the wonders of him who has all wisdom?

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> You, whose clothing is warm, when the
earth is quiet because of the south wind,

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Will you, with him, make the skies
smooth, and strong as a polished looking-glass?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Make clear to me what we are to say to
him; we are unable to put our cause before him, because of the dark.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> How may he have knowledge of my desire
for talk with him? or did any man ever say, May destruction come on me?

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And now the light is not seen, for it
is dark because of the clouds; but a wind comes, clearing them away.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> A bright light comes out of the north;
God's glory is greatly to be feared.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> There is no searching out of the Ruler
of all: his strength and his judging are great; he is full of
righteousness, doing no wrong.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> For this cause men go in fear of him;
he has no respect for any who are wise in heart.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And the Lord made answer to Job out of
the storm-wind, and said,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Who is this who makes the purpose of God
dark by words without knowledge?

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Get your strength together like a man of
war; I will put questions to you, and you will give me the answers.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Where were you when I put the earth on
its base? Say, if you have knowledge.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> By whom were its measures fixed? Say, if
you have wisdom; or by whom was the line stretched out over it?

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> On what were its pillars based, or who
put down its angle-stone,

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> When the morning stars made songs
together, and all the sons of the gods gave cries of joy?

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Or where were you when the sea came to
birth, pushing out from its secret place;

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> When I made the cloud its robe, and put
thick clouds as bands round it,

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Ordering a fixed limit for it, with
locks and doors;

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And said, So far you may come, and no
farther; and here the pride of your waves will be stopped?

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Have you, from your earliest days,
given orders to the morning, or made the dawn conscious of its place;

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> So that it might take a grip of the
skirts of the earth, shaking all the evil-doers out of it?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> It is changed like wet earth under a
stamp, and is coloured like a robe;

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And from the evil-doers their light is
kept back, and the arm of pride is broken.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> Have you come into the springs of the
sea, walking in the secret places of the deep?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Have the doors of death been open to
you, or have the door-keepers of the dark ever seen you?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> Have you taken note of the wide limits
of the earth? Say, if you have knowledge of it all.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Which is the way to the resting-place
of the light, and where is the store-house of the dark;

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> So that you might take it to its limit,
guiding it to its house?

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> No doubt you have knowledge of it, for
then you had come to birth, and the number of your days is great.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Have you come into the secret place of
snow, or have you seen the store-houses of the ice-drops,

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Which I have kept for the time of
trouble, for the day of war and fighting?

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> Which is the way to the place where the
wind is measured out, and the east wind sent out over the earth?

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> By whom has the way been cut for the
flowing of the rain, and the flaming of the thunder;

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> Causing rain to come on a land where no
man is living, on the waste land which has no people;

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> To give water to the land where there
is waste and destruction, and to make the dry land green with young
grass?

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> Has the rain a father? or who gave
birth to the drops of night mist?

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> Out of whose body came the ice? and who
gave birth to the cold mist of heaven?

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> The waters are joined together, hard as
a stone, and the face of the deep is covered.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> Are the bands of the Pleiades fixed by
you, or are the cords of Orion made loose?

<span id="an_38:32">38:32</span> Do you make Mazzaroth come out in its
right time, or are the Bear and its children guided by you?

<span id="an_38:33">38:33</span> Have you knowledge of the laws of the
heavens? did you give them rule over the earth?

<span id="an_38:34">38:34</span> Is your voice sent up to the cloud, so
that you may be covered by the weight of waters?

<span id="an_38:35">38:35</span> Do you send out the thunder-flames, so
that they may go, and say to you, Here we are?

<span id="an_38:36">38:36</span> Who has put wisdom in the high clouds,
or given knowledge to the lights of the north?

<span id="an_38:37">38:37</span> By whose wisdom are the clouds
numbered, or the water-skins of the heavens turned to the earth,

<span id="an_38:38">38:38</span> When the earth becomes hard as metal,
and is joined together in masses?

<span id="an_38:39">38:39</span> Do you go after food for the she-lion,
or get meat so that the young lions may have enough,

<span id="an_38:40">38:40</span> When they are stretched out in their
holes, and are waiting in the brushwood?

<span id="an_38:41">38:41</span> Who gives in the evening the meat he is
searching for, when his young ones are crying to God; when the young
lions with loud noise go wandering after their food?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Have you knowledge of the rock-goats? or
do you see the roes giving birth to their young?

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> Is the number of their months fixed by
you? or is the time when they give birth ordered by you?

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> They are bent down, they give birth to
their young, they let loose the fruit of their body.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Their young ones are strong, living in
the open country; they go out and do not come back again.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Who has let the ass of the fields go
free? or made loose the bands of the loud-voiced beast?

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> To whom I have given the waste land for a
heritage, and the salt land as a living-place.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> He makes sport of the noise of the town;
the voice of the driver does not come to his ears;

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> He goes looking for his grass-lands in
the mountains, searching out every green thing.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Will the ox of the mountains be your
servant? or is his night's resting-place by your food-store?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> Will he be pulling your plough with
cords, turning up the valleys after you?

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Will you put your faith in him, because
his strength is great? will you give the fruit of your work into his
care?

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Will you be looking for him to come
back, and get in your seed to the crushing-floor?

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> Is the wing of the ostrich feeble, or
is it because she has no feathers,

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> That she puts her eggs on the earth,
warming them in the dust,

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> Without a thought that they may be
crushed by the foot, and broken by the beasts of the field?

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> She is cruel to her young ones, as if
they were not hers; her work is to no purpose; she has no fear.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> For God has taken wisdom from her mind,
and given her no measure of knowledge.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> When she is shaking her wings on high,
she makes sport of the horse and of him who is seated on him.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Do you give strength to the horse? is
it by your hand that his neck is clothed with power?

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Is it through you that he is shaking
like a locust, in the pride of his loud-sounding breath?

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> He is stamping with joy in the valley;
he makes sport of fear.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> In his strength he goes out against the
arms of war, turning not away from the sword.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> The bow is sounding against him; he
sees the shining point of spear and arrow.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> Shaking with passion, he is biting the
earth; he is not able to keep quiet at the sound of the horn;

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> When it comes to his ears he says, Aha!
He is smelling the fight from far off, and hearing the thunder of the
captains, and the war-cries.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> Is it through your knowledge that the
hawk takes his flight, stretching out his wings to the south?

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> Or is it by your orders that the eagle
goes up, and makes his resting-place on high?

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> On the rock is his house, and on the
mountain-top his strong place.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> From there he is watching for food; his
eye sees it far off.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> His young have blood for their drink,
and where the dead bodies are, there is he to be seen.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> ...

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Will he who is protesting give teaching
to the Ruler of all? Let him who has arguments to put forward against
God give an answer.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And Job said in answer to the Lord,

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Truly, I am of no value; what answer may
I give to you? I will put my hand on my mouth.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> I have said once, and even twice, what
was in my mind, but I will not do so again.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then the Lord made answer to Job out of
the storm-wind, and said,

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Get your strength together like a man of
war: I will put questions to you, and you will give me the answers.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Will you even make my right of no value?
will you say that I am wrong in order to make clear that you are right?

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Have you an arm like God? have you a
voice of thunder like his?

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Put on the ornaments of your pride; be
clothed with glory and power:

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Let your wrath be overflowing; let your
eyes see all the sons of pride, and make them low.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Send destruction on all who are lifted
up, pulling down the sinners from their places.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Let them be covered together in the
dust; let their faces be dark in the secret place of the underworld.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> Then I will give praise to you, saying
that your right hand is able to give you salvation.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> See now the Great Beast, whom I made,
even as I made you; he takes grass for food, like the ox.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> His strength is in his body, and his
force in the muscles of his stomach.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> His tail is curving like a cedar; the
muscles of his legs are joined together.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> His bones are pipes of brass, his legs
are like rods of iron.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> He is the chief of the ways of God,
made by him for his pleasure.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> He takes the produce of the mountains,
where all the beasts of the field are at play.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> He takes his rest under the trees of
the river, and in the pool, under the shade of the water-plants.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> He is covered by the branches of the
trees; the grasses of the stream are round him.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Truly, if the river is overflowing, it
gives him no cause for fear; he has no sense of danger, even if Jordan
is rushing against his mouth.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Will anyone take him when he is on the
watch, or put metal teeth through his nose?

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Is it possible for Leviathan to be pulled
out with a fish-hook, or for a hook to be put through the bone of his
mouth?

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Will you put a cord into his nose, or
take him away with a cord round his tongue?

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Will he make prayers to you, or say soft
words to you?

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Will he make an agreement with you, so
that you may take him as a servant for ever?

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Will you make sport with him, as with a
bird? or put him in chains for your young women?

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Will the fishermen make profit out of
him? will they have him cut up for the traders?

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> Will you put sharp-pointed irons into his
skin, or fish-spears into his head?

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> Only put your hand on him, and see what a
fight you will have; you will not do it again!

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Truly, the hope of his attacker is false;
he is overcome even on seeing him!

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> He is so cruel that no one is ready to
go against him. Who then is able to keep his place before me?

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Who ever went against me, and got the
better of me? There is no one under heaven!

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> I will not keep quiet about the parts
of his body, or about his power, and the strength of his frame.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> Who has ever taken off his outer skin?
who may come inside his inner coat of iron?

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Who has made open the doors of his
face? Fear is round about his teeth.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> His back is made of lines of plates,
joined tight together, one against the other, like a stamp.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> One is so near to the other that no air
may come between them.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> They take a grip of one another; they
are joined together, so that they may not be parted.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> His sneezings give out flames, and his
eyes are like the eyes of the dawn.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> Out of his mouth go burning lights, and
flames of fire are jumping up.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> Smoke comes out of his nose, like a pot
boiling on the fire.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> His breath puts fire to coals, and a
flame goes out of his mouth.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> Strength is in his neck, and fear goes
dancing before him.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> The plates of his flesh are joined
together, fixed, and not to be moved.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> His heart is as strong as a stone, hard
as the lower crushing-stone.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> When he gets ready for the fight, the
strong are overcome with fear.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> The sword may come near him but is not
able to go through him; the spear, or the arrow, or the sharp-pointed
iron.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> Iron is to him as dry grass, and brass
as soft wood.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> The arrow is not able to put him to
flight: stones are no more to him than dry stems.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> A thick stick is no better than a leaf
of grass, and he makes sport of the onrush of the spear.

<span id="an_41:30">41:30</span> Under him are sharp edges of broken
pots: as if he was pulling a grain-crushing instrument over the wet
earth.

<span id="an_41:31">41:31</span> The deep is boiling like a pot of
spices, and the sea like a perfume-vessel.

<span id="an_41:32">41:32</span> After him his way is shining, so that
the deep seems white.

<span id="an_41:33">41:33</span> On earth there is not another like him,
who is made without fear.

<span id="an_41:34">41:34</span> Everything which is high goes in fear
of him; he is king over all the sons of pride.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> And Job said in answer to the Lord,

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> I see that you are able to do every
thing, and to give effect to all your designs.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Who is this who makes dark the purpose of
God by words without knowledge? For I have been talking without
knowledge about wonders not to be searched out.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Give ear to me, and I will say what is in
my mind; I will put questions to you, and you will give me the answers.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Word of you had come to my ears, but now
my eye has seen you.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> For this cause I give witness that what I
said is false, and in sorrow I take my seat in the dust.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And it came about, after he had said
these words to Job, that the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, I am
very angry with you and your two friends, because you have not said what
is right about me, as my servant Job has.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> And now, take seven oxen and seven sheep,
and go to my servant Job, and give a burned offering for yourselves, and
my servant Job will make prayer for you, that I may not send punishment
on you; because you have not said what is right about me, as my servant
Job has.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> And Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the
Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite, went and did as the Lord had said.
And the Lord gave ear to Job.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> And the Lord made up to Job for all his
losses, after he had made prayer for his friends: and all Job had before
was increased by the Lord twice as much.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And all his brothers and sisters, and
his friends of earlier days, came and took food with him in his house;
and made clear their grief for him, and gave him comfort for all the
evil which the Lord had sent on him; and they all gave him a bit of
money and a gold ring.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And the Lord's blessing was greater on
the end of Job's life than on its start: and so he came to have fourteen
thousand sheep and goats, and six thousand camels, and two thousand
oxen, and a thousand she-asses.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And he had seven sons and three
daughters.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> And he gave the first the name of
Jemimah, the second Keziah, and the third Keren-happuch;

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And there were no women so beautiful as
the daughters of Job in all the earth: and their father gave them a
heritage among their brothers.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And after this Job had a hundred and
forty years of life, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four
generations.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> And Job came to his end, old and full
of days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms](psa)
