[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](luk)  [Next](act) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> From the first he was the Word, and the
Word was in relation with God and was God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> This Word was from the first in relation
with God.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> All things came into existence through him,
and without him nothing was.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> What came into existence in him was life,
and the life was the light of men.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the light goes on shining in the dark;
it is not overcome by the dark.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> There was a man sent from God, whose name
was John.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He came for witness, to give witness about
the light, so that all men might have faith through him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> He himself was not the light: he was sent
to give witness about the light.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The true light, which gives light to every
man, was then coming into the world.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> He was in the world, the world which came
into being through him, but the world had no knowledge of him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> He came to the things which were his and
his people did not take him to their hearts.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> To all those who did so take him,
however, he gave the right of becoming children of God--that is, to
those who had faith in his name:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Whose birth was from God and not from
blood, or from an impulse of the flesh and man's desire.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And so the Word became flesh and took a
place among us for a time; and we saw his glory--such glory as is given
to an only son by his father--saw it to be true and full of grace.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> John gave witness about him, crying, This
is he of whom I said, He who is coming after me is put over me because
he was in existence before me.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> From his full measure we have all been
given grace on grace.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For the law was given through Moses;
grace and the true way of life are ours through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> No man has seen God at any time; the only
Son, who is on the breast of the Father, he has made clear what God is.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And this is the witness of John when the
Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him with the question,
Who are you?

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> He said quite openly and
straightforwardly, I am not the Christ.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they said to him, What then? Are you
Elijah? And he said, I am not. Are you the prophet? And his answer was,
I am not.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> So they said to him, Who are you then? We
have to give some answer to those who sent us. What have you to say
about yourself?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> He said, I am the voice of one crying in
the waste land, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said Isaiah the
prophet.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Those who had been sent came from the
Pharisees.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And they put this question to him,
saying, Why then are you giving baptism if you are not the Christ, or
Elijah, or the prophet?

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> John's answer was: I give baptism with
water; but there is one among you of whom you have no knowledge;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> It is he who is coming after me; I am not
good enough to undo his shoes.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> These things took place at Bethany on the
other side of the Jordan, where John was giving baptism.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> The day after, John sees Jesus coming to
him and says, See, here is the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the
world!

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> This is he of whom I said, One is coming
after me who is put over me because he was in existence before me.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> I myself had no knowledge of him, but I
came giving baptism with water so that he might be seen openly by
Israel.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And John gave this witness, saying, I saw
the Spirit coming down from heaven like a dove and resting on him.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> I had no knowledge who he was, but he who
sent me to give baptism with water said to me, The one on whom you see
the Spirit coming down and resting, it is he who gives baptism with the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> This I saw myself and my witness is that
he is the Son of God.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> The day after, John was there again with
two of his disciples;

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And looking at Jesus while he was walking
he said, See, there is the Lamb of God!

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Hearing what he said, the two disciples
went after Jesus.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And Jesus, turning round, saw them coming
after him and said to them, What are you looking for? They said to him,
Rabbi (which is to say, Master), where are you living?

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> +

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> He said to them, Come and see. They went
with him then and saw where he was living; and they were with him all
that day: it was then about the tenth hour of the day.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of
the two men who, hearing what John said, went after Jesus.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Early in the morning he came across his
brother and said to him, We have made discovery! It is the Messiah!
(which is to say, the Christ).

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And he took him to Jesus. Looking at him
fixedly Jesus said, You are Simon, the son of John; your name will be
Cephas (which is to say, Peter).

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> The day after this, Jesus had a desire to
go into Galilee. He came across Philip and said to him, Come and be my
disciple.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> Now Philip's town was Beth-saida, where
Andrew and Peter came from.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Philip came across Nathanael and said to
him, We have made a discovery! It is he of whom Moses, in the law, and
the prophets were writing, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> Nazareth! said Nathanael, Is it possible
for any good to come out of Nazareth? Philip said to him, Come and see.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him and
said of him, See, here is a true son of Israel in whom there is nothing
false.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Nathanael said to him, Where did you get
knowledge of me? In answer Jesus said, Before Philip was talking with
you, while you were still under the fig-tree, I saw you.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Nathanael said to him, Rabbi, you are the
Son of God, you are King of Israel!

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> In answer Jesus said to him, You have
faith because I said to you, I saw you under the fig-tree. You will see
greater things than these.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And he said to him, Truly I say to you
all, You will see heaven opening and God's angels going up and coming
down on the Son of man.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> On the third day two people were going to
be married at Cana in Galilee. The mother of Jesus was there:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jesus with his disciples came as
guests.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> When they had not enough wine, the mother
of Jesus said to him, They have no wine.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Jesus said to her, Woman, this is not your
business; my time is still to come.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> His mother said to the servants, Whatever
he says to you, do it.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now six pots of stone, every one taking two
or three firkins of water, were placed there for the purpose of washing,
as is the way of the Jews.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Jesus said to the servants, Make the pots
full of water. And they made them full to the top.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Then he said to them, Now take some, and
give it to the master of the feast. So they took it to him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> After tasting the water which had now
become wine, the master of the feast (having no idea where it came from,
though it was clear to the servants who took the water out) sent for the
newly-married man,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And said to him, Every man first puts out
his best wine and when all have had enough he puts out what is not so
good; but you have kept the good wine till now.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> This, the first of his signs, Jesus did
at Cana in Galilee and let his glory be seen openly; and his disciples
put their faith in him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> After this he went down to Capernaum,
with his mother, his brothers, and his disciples, and they were there
not more than two or three days.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The time of the Passover of the Jews was
near and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And there in the Temple he saw men
trading in oxen and sheep and doves, and he saw the changers of money in
their seats:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And he made a whip of small cords and put
them all out of the Temple, with the sheep and the oxen, sending in all
directions the small money of the changers and overturning their tables;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And to those who were trading in doves he
said, Take these things away; do not make my Father's house a market.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And it came to the minds of the disciples
that the Writings say, I am on fire with passion for your house.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Then the Jews put this question to him:
What sign of authority have you to give us, seeing that you do these
things?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jesus said to them, Send destruction
on this Temple and I will put it up again in three days.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The Jews said, The building of this
Temple took forty-six years; and you will put it up in three days!

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> But his words were about that holy
building which was his body.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> So when he had come back again from the
dead, the memory of these words came back to the disciples, and they had
faith in the holy Writings and in the word which Jesus had said.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Now while he was in Jerusalem at the
feast of the Passover, a great number of people came to have faith in
his name, after seeing the signs which he did.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But Jesus did not have faith in them,
because he had knowledge of them all.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> He had no need for any witness about man;
for he himself had knowledge of what was in man.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now there was among the Pharisees a man
named Nicodemus, who was one of the rulers of the Jews.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> He came to Jesus by night and said to him,
Rabbi, we are certain that you have come from God as a teacher, because
no man would be able to do these signs which you do if God was not with
him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Jesus said to him, Truly, I say to you,
Without a new birth no man is able to see the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Nicodemus said to him, How is it possible
for a man to be given birth when he is old? Is he able to go into his
mother's body a second time and come to birth again?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Jesus said in answer, Truly, I say to you,
If a man's birth is not from water and from the Spirit, it is not
possible for him to go into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That which has birth from the flesh is
flesh, and that which has birth from the Spirit is spirit.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Do not be surprised that I say to you, It
is necessary for you to have a second birth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The wind goes where its pleasure takes it,
and the sound of it comes to your ears, but you are unable to say where
it comes from and where it goes: so it is with everyone whose birth is
from the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And Nicodemus said to him, How is it
possible for these things to be?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And Jesus, answering, said, Are you the
teacher of Israel and have no knowledge of these things?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Truly, I say to you, We say that of which
we have knowledge; we give witness of what we have seen; and you do not
take our witness to be true.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> If you have no belief when my words are
about the things of earth, how will you have belief if my words are
about the things of heaven?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And no one has ever gone up to heaven but
he who came down from heaven, the Son of man.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> As the snake was lifted up by Moses in
the waste land, even so it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted
up:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> So that whoever has faith may have in him
eternal life.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For God had such love for the world that
he gave his only Son, so that whoever has faith in him may not come to
destruction but have eternal life.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> God did not send his Son into the world
to be judge of the world; he sent him so that the world might have
salvation through him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> The man who has faith in him does not
come up to be judged; but he who has no faith in him has been judged
even now, because he has no faith in the name of the only Son of God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And this is the test by which men are
judged: the light has come into the world and men have more love for the
dark than for the light, because their acts are evil.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> The light is hated by everyone whose acts
are evil and he does not come to the light for fear that his acts will
be seen.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But he whose life is true comes to the
light, so that it may be clearly seen that his acts have been done by
the help of God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> After these things Jesus and his
disciples went into the land of Judaea, and there he was with them for
some time, giving baptism.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Now John was then giving baptism at Aenon
near Salim, because there was much water there; and people came and were
given baptism.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For at this time John had not been put
into prison.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Then a question came up between John's
disciples and a Jew about washing.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And they went to John and said to him,
Rabbi, the man who was with you on the other side of the Jordan, the man
to whom you gave witness, is now giving baptism, and everyone is going
to him.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And this was John's answer: A man is
unable to have anything if it is not given to him from heaven.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> You yourselves give witness that I said,
I am not the Christ. What I said was, I am sent before the Christ.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> He who has the bride is the husband: but
the husband's friend, whose place is by his side and whose ears are open
to him, is full of joy because of the husband's voice: such is my joy,
and it is complete.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> He has to become greater while I become
less.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> He who comes from heaven is greater than
all others: he who comes from earth is of the earth, and of the earth
are his words: he who comes from heaven is over all.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> He gives witness of what he has seen and
of what has come to his ears; and no man takes his witness as true.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> He who so takes his witness has made
clear his faith that God is true.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> For he whom God has sent says God's
words; and God does not give him the Spirit by measure.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The Father has love for the Son and has
put all things into his hands.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> He who has faith in the Son has eternal
life; but he who has not faith in the Son will not see life; God's wrath
is resting on him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now when it was clear to the Lord that word
had come to the ears of the Pharisees that Jesus was making more
disciples than John and was giving them baptism

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> (Though, in fact, it was his disciples who
gave baptism, not Jesus himself),

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> He went out of Judaea into Galilee again.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And it was necessary for him to go through
Samaria.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> So he came to a town of Samaria which was
named Sychar, near to the bit of land which Jacob gave to his son
Joseph:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Now Jacob's fountain was there. Jesus,
being tired after his journey, was resting by the fountain. It was about
the sixth hour.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> A woman of Samaria came to get water, and
Jesus said to her, Give me some water.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For his disciples had gone to the town to
get food.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The woman of Samaria said to him, Why do
you, a Jew, make a request for water to me, a woman of Samaria? She said
this because Jews have nothing to do with the people of Samaria.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> In answer Jesus said, If you had
knowledge of what God gives freely and who it is who says to you, Give
me water, you would make your prayer to him, and he would give you
living water.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The woman said to him, Sir, you have no
vessel and the fountain is deep; from where will you get the living
water?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Are you greater than our father Jacob who
gave us the fountain and took the water of it himself, with his children
and his cattle?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Jesus said to her, Everyone who takes
this water will be in need of it again:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> But whoever takes the water I give him
will never be in need of drink again; for the water I give him will
become in him a fountain of eternal life.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The woman said to him, Sir, give me this
water, so that I may not be in need again of drink and will not have to
come all this way for it.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Jesus said to her, Go, get your husband
and come back here with him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In answer, the woman said, I have no
husband. Jesus said to her, You have said rightly, I have no husband:

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> You have had five husbands, and the man
you have now is not your husband: that was truly said.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The woman said to him, Sir, I see that
you are a prophet.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Our fathers gave worship on this
mountain, but you Jews say that the right place for worship is in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Jesus said to her, Woman, take my word
for this; the time is coming when you will not give worship to the
Father on this mountain or in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> You give worship, but without knowledge
of what you are worshipping: we give worship to what we have knowledge
of: for salvation comes from the Jews.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> But the time is coming, and is even now
here, when the true worshippers will give worship to the Father in the
true way of the spirit, for these are the worshippers desired by the
Father.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> God is Spirit: then let his worshippers
give him worship in the true way of the spirit.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> The woman said to him, I am certain that
the Messiah, who is named Christ, is coming; when he comes he will make
all things clear to us.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Jesus said to her, I, who am talking to
you, am he.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> At that point the disciples came back,
and they were surprised to see him talking to a woman; but not one of
them said to him, What is your purpose? or, Why are you talking to her?

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Then the woman put down her water-pot and
went into the town, and said to the people,

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Come and see a man who has been talking
to me of everything I ever did! Is it possible that this is the Christ?

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> So they went out of the town and came to
him.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> While this was taking place, the
disciples were saying to Jesus, Master, take some food.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> But he said to them, I have food of which
you have no knowledge.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> So the disciples said one to another, Did
anyone give him food?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Jesus said, My food is to do the pleasure
of him who sent me and to make his work complete.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> You would say, Four months from now is
the time of the grain-cutting. Take a look, I say to you, at the fields;
they are even now white for cutting.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> He who does the cutting now has his
reward; he is getting together fruit for eternal life, so that he who
did the planting and he who gets in the grain may have joy together.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> In this the saying is a true one, One
does the planting, and another gets in the grain.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> I sent you to get in grain which you had
no hand in planting: other men did that work, and you take the reward.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Now a number of the people of that town
had faith in him because of the woman's witness: He has been talking to
me of everything I ever did.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> So when the people came to him they made
request to him to be among them for a time, and he was there two days.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And a great number more of them came to
have faith in him because of what he himself said.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And they said to the woman, Now we have
faith, but not because of your story: we ourselves have given ear to his
words, and we are certain that he is truly the Saviour of the world.

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> And after the two days he went on from
there into Galilee.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> For Jesus himself said that a prophet has
no honour in the country of his birth.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> So when he came into Galilee, the
Galilaeans took him to their hearts because of the things which they had
seen him do in Jerusalem at the feast--they themselves having been there
at the feast.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> So he came to Cana in Galilee, where he
had made the water wine. And there was a certain man of high position
whose son was ill at Capernaum.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> When it came to his ears that Jesus had
come from Judaea into Galilee, he went to him and made a request that he
would come down to his son, who was near to death, and make him well.

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> Then Jesus said to him, You will not have
faith if you do not see signs and wonders.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> The man said, Sir, come down before my
boy is dead.

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> And Jesus said, Go in peace; your son is
living. The man had faith in the word which Jesus said to him and went
away.

<span id="an_4:51">4:51</span> And while he was going down, his servants
came to him and said, Your boy is living.

<span id="an_4:52">4:52</span> So he put a question to them as to the
hour when he became better; and they said to him, The disease went from
him yesterday at the seventh hour.

<span id="an_4:53">4:53</span> It was clear then to the father that this
was the very time at which Jesus said to him, Your son is living. And he
had faith in Jesus, he and all his family.

<span id="an_4:54">4:54</span> Now this is the second sign which Jesus
did after he had come out of Judaea into Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After these things there was a feast of the
Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Now in Jerusalem near the sheep-market
there is a public bath which in Hebrew is named Beth-zatha. It has five
doorways.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> In these doorways there were a great number
of people with different diseases: some unable to see, some without the
power of walking, some with wasted bodies.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> \[\]

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> One man was there who had been ill for
thirty-eight years.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> When Jesus saw him there on the floor it
was clear to him that he had been now a long time in that condition, and
so he said to the man, Is it your desire to get well?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The ill man said in answer, Sir, I have
nobody to put me into the bath when the water is moving; and while I am
on the way down some other person gets in before me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Jesus said to him, Get up, take your bed
and go.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And the man became well straight away, and
took up his bed and went. Now that day was the Sabbath.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So the Jews said to the man who had been
made well, It is the Sabbath; and it is against the law for you to take
up your bed.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> He said to them, But he who made me well,
said to me, Take up your bed and go.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then they put to him the question: Who is
the man who said to you, Take it up and go?

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Now he who had been made well had no
knowledge who it was, Jesus having gone away because of the number of
people who were in that place.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> After a time Jesus came across him in the
Temple and said to him, See, you are well and strong; do no more sin for
fear a worse thing comes to you.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The man went away and said to the Jews
that it was Jesus who had made him well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And for this reason the Jews were turned
against Jesus, because he was doing these things on the Sabbath.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But his answer was: My Father is still
working even now, and so I am working.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For this cause the Jews had an even
greater desire to put Jesus to death, because not only did he not keep
the Sabbath but he said God was his Father, so making himself equal with
God.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> So Jesus made answer and said, Truly I
say to you, The Son is not able to do anything himself; he is able to do
only what he sees the Father doing; whatever the Father does the Son
does it in the same way.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For the Father has love for the Son and
lets him see everything which he does: and he will let him see greater
works than these so that you may be full of wonder.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> In the same way, as the Father gives life
to the dead, even so the Son gives life to those to whom he is pleased
to give it.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The Father is not the judge of men, but
he has given all decisions into the hands of the Son;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> So that all men may give honour to the
Son even as they give honour to the Father. He who gives no honour to
the Son gives no honour to the Father who sent him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Truly I say to you, The man whose ears
are open to my word and who has faith in him who sent me, has eternal
life; he will not be judged, but has come from death into life.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Truly I say to you, The time is coming,
it has even now come, when the voice of the Son of God will come to the
ears of the dead, and those hearing it will have life.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For even as the Father has life in
himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And he has given him authority to be
judge because he is the Son of man.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Do not be surprised at this: for the time
is coming when his voice will come to all who are in the place of the
dead,

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And they will come out; those who have
done good, into the new life; and those who have done evil, to be
judged.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Of myself I am unable to do anything: as
the voice comes to me so I give a decision: and my decision is right
because I have no desire to do what is pleasing to myself, but only what
is pleasing to him who sent me.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> If I gave witness about myself, my
witness would not be true.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> There is another who gives witness about
me and I am certain that the witness he gives about me is true.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> You sent to John and he gave true
witness.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But I have no need of a man's witness: I
only say these things so that you may have salvation.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> He was a burning and shining light, and
for a time you were ready to be happy in his light.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> But the witness which I have is greater
than that of John: the work which the Father has given me to do, the
very work which I am now doing, is a witness that the Father has sent
me.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And the Father himself who sent me has
given witness about me. Not one of you has ever given ear to his voice;
his form you have not seen.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And you have not kept his word in your
hearts, because you have not faith in him whom he has sent.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> You make search in the holy Writings, in
the belief that through them you get eternal life; and it is those
Writings which give witness about me.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And still you have no desire to come to
me so that you may have life.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> I do not take honour from men;

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> But I have knowledge of you that you have
no love for God in your hearts.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> I have come in my Father's name, and your
hearts are not open to me. If another comes with no other authority but
himself, you will give him your approval.

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> How is it possible for you to have faith
while you take honour one from another and have no desire for the honour
which comes from the only God?

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> Put out of your minds the thought that I
will say things against you to the Father: the one who says things
against you is Moses, on whom you put your hopes.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> If you had belief in Moses you would have
belief in me; for his writings are about me.

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> If you have no belief in his writings,
how will you have belief in my words?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> After these things Jesus went away to the
other side of the sea of Galilee--that is, the sea of Tiberias.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And a great number of people went after him
because they saw the signs which he did on those who were ill.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then Jesus went up the mountain and was
seated there with his disciples.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Now the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was
near.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Lifting up his eyes, Jesus saw a great
number of people coming to where he was, and he said to Philip, Where
may we get bread for all these people?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> This he said, testing him: for he had no
doubt what he himself would do.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Philip made answer, Bread to the value of
two hundred pence would not be enough even to give everyone a little.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> One of his disciples, Andrew, the brother
of Simon Peter, said to Jesus,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> There is a boy here with five barley cakes
and two fishes: but what is that among such a number?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Jesus said, Let the people be seated. Now
there was much grass in that place. And those seated on the grass were
about five thousand.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then Jesus took the cakes and having
given praise to God, he gave them to the people who were seated, and the
fishes in the same way, as much as they had need of.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And when they had had enough, Jesus said
to his disciples, Take up the broken bits which are over, so that
nothing may be wasted.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> So they took them up: twelve baskets full
of broken bits of the five cakes which were over after the people had
had enough.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And when the people saw the sign which he
had done, they said, Truly, this is the prophet who is to come into the
world.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Now when Jesus saw that the people were
about to come and take him by force to make him a king, he went away
again up the mountain by himself.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> When evening came the disciples went down
to the sea;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And they took a boat and went across the
sea in the direction of Capernaum. By then it was dark and still Jesus
had not come to them.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The sea was getting rough because of a
strong wind which was blowing.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> After they had gone three or four miles
they saw Jesus walking on the sea and coming near to the boat; and they
had great fear.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But he said to them, It is I, have no
fear.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then they readily took him into the boat:
and straight away the boat was at the land to which they were going.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> The day after, the people who were on the
other side of the sea saw that only one small boat had been there, that
Jesus had not gone in that boat with the disciples, but that the
disciples had gone away by themselves.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Some other boats, however, came from
Tiberias near to the place where they had taken the bread after the Lord
had given praise.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> So when the people saw that Jesus was not
there, or his disciples, they got into those boats and went over to
Capernaum looking for Jesus.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And when they came across him on the
other side of the sea they said, Rabbi, when did you come here?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Jesus, answering them, said, Truly I say
to you, You come after me, not because you saw signs, but because you
were given the bread and had enough.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Let your work not be for the food which
comes to an end, but for the food which goes on for eternal life, which
the Son of man will give to you, for on him has God the Father put his
mark.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Then they said to him, How may we do the
works of God?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Jesus, answering, said to them, This is
to do the work of God: to have faith in him whom God has sent.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> So they said, What sign do you give us,
so that we may see and have faith in you? What do you do?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Our fathers had the manna in the waste
land, as the Writings say, He gave them bread from heaven.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Jesus then said to them, Truly I say to
you, What Moses gave you was not the bread from heaven; it is my Father
who gives you the true bread from heaven.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> The bread of God is the bread which comes
down out of heaven and gives life to the world.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Ah, Lord, they said, give us that bread
for ever!

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And this was the answer of Jesus: I am
the bread of life. He who comes to me will never be in need of food, and
he who has faith in me will never be in need of drink.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> But it is as I said to you: you have seen
me, and still you have no faith.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> Whatever the Father gives to me will come
to me; and I will not send away anyone who comes to me.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> For I have come down from heaven, not to
do my pleasure, but the pleasure of him who sent me.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And this is the pleasure of him who sent
me, that I am not to let out of my hands anything which he has given me,
but I am to give it new life on the last day.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> This, I say, is my Father's pleasure,
that everyone who sees the Son and has faith in him may have eternal
life: and I will take him up on the last day.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> Now the Jews said bitter things about
Jesus because of his words, I am the bread which came down from heaven.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son
of Joseph, whose father and mother we have seen? How is it then that he
now says, I have come down from heaven?

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> Jesus made answer and said, Do not say
things against me, one to another.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> No man is able to come to me if the
Father who sent me does not give him the desire to come: and I will take
him up from the dead on the last day.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> The writings of the prophets say, And
they will all have teaching from God. Everyone whose ears have been open
to the teaching of the Father comes to me.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> Not that anyone has ever seen the Father;
only he who is from God, he has seen the Father.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> Truly I say to you, He who has faith in
me has eternal life.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> I am the bread of life.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> Your fathers took the manna in the waste
land--and they are dead.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> The bread which comes from heaven is such
bread that a man may take it for food and never see death.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> I am the living bread which has come from
heaven: if any man takes this bread for food he will have life for ever:
and more than this, the bread which I will give is my flesh which I will
give for the life of the world.

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> Then the Jews had an angry discussion
among themselves, saying, How is it possible for this man to give us his
flesh for food?

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> Then Jesus said to them, Truly I say to
you, If you do not take the flesh of the Son of man for food, and if you
do not take his blood for drink, you have no life in you.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> He who takes my flesh for food and my
blood for drink has eternal life: and I will take him up from the dead
at the last day.

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> My flesh is true food and my blood is
true drink.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> He who takes my flesh for food and my
blood for drink is in me and I in him.

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> As the living Father has sent me, and I
have life because of the Father, even so he who takes me for his food
will have life because of me.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> This is the bread which has come down
from heaven. It is not like the food which your fathers had: they took
of the manna, and are dead; but he who takes this bread for food will
have life for ever.

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> Jesus said these things in the Synagogue
while he was teaching at Capernaum.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> Then, hearing this, a number of his
disciples said, This is a hard saying; who is able to take in such
teaching?

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> When Jesus became conscious that his
disciples were protesting about what he said, he said to them, Does this
give you trouble?

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> What then will you say if you see the Son
of man going up to where he was before?

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> The spirit is the life giver; the flesh
is of no value: the words which I have said to you are spirit and they
are life.

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> But still some of you have no faith. For
it was clear to Jesus from the first who they were who had no faith, and
who it was who would be false to him.

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> And he said, This is why I said to you,
No man is able to come to me if he is not given the power to do so by
the Father.

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> Because of what he said, a number of the
disciples went back and would no longer go with him.

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> So Jesus said to the twelve, Have you a
desire to go away?

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> Then Simon Peter gave this answer: Lord,
to whom are we to go? you have the words of eternal life;

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> And we have faith and are certain that
you are the Holy One of God.

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> Then Jesus said, Did I not make a
selection of you, the twelve, and one of you is a son of the Evil One?

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> He was talking of Judas, the son of Simon
Iscariot. It was he who was to be false to Jesus--one of the twelve.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> After this, Jesus went from place to place
in Galilee. He did not go about in Judaea, because the Jews were looking
for a chance to put him to death.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> But the feast of the Jews, the feast of
tents, was near.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So his brothers said to him, Go away from
here into Judaea so that your disciples may see the works which you do.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Because no man does things secretly if he
has a desire that men may have knowledge of him. If you do these things,
let yourself be seen by all men.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For even his brothers had no belief in him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Jesus said to them, My time is still to
come, but any time is good for you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> It is not possible for you to be hated by
the world; but I am hated by it, because I give witness that what it
does is evil.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Go you up to the feast: I am not going up
now to the feast because my time has not fully come.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Having said these things to them, he still
kept in Galilee.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But after his brothers had gone up to the
feast, then he went up, not publicly, but in secret.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> At the feast the Jews were looking for
him and saying, Where is he?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And there was much discussion about him
among the mass of the people. Some said, He is a good man; but others
said, No, he is giving people false ideas.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> But no man said anything about him openly
for fear of the Jews.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Now in the middle of the feast Jesus went
up to the Temple and was teaching.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Then the Jews were surprised and said,
How has this man got knowledge of books? He has never been to school.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Jesus gave them this answer: It is not my
teaching, but his who sent me.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If any man is ready to do God's pleasure
he will have knowledge of the teaching and of where it comes from--from
God or from myself.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The man whose words come from himself is
looking for glory for himself, but he who is looking for the glory of
him who sent him--that man is true and there is no evil in him.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Did not Moses give you the law? Even so,
not one of you keeps the law. Why have you a desire to put me to death?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The people said in answer, You have an
evil spirit: who has any desire to put you to death?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> This was the answer of Jesus: I have done
one work and you are all surprised at it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Moses gave you circumcision--not that it
comes from Moses, but from the fathers--and even on the Sabbath you give
a child circumcision.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> If a child is given circumcision on the
Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you angry
with me because I made a man completely well on the Sabbath?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Let not your decisions be based on what
you see, but on righteousness.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Then some of the people of Jerusalem
said, Is not this the man whose death is desired?

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And here he is talking openly and they
say nothing to him! Is it possible that the rulers have knowledge that
this is truly the Christ?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> However, it is clear to us where this man
comes from: but when the Christ comes no one will have knowledge where
he comes from.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Then, when he was teaching in the Temple,
Jesus said with a loud voice, You have knowledge of me and you have
knowledge of where I come from; and I have not come of myself; but there
is One who has sent me; he is true, but you have no knowledge of him.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> I have knowledge of him because I came
from him and he sent me.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> Then they had a desire to take him: but
no man put hands on him because his hour was still to come.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And numbers of the people had belief in
him, and they said, When the Christ comes will he do more signs than
this man has done?

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> This discussion of the people came to the
ears of the Pharisees; and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent
servants to take him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> Then Jesus said, I will be with you a
little longer and then I go to him who sent me.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> You will be looking for me, and you will
not see me: and where I am you may not come.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> So the Jews said among themselves, To
what place is he going where we will not see him? will he go to the Jews
living among the Greeks and become the teacher of the Greeks?

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> What is this saying of his, You will be
looking for me and will not see me, and where I am you may not come?

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> On the last day, the great day of the
feast, Jesus got up and said in a loud voice, If any man is in need of
drink let him come to me and I will give it to him.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> He who has faith in me, out of his body,
as the Writings have said, will come rivers of living water.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> This he said of the Spirit which would be
given to those who had faith in him: the Spirit had not been given then,
because the glory of Jesus was still to come.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> When these words came to their ears, some
of the people said, This is certainly the prophet.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> Others said, This is the Christ. But
others said, Not so; will the Christ come from Galilee?

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Do not the Writings say that the Christ
comes of the seed of David and from Beth-lehem, the little town where
David was?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> So there was a division among the people
because of him.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> And some of them had a desire to take
him; but no man put hands on him.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Then the servants went back to the chief
priests and Pharisees, who said to them, Why have you not got him with
you?

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> The servants made answer, No man ever
said things like this man.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> Then the Pharisees said to them, Have
you, like the others, been given false ideas?

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Have any of the rulers belief in him, or
any one of the Pharisees?

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> But these people who have no knowledge of
the law are cursed.

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Nicodemus--he who had come to Jesus
before, being himself one of them--said to them,

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> Is a man judged by our law before it has
given him a hearing and has knowledge of what he has done?

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> This was their answer: And do you come
from Galilee? Make search and you will see that no prophet comes out of
Galilee.

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> \[And every man went to his house;

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> But Jesus went to the Mountain of Olives.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And early in the morning he came again into
the Temple and all the people came to him and he was seated teaching
them.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Now the scribes and Pharisees came, with a
woman who had been taken in the act of sinning against the married
relation;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And putting her forward, they said to him,
Master, this woman has been taken in the very act of sinning against the
married relation.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Now in the law Moses gave directions that
such women were to be stoned; what do you say about it?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> They said this, testing him, so that they
might have something against him. But Jesus, with his head bent down,
made letters on the floor with his finger.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> But when they went on with their questions,
he got up and said to them, Let him among you who is without sin be the
first to send a stone at her.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And again, with bent head, he made letters
on the floor.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And when his words came to their ears, they
went out one by one, starting with the oldest even to the last, because
they were conscious of what was in their hearts: and Jesus was there by
himself with the woman before him.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Then Jesus got up, and seeing nobody but
the woman, he said to her, Where are the men who said things against
you? did no one give a decision against you?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus
said, And I do not give a decision against you: go, and never do wrong
again.\]

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then again Jesus said to them, I am the
light of the world; he who comes with me will not be walking in the dark
but will have the light of life.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So the Pharisees said to him, The witness
you give is about yourself: your witness is not true.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Jesus said in answer, Even if I give
witness about myself, my witness is true, because I have knowledge of
where I came from and where I am going; but you have no knowledge of
where I come from or of where I am going.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> You are judging from what you see; I am
judging no man.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Even if I am judging, my decision is
right, because I am not by myself--with me is the Father who sent me.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Even in your law it is said that the
witness of two men is true.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> I give witness about myself and the
Father who sent me gives witness about me.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Then they said to him, Where is your
Father? Jesus said in answer, You have no knowledge of me or of my
Father: if you had knowledge of me you would have knowledge of my
Father.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Jesus said these words in the place where
the offerings were stored, while he was teaching in the Temple: but no
man took him because his time was still to come.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Then he said to them again, I am going
away and you will be looking for me, but death will overtake you in your
sins. It is not possible for you to come where I am going.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> So the Jews said, Will he take his life?
Is that why he says, Where I go it is not possible for you to come?

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he said to them, You are of the
earth; I am from heaven: you are of this world; I am not of this world.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> For this reason I said to you that death
will overtake you in your sins: for if you have not faith that I am he,
death will come to you while you are in your sins.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Then they said to him, Who are you? Jesus
said, What I said to you from the first.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> I have much to say about you and against
you: but he who sent me is true and what he has said to me I say to the
world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> They did not see that his words were
about the Father.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> So Jesus said, When the Son of man has
been lifted up by you, then it will be clear to you who I am, and that I
do nothing of myself, but say as the Father gave me teaching.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> He who sent me is with me; he has not
gone from me, because at all times I do the things which are pleasing to
him.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> When he said this a number came to have
faith in him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Then Jesus said to the Jews who had faith
in him, If you keep my word, then you are truly my disciples;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And you will have knowledge of what is
true, and that will make you free.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> They said to him in answer, We are
Abraham's seed and have never been any man's servant: why do you say,
You will become free?

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And this was the answer Jesus gave them:
Truly I say to you, Everyone who does evil is the servant of sin.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Now the servant does not go on living in
the house for ever, but the son does.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> If then the son makes you free, you will
be truly free.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> I am conscious that you are Abraham's
seed; but you have a desire to put me to death because my word has no
place in you.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> I say the things which I have seen in my
Father's house: and you do the things which come to you from your
father's house.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> In answer they said to him, Our father is
Abraham. Jesus said to them, If you were Abraham's children you would do
what Abraham did.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But now you have a desire to put me to
death, a man who has said to you what is true, as I had it from God:
Abraham did not do that.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> You are doing the works of your father.
They said to him, We are true sons of Abraham; we have one Father, who
is God.

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> Jesus said to them, If God was your
Father you would have love for me, because it was from God I came and am
here. I did not come of myself, but he sent me.

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> Why are my words not clear to you? It is
because your ears are shut to my teaching.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> You are the children of your father the
Evil One and it is your pleasure to do his desires. From the first he
was a taker of life; and he did not go in the true way because there is
no true thing in him. When he says what is false, it is natural to him,
for he is false and the father of what is false.

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> But because I say what is true, you have
no belief in me.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> Which of you is able truly to say that I
am a sinner? If I say what is true, why have you no belief in me?

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> He who is a child of God gives ear to the
words of God: your ears are not open to them because you are not from
God.

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> The Jews said to him in answer, Are we
not right in saying that you are of Samaria and have an evil spirit?

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> And this was the answer of Jesus: I have
not an evil spirit; but I give honour to my Father and you do not give
honour to me.

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> I, however, am not in search of glory for
myself: there is One who is searching for it and he is judge.

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> Truly I say to you, If a man keeps my
word he will never see death.

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> The Jews said to him, Now we are certain
that you have an evil spirit. Abraham is dead, and the prophets are
dead; and you say, If a man keeps my word he will never see death.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> Are you greater than our father Abraham,
who is dead? and the prophets are dead: who do you say that you are?

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> Jesus said in answer, If I take glory for
myself, my glory is nothing: it is my Father who gives me glory, of whom
you say that he is your God.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> You have no knowledge of him, but I have
knowledge of him; and if I said I have no knowledge of him I would be
talking falsely like you: but I have full knowledge of him, and I keep
his word.

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Your father Abraham was full of joy at
the hope of seeing my day: he saw it and was glad.

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> Then the Jews said to him, You are not
fifty years old; have you seen Abraham?

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you,
Before Abraham came into being, I am.

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> So they took up stones to send at him:
but Jesus got secretly out of their way and went out of the Temple.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And when he went on his way, he saw a man
blind from birth.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And his disciples put a question to him,
saying, Master, was it because of this man's sin, or the sin of his
father and mother, that he has been blind from birth?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Jesus said in answer, It was not because of
his sin, or because of his father's or mother's; it was so that the
works of God might be seen openly in him.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> While it is day we have to do the works of
him who sent me: the night comes when no work may be done.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> As long as I am in the world, I am the
light of the world.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Having said these words, he put earth,
mixed with water from his mouth, on the man's eyes,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And said to him, Go and make yourself clean
in the bath of Siloam (the sense of the name is, Sent). So he went away
and, after washing, came back able to see.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Then the neighbours and others who had seen
him before in the street, with his hand out for money, said, Is not this
the man who got money from people?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Some said, It is he: others said, No, but
he is like him. He said, I am he.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> So they said to him, How then were your
eyes made open?

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> His answer was: The man who is named
Jesus put earth mixed with water on my eyes, and said to me, Go and make
yourself clean in Siloam: so I went away and, after washing, am now able
to see.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And they said to him, Where is he? His
answer was: I have no knowledge.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> They took him before the Pharisees--this
man who had been blind.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Now the day on which the earth was mixed
by Jesus and the man's eyes were made open was the Sabbath.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So the Pharisees put more questions to
him about how his eyes had been made open. And he said to them, He put
earth on my eyes, and I had a wash and am able to see.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Then some of the Pharisees said, That man
has not come from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath. Others said,
How is it possible for a sinner to do such signs? So there was a
division among them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Again they said to the blind man, What
have you to say about him for opening your eyes? And he said, He is a
prophet.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Now the Jews had no belief in the
statement that he had been blind and was now able to see, till they sent
for the father and mother of the man whose eyes had been made open,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And put the question to them, saying, Is
this your son, of whom you say that he was blind at birth? how is it
then that he is now able to see?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> In answer his father and mother said, We
are certain that this is our son and that he was blind at birth:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> But how it is he is now able to see, or
who made his eyes open, we are not able to say: put the question to him;
he is old enough to give an answer for himself.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> They said this because of their fear of
the Jews: for the Jews had come to an agreement that if any man said
that Jesus was the Christ he would be put out of the Synagogue.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> That was the reason why they said, He is
old enough; put the question to him.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So they sent a second time for the man
who had been blind and they said to him, Give glory to God: it is clear
to us that this man is a sinner.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> He said in answer, I have no knowledge if
he is a sinner or not, but one thing I am certain about; I was blind,
and now I see.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Then they said to him, What did he do to
you? how did he give you the use of your eyes?

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> His answer was: I have said it before,
but your ears were shut: why would you have me say it again? is it your
desire to become his disciples?

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And they were angry with him and said,
You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> We are certain that God gave his word to
Moses: but as for this man, we have no knowledge where he comes from.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> The man said in answer, Why, here is a
strange thing! You have no knowledge where he comes from though he gave
me the use of my eyes.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> We have knowledge that God does not give
ear to sinners, but if any man is a worshipper of God and does his
pleasure, to him God's ears are open.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> In all the years nobody has ever before
seen the eyes of a man blind from birth made open.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> If this man did not come from God he
would be unable to do anything.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Their answer was: You came to birth
through sin; do you make yourself our teacher? And they put him out of
the Synagogue.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> It came to the ears of Jesus that they
had put him out, and meeting him he said, Have you faith in the Son of
man?

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> He said in answer, And who is he, Lord?
Say, so that I may have faith in him.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Jesus said to him, You have seen him; it
is he who is talking to you.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And he said, Lord, I have faith. And he
gave him worship.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Jesus said, I came into this world to
be a judge, so that those who do not see may see, and those who see may
become blind.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> These words came to the ears of the
Pharisees who were with him and they said to him, Are we, then, blind?

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> Jesus said to them, If you were blind you
would have no sin: but now that you say, We see; your sin is there
still.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Truly I say to you, He who does not go
through the door into the place where the sheep are kept, but gets in by
some other way, is a thief and an outlaw.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> He who goes in by the door is the keeper
of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> The porter lets him in; and the sheep
give ear to his voice; he says over the names of the sheep, and takes
them out.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> When he has got them all out, he goes
before them, and the sheep go after him, for they have knowledge of his
voice.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> They will not go after another who is not
their keeper, but will go from him in flight, because his voice is
strange to them.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> In this Jesus was teaching them in the
form of a story: but what he said was not clear to them.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> So Jesus said again, Truly I say to you,
I am the door of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> All who came before me are thieves and
outlaws: but the sheep did not give ear to them.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> I am the door: if any man goes in through
me he will have salvation, and will go in and go out, and will get food.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> The thief comes only to take the sheep
and to put them to death: he comes for their destruction: I have come so
that they may have life and have it in greater measure.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> I am the good keeper of sheep: the good
keeper gives his life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> He who is a servant, and not the keeper
or the owner of the sheep, sees the wolf coming and goes in flight, away
from the sheep; and the wolf comes down on them and sends them in all
directions:

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Because he is a servant he has no
interest in the sheep.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> I am the good keeper; I have knowledge
of my sheep, and they have knowledge of me,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Even as the Father has knowledge of me
and I of the Father; and I am giving my life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And I have other sheep which are not of
this field: I will be their guide in the same way, and they will give
ear to my voice, so there will be one flock and one keeper.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For this reason am I loved by the
Father, because I give up my life so that I may take it again.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> No one takes it away from me; I give it
up of myself. I have power to give it up, and I have power to take it
again. These orders I have from my Father.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> There was a division again among the
Jews because of these words.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And a number of them said, He has an
evil spirit and is out of his mind; why do you give ear to him?

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Others said, These are not the words of
one who has an evil spirit. Is it possible for an evil spirit to make
blind people see?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Then came the feast of the opening of
the Temple in Jerusalem: it was winter;

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus was walking in the Temple, in
Solomon's covered way.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Then the Jews came round him, saying,
how long are you going to keep us in doubt? If you are the Christ, say
so clearly.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Jesus said in answer, I have said it
and you have no belief: the works which I do in my Father's name, these
give witness about me.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But you have no belief because you are
not of my sheep.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> My sheep give ear to my voice, and I
have knowledge of them, and they come after me:

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And I give them eternal life; they will
never come to destruction, and no one will ever take them out of my
hand.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> That which my Father has given to me
has more value than all; and no one is able to take anything out of the
Father's hand.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> I and my Father are one.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Then the Jews took up stones again to
send at him.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Jesus said to them in answer, I have
let you see a number of good works from the Father; for which of those
works are you stoning me?

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> This was their answer: We are not
stoning you for a good work but for evil words; because being a man you
make yourself God.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> In answer, Jesus said, Is there not a
saying in your law, I said, You are gods?

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> If he said they were gods, to whom the
word of God came (and the Writings may not be broken),

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Do you say of him whom the Father made
holy and sent into the world, Your words are evil; because I said, I am
God's Son?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> If I am not doing the works of my
Father, do not have belief in me;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But if I am doing them, then have
belief in the works even if you have no belief in me; so that you may
see clearly and be certain that the Father is in me and I am in the
Father.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> Then again they made an attempt to take
him; but he got away from them.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> And he went again to the other side of
the Jordan, to the place where John first gave baptism; and he was there
for a time.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And a great number of people came to
him, saying, John did no sign: but everything John said of this man was
true.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And a number came to have faith in him
there.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now a certain man named Lazarus was ill;
he was of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> (The Mary whose brother Lazarus was ill,
was the Mary who put perfumed oil on the Lord and made his feet dry with
her hair.)

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> So the sisters sent to him, saying, Lord,
your dear friend is ill.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> When this came to his ears, Jesus said,
The end of this disease is not death, but the glory of God, so that the
Son of God may have glory because of it.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Now Jesus had love in his heart for
Martha and her sister and Lazarus.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> So when the news came to him that Lazarus
was ill, he did not go from the place where he was for two days.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then after that time he said to his
disciples, Let us go into Judaea again.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The disciples said to him, Master, the
Jews were attempting only the other day to have you stoned, and are you
going back there again?

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then Jesus said in answer, Are there not
twelve hours in the day? A man may go about in the day without falling,
because he sees the light of this world.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> But if a man goes about in the night,
he may have a fall because the light is not in him.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> These things said he: and after that he
said to them, Lazarus our friend is at rest; but I go so that I may make
him come out of his sleep.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Then his disciples said to him, Lord,
if he is resting he will get well.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Jesus, however, was talking of his
death: but they had the idea that he was talking about taking rest in
sleep.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Then Jesus said to them clearly,
Lazarus is dead.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And because of you I am glad I was not
there, so that you may have faith; but let us go to him.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Then Thomas, who was named Didymus,
said to the other disciples, Let us go so that we may be with him in
death.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Now when Jesus came, he made the
discovery that Lazarus had been put into the earth four days before.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Now Bethany was near to Jerusalem,
about two miles away;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And a number of Jews had come to Martha
and Mary to give them comfort about their brother.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> When Martha had the news that Jesus was
on the way, she went out to him, but Mary did not go from the house.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Then Martha said to Jesus, Lord, if you
had been here my brother would not be dead.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But I am certain that, even now,
whatever request you make to God, God will give it to you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Jesus said to her, Your brother will
come to life again.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Martha said to him, I am certain that
he will come to life again when all come back from the dead at the last
day.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Jesus said to her, I am myself that day
and that life; he who has faith in me will have life even if he is dead;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And no one who is living and has faith
in me will ever see death. Is this your faith?

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> She said to him, Yes, Lord: my faith is
that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And having said this, she went away and
said secretly to her sister Mary, The Master is here and has sent for
you.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Mary, hearing this, got up quickly
and went to him.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Now Jesus had not at this time come
into the town, but was still in the place where Martha had seen him.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Then the Jews who were with her in the
house, comforting her, when they saw Mary get up quickly and go out,
went after her in the belief that she was going to the place of the dead
and would be weeping there.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> When Mary came to where Jesus was and
saw him, she went down at his feet, saying, Lord, if you had been here
my brother would not be dead.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And when Jesus saw her weeping, and saw
the Jews weeping who came with her, his spirit was moved and he was
troubled,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> And said, Where have you put him? They
said, Come and see, Lord.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And Jesus himself was weeping.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> So the Jews said, See how dear he was
to him!

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> But some of them said, This man, who
made open the eyes of the blind man, was he not able to keep his friend
from death?

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> So Jesus, deeply troubled in heart,
came to the place of the dead. It was a hole in the rock, and a stone
was over the opening.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> Jesus said, Take away the stone.
Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said, Lord, by this time the
body will be smelling, for he has been dead four days.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Jesus said to her, Did I not say to you
that if you had faith you would see the glory of God?

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> So they took away the stone. And Jesus,
looking up to heaven, said, Father, I give praise to you for hearing me.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> I was certain that your ears are at all
times open to me, but I said it because of these who are here, so that
they may see that you sent me.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> Then he said in a loud voice, Lazarus,
come out!

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> And he who was dead came out, with
linen bands folded tightly about his hands and feet, and a cloth about
his face. Jesus said to them, Make him free and let him go.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> Then a number of the Jews who had come
to Mary and had seen the things which Jesus did had belief in him.

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> But some of them went to the Pharisees
with the news of what Jesus had done.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> Then the high priests and the Pharisees
had a meeting and said, What are we doing? This man is doing a number of
signs.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> If we let him go on in this way,
everybody will have belief in him and the Romans will come and take away
our place and our nation.

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> But one of them, Caiaphas, who was high
priest that year, said to them, You have no knowledge of anything;

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> You do not see that it is in your
interest for one man to be put to death for the people, so that all the
nation may not come to destruction.

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> He did not say this of himself, but
being the high priest that year he said, as a prophet, that Jesus would
be put to death for the nation;

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> And not for that nation only, but for
the purpose of uniting in one body the children of God all over the
world.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> And from that day they took thought
together how to put him to death.

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> So Jesus no longer went about publicly
among the Jews, but went from there into the country near to the waste
land, to a town named Ephraim, where he was for some time with the
disciples.

<span id="an_11:55">11:55</span> Now the Passover of the Jews was near,
and numbers of people went up from the country to Jerusalem to make
themselves clean before the Passover.

<span id="an_11:56">11:56</span> They were looking for Jesus and saying
to one another while they were in the Temple, What is your opinion? Will
he not come to the feast?

<span id="an_11:57">11:57</span> Now the chief priests and the Pharisees
had given orders that if anyone had knowledge where he was, he was to
give them word, so that they might take him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus
came to Bethany where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had made to come back from
the dead.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> So they made him a meal there, and he was
waited on by Martha, and Lazarus was among those who were seated with
him at table.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Then Mary, taking a pound of perfumed oil
of great value, put it on the feet of Jesus and made them dry with her
hair: and the house became full of the smell of the perfume.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot
(who was to give him up), said,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Why was not this perfume traded for three
hundred pence, and the money given to the poor?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> (He said this, not because he had any
love for the poor; but because he was a thief, and, having the
money-bag, took for himself what was put into it.)

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then Jesus said, Let her be. Let her keep
what she has for the day of my death.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> The poor you have ever with you, but me
you have not for ever.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Then a great number of the Jews had news
that he was there: and they came, not only because of Jesus, but so that
they might see Lazarus who had been dead and to whom he had given life.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Now there was talk among the chief
priests of putting Lazarus to death;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> For because of him a great number of
the Jews went away and had belief in Jesus.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The day after, a great number of people
who were there for the feast, when they had the news that Jesus was
coming to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Took branches of palm-trees and went
out to him, crying, A blessing on him who comes in the name of the Lord,
the King of Israel!

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And Jesus saw a young ass and took his
seat on it; as the Writings say,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Have no fear, daughter of Zion: see
your King is coming, seated on a young ass.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> (These things were not clear to his
disciples at first: but when Jesus had been lifted up into his glory,
then it came to their minds that these things in the Writings were about
him and that they had been done to him.)

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Now the people who were with him when
his voice came to Lazarus in the place of the dead, and gave him life
again, had been talking about it.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And that was the reason the people went
out to him, because it had come to their ears that he had done this
sign.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Then the Pharisees said one to another,
You see, you are unable to do anything: the world has gone after him.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now there were some Greeks among the
people who had come up to give worship at the feast:

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> They came to Philip, who was of
Beth-saida in Galilee, and made a request, saying, Sir, we have a desire
to see Jesus.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Philip went and gave word of it to
Andrew; and Andrew went with Philip to Jesus.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And Jesus said to them in answer, The
hour of the glory of the Son of man has come.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Truly I say to you, If a seed of grain
does not go into the earth and come to an end, it is still a seed and no
more; but through its death it gives much fruit.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> He who is in love with life will have
it taken from him; and he who has no care for his life in this world
will keep it for ever and ever.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If any man is my servant, let him come
after me; and where I am, there will my servant be. If any man becomes
my servant, my Father will give him honour.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Now is my soul troubled; and what am I
to say? Father, keep me from this hour. No: for this purpose have I come
to this hour.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Father, give glory to your name. Then
there came a voice out of heaven, saying, I have given it glory, and I
will give it glory again.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Hearing the sound, a number of people
who were there said that it was thunder: others said, An angel was
talking to him.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Jesus said in answer, This voice came
not for me but for you.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Now is this world to be judged: now
will the ruler of this world be sent out.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And I, if I am lifted up from the
earth, will make all men come to me.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> (This he said, pointing to the sort of
death he would have.)

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> Then the people in answer said to him,
The law says that the Christ will have life without end: how say you
then that it is necessary for the Son of man to be lifted up? Who is
this Son of man?

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> Jesus said to them, For a little time
longer the light will be among you; while you have the light go on
walking in it, so that the dark may not overtake you: one walking in the
dark has no knowledge of where he is going.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> In so far as you have the light, put
your faith in the light so that you may become sons of light. With these
words Jesus went away and for a time was not seen again by them.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> But though he had done such a number of
signs before them, they still had no belief in him:

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> So that the words of the prophet Isaiah
might come true, when he said, Lord, who has any belief in our
preaching? and the arm of the Lord, to whom has it been unveiled?

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> For this reason they were unable to
have belief, because Isaiah said again,

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> He has made their eyes blind, and their
hearts hard; for fear that they might see with their eyes and get
knowledge with their hearts, and be changed, and I might make them well.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> (Isaiah said these words because he saw
his glory. His words were about him.)

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> However, a number even of the rulers
had belief in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not say so
openly for fear that they might be shut out from the Synagogue:

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> For the praise of men was dearer to
them than the approval of God.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Then Jesus said with a loud voice, He
who has faith in me, has faith not in me, but in him who sent me.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> And he who sees me, sees him who sent
me.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> I have come as a light into the world,
so that no one who has faith in me will go on living in the dark.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And if any man gives ear to my words
and does not keep them, I am not his judge: I did not come to be judge
of the world but to give salvation to the world.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> He who puts me on one side and does not
take my words to heart, is not without a judge: the word which I have
said will be his judge on the last day.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> For I have not said it on my authority,
but the Father who sent me gave me orders what to say and how to say it.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> And I have knowledge that his order is
eternal life: so that the things which I say, I say them even as the
Father says them to me.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now before the feast of the Passover, it
was clear to Jesus that the time had come for him to go away from this
world to the Father. Having once had love for those in the world who
were his, his love for them went on to the end.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> So while a meal was going on, the Evil
One having now put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to
be false to him,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Jesus, being conscious that the Father
had put everything into his hands, and that he came from God and was
going to God,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Got up from table, put off his robe and
took a cloth and put it round him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Then he put water into a basin and was
washing the feet of the disciples and drying them with the cloth which
was round him.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So he came to Simon Peter. Peter said,
Lord, are my feet to be washed by you?

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And Jesus, answering, said to him, What I
do is not clear to you now, but it will be clear to you in time to come.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Peter said, I will never let my feet be
washed by you, never. Jesus said in answer, If I do not make you clean
you have no part with me.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Simon Peter said to him, Lord, not my
feet only, but my hands and my head.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Jesus said to him, He who is bathed has
need only to have his feet washed and then he is clean all over: and
you, my disciples, are clean, but not all of you.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> (He had knowledge who was false to him;
that is why he said, You are not all clean.)

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then, after washing their feet and
putting on his robe again, he took his seat and said to them, Do you see
what I have done to you?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> You give me the name of Master and
Lord: and you are right; that is what I am.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> If then I, the Lord and the Master,
have made your feet clean, it is right for you to make one another's
feet clean.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> I have given you an example, so that
you may do what I have done to you.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Truly I say to you, A servant is not
greater than his lord; and he who is sent is not greater than the one
who sent him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> If these things are clear to you, happy
are you if you do them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> I am not talking of you all: I have
knowledge of my true disciples, but things are as they are, so that the
Writings may come true, The foot of him who takes bread with me is
lifted up against me.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> From this time forward, I give you
knowledge of things before they come about, so that when they come about
you may have belief that I am he.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Truly I say to you, He who takes to his
heart anyone whom I send, takes me to his heart; and he who so takes me,
takes him who sent me.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> When Jesus had said this he was
troubled in spirit, and gave witness, saying, Truly I say to you, that
one of you will be false to me.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Then the eyes of the disciples were
turned on one another, in doubt as to whom he had in mind.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> There was at table one of his
disciples, the one dear to Jesus, resting his head on Jesus' breast.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Making a sign to him, Simon Peter said,
Who is it he is talking about?

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> He, then, resting his head on Jesus'
breast, said to him, Lord, who is it?

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> This was the answer Jesus gave: It is
the one to whom I will give this bit of bread after I have put it in the
vessel. Then he took the bit of bread, put it into the vessel, and gave
it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And when Judas took the bread Satan
went into him. Then Jesus said to him, Do quickly what you have to do.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Now it was not clear to anyone at table
why he said this to him.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Some were of the opinion that because
Judas kept the money-bag Jesus said to him, Get the things we have need
of for the feast; or, that he was to give something to the poor.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> So Judas, having taken the bit of
bread, straight away went out: and it was night.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Then when he had gone out, Jesus said,
Now is glory given to the Son of man, and God is given glory in him.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> If God is given glory in him, God will
give him glory in himself, and will give him glory even now.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> My dear children, I am only to be with
you a little longer. Then you will be looking for me: and as I said to
the Jews, so now I say to you, Where I am going you may not come.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> I give you a new law: Have love one for
another; even as I have had love for you, so are you to have love one
for another.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> By this it will be clear to all men
that you are my disciples, if you have love one for another.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Simon Peter said to him, Lord, where
are you going? Jesus said in answer, Where I am going you may not come
with me now, but you will come later.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> Peter said to him, Why may I not come
with you even now? I will give up my life for you.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Jesus said in answer, Will you give up
your life for me? Truly I say to you, Before the cry of the cock you
will have said three times that you are not my disciple.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Let not your heart be troubled: have
faith in God and have faith in me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> In my Father's house are rooms enough; if
it was not so, would I have said that I am going to make ready a place
for you?

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And if I go and make ready a place for
you, I will come back again and will take you to be with me, so that you
may be where I am.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And you all have knowledge of where I am
going, and of the way to it.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Thomas said, Lord, we have no knowledge
of where you are going; how may we have knowledge of the way?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Jesus said to him, I am the true and
living way: no one comes to the Father but by me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> If you had knowledge of me, you would
have knowledge of my Father: you have knowledge of him now and have seen
him.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Philip said to him, Lord, let us see the
Father, and we have need of nothing more.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Jesus said to him, Philip, have I been
with you all this time, and still you have no knowledge of me? He who
has seen me has seen the Father. Why do you say, Let us see the Father?

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Have you not faith that I am in the
Father and the Father is in me? The words which I say to you, I say not
from myself: but the Father who is in me all the time does his works.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Have faith that I am in the Father and
that the Father is in me: at least, have faith in me because of what I
do.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Truly I say to you, He who puts his
faith in me will do the very works which I do, and he will do greater
things than these, because I am going to my Father.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And whatever request you make in my
name, that I will do, so that the Father may have glory in the Son.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If you make any request to me in my
name, I will do it.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If you have love for me, you will keep
my laws.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And I will make prayer to the Father
and he will give you another Helper to be with you for ever,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Even the Spirit of true knowledge. That
Spirit the world is not able to take to its heart because it sees him
not and has no knowledge of him: but you have knowledge of him, because
he is ever with you and will be in you.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I will not let you be without a friend:
I am coming to you.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> A little time longer, and the world
will see me no more; but you will see me; and you will be living because
I am living.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> At that time it will be clear to you
that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I in you.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He who has my laws and keeps them, he
it is who has love for me: and he who has love for me will be loved by
my Father, and I will have love for him and will let myself be seen
clearly by him.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, How
is it that you will let yourself be seen clearly by us and not by the
world?

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> Jesus said to him in answer, If anyone
has love for me, he will keep my words: and he will be dear to my
Father; and we will come to him and make our living-place with him.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> He who has no love for me does not keep
my words; and the word which you are hearing is not my word but the
Father's who sent me.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> I have said all this to you while I am
still with you.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom
the Father will send in my name, will be your teacher in all things and
will put you in mind of everything I have said to you.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> May peace be with you; my peace I give
to you: I give it not as the world gives. Let not your heart be
troubled; let it be without fear.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Keep in mind how I said to you, I go
away and come to you again. If you had love for me you would be glad,
because I am going to the Father: for the Father is greater than I.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And now I have given you word of it
before it comes, so that, when it comes, you may have faith.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> After this I will not say much to you,
because the ruler of this world comes: and he has no power over me;

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But he comes so that the world may see
that I have love for the Father, and that I am doing as I am ordered by
the Father. Get up, and let us go.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> I am the true vine and my Father is the
gardener.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> He takes away every branch in me which
has no fruit, and every branch which has fruit he makes clean, so that
it may have more fruit.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> You are clean, even now, through the
teaching which I have given you.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Be in me at all times as I am in you. As
the branch is not able to give fruit of itself, if it is not still on
the vine, so you are not able to do so if you are not in me.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> I am the vine, you are the branches: he
who is in me at all times as I am in him, gives much fruit, because
without me you are able to do nothing.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> If a man does not keep himself in me, he
becomes dead and is cut off like a dry branch; such branches are taken
up and put in the fire and burned.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If you are in me at all times, and my
words are in you, then anything for which you make a request will be
done for you.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Here is my Father's glory, in that you
give much fruit and so are my true disciples.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Even as the Father has given me his love,
so I have given my love to you: be ever in my love.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> If you keep my laws, you will be ever
in my love, even as I have kept my Father's laws, and am ever in his
love.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> I have said these things to you so that
I may have joy in you and so that your joy may be complete.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> This is the law I give you: Have love
one for another, even as I have love for you.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Greater love has no man than this, that
a man gives up his life for his friends.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> You are my friends, if you do what I
give you orders to do.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> No longer do I give you the name of
servants; because a servant is without knowledge of what his master is
doing: I give you the name of friends, because I have given you
knowledge of all the things which my Father has said to me.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> You did not take me for yourselves, but
I took you for myself; and I gave you the work of going about and
producing fruit which will be for ever; so that whatever request you
make to the Father in my name he may give it to you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> So this is my law for you: Have love
one for another.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> If you are hated by the world, keep in
mind that I was hated by the world before you.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If you were of the world, you would be
loved by the world: but because you are not of the world, but I have
taken you out of the world, you are hated by the world.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Keep in mind the words I said to you, A
servant is not greater than his lord. If they were cruel to me, they
will be cruel to you; if they kept my words, they will keep yours.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> They will do all this to you because of
my name--because they have no knowledge of him who sent me.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> If I had not come and been their
teacher they would have had no sin: but now they have no reason to give
for their sin.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He who has hate for me has hate for my
Father.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> If I had not done among them the works
which no other man ever did, they would have had no sin: but now they
have seen, and they have had hate in their hearts for me and my Father.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> This comes about so that the writing in
their law may be made true, Their hate for me was without cause.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> When the Helper comes, whom I will send
to you from the Father even the Spirit of true knowledge who comes from
the Father--he will give witness about me;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And you, in addition, will give witness
because you have been with me from the first.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> I have said these things to you so that
you may not be in doubt.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> They will put you out of the Synagogues:
yes, the time is coming when whoever puts you to death will have the
belief that he is doing God's pleasure.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> They will do these things to you because
they have not had knowledge of the Father or of me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I have said these things to you so that
when the time comes, what I have said may come to your mind. I did not
say them to you at the first, because then I was still with you.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But now I am going to him who sent me;
and not one of you says to me, Where are you going?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But your hearts are full of sorrow
because I have said these things.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But what I am saying is true: my going is
for your good: for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you;
but if I go, I will send him to you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And he, when he comes, will make the
world conscious of sin, and of righteousness, and of being judged:

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Of sin, because they have not faith in
me;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Of righteousness, because I go to the
Father and you will see me no more;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Of being judged, because the ruler of
this world has been judged.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I have still much to say to you, but
you are not strong enough for it now.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> However, when he, the Spirit of true
knowledge, has come, he will be your guide into all true knowledge: for
his words will not come from himself, but whatever has come to his
hearing, that he will say: and he will make clear to you the things to
come.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He will give me glory, because he will
take of what is mine, and make it clear to you.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Everything which the Father has is
mine: that is why I say, He will take of what is mine and will make it
clear to you.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> After a little time you will see me no
longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> So some of the disciples said one to
another, What is this he is saying, After a little time, you will see me
no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me? and, I
am going to the Father?

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> So they said again and again, What is
this he is saying, A little time? His words are not clear to us.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Jesus saw that they had a desire to put
the question to him, so he said to them, Is this what you are
questioning one with another, why I said, After a little time, you will
see me no longer; and then again, after a little time, you will see me?

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Truly I say to you, You will be weeping
and sorrowing, but the world will be glad: you will be sad, but your
sorrow will be turned into joy.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> When a woman is about to give birth she
has sorrow, because her hour is come; but when she has given birth to
the child, the pain is put out of her mind by the joy that a man has
come into the world.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> So you have sorrow now: but I will see
you again, and your hearts will be glad, and no one will take away your
joy.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And on that day you will put no
questions to me. Truly I say to you, Whatever request you make to the
Father, he will give it to you in my name.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Up to now you have made no request in
my name: do so, and it will be answered, so that your hearts may be full
of joy.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> All this I have said to you in veiled
language: but the time is coming when I will no longer say things in
veiled language but will give you knowledge of the Father clearly.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> In that day you will make requests in
my name: and I do not say that I will make prayer to the Father for you,

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> For the Father himself gives his love
to you, because you have given your love to me and have had faith that I
came from God.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> I came out from the Father and have
come into the world: again, I go away from the world and go to the
Father.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> His disciples said, Now you are talking
clearly and not in veiled language.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> Now we are certain that you have
knowledge of all things and have no need for anyone to put questions to
you: through this we have faith that you came from God.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Jesus made answer, Have you faith now?

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> See, a time is coming, yes, it is now
here, when you will go away in all directions, every man to his house,
and I will be by myself: but I am not by myself, because the Father is
with me.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> I have said all these things to you so
that in me you may have peace. In the world you have trouble: but take
heart! I have overcome the world.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Jesus said these things; then, lifting
his eyes to heaven, he said, Father, the time has now come; give glory
to your Son, so that the Son may give glory to you:

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Even as you gave him authority over all
flesh, to give eternal life to all those whom you have given to him.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And this is eternal life: to have
knowledge of you, the only true God, and of him whom you have sent, even
Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> I have given you glory on the earth,
having done all the work which you gave me to do.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And now, Father, let me have glory with
you, even that glory which I had with you before the world was.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> I have given knowledge of your name to
the men whom you gave me out of the world: yours they were, and you gave
them to me, and they have kept your words.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Now it is clear to them that whatever you
have given to me comes from you:

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Because I have given them the words which
you gave to me; and they have taken them to heart, and have certain
knowledge that I came from you, and they have faith that you sent me.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> My prayer is for them: my prayer is not
for the world, but for those whom you have given to me, because they are
yours

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> (All mine are yours, and yours are
mine) and I have glory in them.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And now I will be no longer in the
world, but they are in the world and I come to you. Holy Father, keep
them in your name which you have given to me, so that they may be one
even as we are one.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> While I was with them I kept them safe
in your name which you have given to me: I took care of them and not one
of them has come to destruction, but only the son of destruction, so
that the Writings might come true.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And now I come to you; and these things
I say in the world so that they may have my joy complete in them.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I have given your word to them; and
they are hated by the world, because they are not of the world, even as
I am not of the world.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> My prayer is not that you will take
them out of the world, but that you will keep them from the Evil One.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> They are not of the world any more than
I am of the world.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Make them holy by the true word: your
word is the true word.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Even as you have sent me into the
world, so I have sent them into the world.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And for them I make myself holy, so
that they may be made truly holy.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> My prayer is not for them only, but for
all who will have faith in me through their word;

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> May they all be one! Even as you,
Father, are in me and I am in you, so let them be in us, so that all men
may come to have faith that you sent me.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And the glory which you have given to
me I have given to them, so that they may be one even as we are one;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> I in them, and you in me, so that they
may be made completely one, and so that it may become clear to all men
that you have sent me and that they are loved by you as I am loved by
you.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Father, it is my desire that these whom
you have given to me may be by my side where I am, so that they may see
my glory which you have given to me, because you had love for me before
the world came into being.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Father of righteousness, I have
knowledge of you, though the world has not; and to these it is clear
that you sent me;

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And I have given to them knowledge of
your name, and will give it, so that the love which you have for me may
be in them and I in them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> When Jesus had said these words he went
out with his disciples over the stream Kedron to a garden, into which he
went with his disciples.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Judas, who was false to him, had
knowledge of the place because Jesus went there frequently with his
disciples.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> So Judas, getting a band of armed men and
police from the chief priests and Pharisees, went there with lights and
with arms.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Then Jesus, having knowledge of
everything which was coming on him, went forward and said to them, Who
are you looking for?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Their answer was, Jesus the Nazarene.
Jesus said, I am he. And Judas, who was false to him, was there at their
side.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And when he said to them, I am he, they
went back, falling to the earth.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> So again he put the question to them, Who
are you looking for? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Jesus made answer, I have said that I am
he; if you are looking for me, let these men go away.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> (He said this so that his words might
come true, I have kept safe all those whom you gave to me.)

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, took
it out and gave the high priest's servant a blow, cutting off his right
ear. The servant's name was Malchus.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Then Jesus said to Peter, Put back your
sword: am I not to take the cup which my Father has given to me?

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Then the band and the chief captain and
the police took Jesus and put cords round him.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> They took him first to Annas, because
Annas was the father-in-law of Caiaphas who was the high priest that
year.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> It was Caiaphas who had said to the
Jews that it was in their interest for one man to be put to death for
the people.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Simon Peter went after Jesus with
another disciple. Now that disciple was a friend of the high priest and
he went in with Jesus into the house of the high priest;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But Peter was kept outside at the door.
Then this other disciple, who was a friend of the high priest, came out
and had a word with the girl who kept the door, and took Peter in.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then the girl who was the door-keeper
said to Peter, Are you not one of this man's disciples? In answer he
said, I am not.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Now the servants and the police had
made a fire of coals because it was cold; they were warming themselves
in front of it and Peter was there with them, warming himself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Then the high priest put questions to
Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Jesus made answer, I said things openly
to the world at all times; I have given my teaching in the Synagogues
and in the Temple to which all the Jews come; and I have said nothing
secretly.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Why are you questioning me? put
questions to my hearers about what I have said to them: they have
knowledge of what I said.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When he said this, one of the police by
his side gave him a blow with his open hand, saying, Do you give such an
answer to the high priest?

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Jesus said in answer, If I have said
anything evil, give witness to the evil: but if I said what is true, why
do you give me blows?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Then Annas sent him chained to
Caiaphas, the high priest.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> But Simon Peter was still there warming
himself by the fire. They said to him, Are you not one of his disciples?
He said, No, I am not.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> One of the servants of the high priest,
a relation of him whose ear had been cut off by Peter, said, Did I not
see you with him in the garden?

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Then again Peter said, No. And straight
away a cock gave its cry.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> So they took Jesus from the house of
Caiaphas to the Praetorium. It was early. They themselves did not go
into the Praetorium, so that they might not become unclean, but might
take the Passover.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> So Pilate came out to them and put the
question: What have you to say against this man?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> They said to him in answer, If the man
was not a wrongdoer we would not have given him up to you.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Then Pilate said to them, Take him
yourselves and let him be judged by your law. But the Jews said to him,
We have no right to put any man to death.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> (That the word of Jesus might come
true, pointing to the sort of death he would have.)

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Then Pilate went back into the
Praetorium and sent for Jesus and said to him, Are you the King of the
Jews?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Jesus made answer, Do you say this of
yourself, or did others say it about me?

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> Pilate said, Am I a Jew? Your nation
and the chief priests have given you into my hands: what have you done?

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> Jesus said in answer, My kingdom is not
of this world: if my kingdom was of this world, my disciples would have
made a good fight to keep me out of the hands of the Jews: but my
kingdom is not here.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Then Pilate said to him, Are you then a
king? Jesus made answer, You say that I am a king. For this purpose was
I given birth, and for this purpose I came into the world, that I might
give witness to what is true. Every lover of what is true gives ear to
my voice.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Pilate said to him, True? what is true?
Having said this he went out again to the Jews and said to them, I see
no wrong in him.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> But every year you make a request to me
to let a prisoner go free at the Passover. Is it your desire that I let
the King of the Jews go free?

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> Then again they gave a loud cry, Not
this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was an outlaw.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Then Pilate took Jesus and had him
whipped with cords.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And the men of the army made a crown of
thorns and put it on his head, and they put a purple robe on him.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And they kept coming and saying, Long
life to the King of the Jews! And they gave him blows with their hands.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Pilate went out again and said to
them, See, I let him come out to you to make it clear to you that I see
no wrong in him.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Then Jesus came out with the crown of
thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate said to them, Here is the man!

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> So when the chief priests and the police
saw him they gave a loud cry, To the cross! to the cross! Pilate said to
them, Take him yourselves and put him on the cross: I see no crime in
him.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the Jews made answer, We have a law,
and by that law it is right for him to be put to death because he said
he was the Son of God.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> When this saying came to Pilate's ears
his fear became greater;

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he went again into the Praetorium and
said to Jesus, Where do you come from? But Jesus gave him no answer.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Then Pilate said to him, You say
nothing to me? is it not clear to you that I have power to let you go
free and power to put you to death on the cross?

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Jesus gave this answer: You would have
no power at all over me if it was not given to you by God; so that he
who gave me up to you has the greater sin.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Hearing this, Pilate had a desire to
let him go free, but the Jews said in a loud voice, If you let this man
go, you are not Caesar's friend: everyone who makes himself a king goes
against Caesar.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> So when these words came to Pilate's
ear, he took Jesus out, seating himself in the judge's seat in a place
named in Hebrew, Gabbatha, or the Stone Floor.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> (It was the day when they made ready
for the Passover; and it was about the sixth hour.) And he said to the
Jews, There is your King!

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Then they gave a loud cry, Away with
him! away with him! to the cross! Pilate said to them, Am I to put your
King to death on the cross? The chief priests said in answer, We have no
king but Caesar.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> So then he gave him up to them to be
put to death on the cross. And they took Jesus away;

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And he went out with his cross on him
to the place which is named Dead Man's Head (in Hebrew, Golgotha):

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Where they put him on the cross with
two others, one on this side and one on that, and Jesus in the middle.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And Pilate put on the cross a statement
in writing. The writing was: JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The writing was seen by a number of the
Jews, for the place where Jesus was put to death on the cross was near
the town; and the writing was in Hebrew and Latin and Greek.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Then the chief priests of the Jews said
to Pilate, Do not put, The King of the Jews, but, He said, I am the King
of the Jews.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> But Pilate made answer, What I have put
in writing will not be changed.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And when Jesus was nailed to the cross,
the men of the army took his clothing, and made a division of it into
four parts, to every man a part, and they took his coat: now the coat
was without a join, made out of one bit of cloth.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> So they said among themselves, Let this
not be cut up, but let us put it to the decision of chance and see who
gets it. (They did this so that the Writings might come true, which say,
They made a distribution of my clothing among them, and my coat they put
to the decision of chance.) This was what the men of the army did.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Now by the side of the cross of Jesus
were his mother, and his mother's sister Mary, the wife of Cleopas, and
Mary Magdalene.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> So when Jesus saw his mother and the
disciple who was dear to him, he said to his mother, Mother, there is
your son!

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then he said to the disciple, There is
your mother! And from that hour the disciple took her to his house.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> After this, being conscious that all
things had now been done so that the Writings might come true, Jesus
said, Give me water.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Now there was a vessel ready, full of
bitter wine, and they put a sponge full of it on a stick and put it to
his mouth.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> So when Jesus had taken the wine he
said, All is done. And with his head bent he gave up his spirit.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> Now it was the day of getting ready for
the Passover, and so that the bodies might not be on the cross on the
Sabbath (because the day of that Sabbath was a great day), the Jews made
a request to Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might
be taken away.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> So the men of the army came, and the
legs of the first were broken and then of the other who was put to death
on the cross with Jesus:

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> But when they came to Jesus, they saw
that he was dead by this time, and so his legs were not broken;

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But one of the men made a wound in his
side with a spear, and straight away there came out blood and water.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And he who saw it has given witness
(and his witness is true; he is certain that what he says is true) so
that you may have belief.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> These things came about so that the
Writings might be true, No bone of his body will be broken.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And again another verse says, They will
see him who was wounded by their spears.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> After these things, Joseph of
Arimathaea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the
Jews, made a request to Pilate to let him take away the body of Jesus:
and Pilate said he might do so. So he went and took away his body.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> And Nicodemus came (he who had first
come to Jesus by night) with a roll of myrrh and aloes mixed, about a
hundred pounds.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> Then they took the body of Jesus,
folding linen about it with the spices, as is the way of the Jews when
they put the dead to rest.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> Now there was a garden near the cross,
and in the garden a new place for the dead in which no man had ever been
put.

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> So they put Jesus there, because it was
the Jews' day of getting ready for the Passover, and the place was near.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Now on the first day of the week, very
early, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene came to the place and saw
that the stone had been taken away from it.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then she went running to Simon Peter, and
to the other disciple who was loved by Jesus, and said to them, They
have taken away the Lord out of the place of the dead and we have no
knowledge where they have put him.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> So Peter and the other disciple went out
to the place of the dead.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> They went running together, and the other
disciple got in front of Peter and came first to the hole in the rock;

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And looking in, he saw the linen bands on
the earth; but he did not go in,

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Then Simon Peter came after him and went
into the hole in the rock; and he saw the linen bands on the earth,

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And the cloth, which had been round his
head, not with the linen bands but rolled up in a place by itself.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Then the other disciple who came there
first went in; and he saw and belief came to him.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> For at that time they had no knowledge
that the Writings said that he would have to come again from the dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> So then the disciples went away again
to their houses.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> But Mary was still there outside the
hole in the rock, weeping; and while she was weeping and looking into
the hole,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> She saw two angels in white seated
where the body of Jesus had been, one at the head and the other at the
feet.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> They said to her, Woman, why are you
weeping? She said to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I
have no knowledge where they have put him.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And then looking round, she saw Jesus
there, but had no idea that it was Jesus.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Jesus said to her, Woman, why are you
weeping? who are you looking for? She, taking him for the gardener, said
to him, Sir, if you have taken him away from here, say where you have
put him and I will take him away.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Jesus said to her, Mary! Turning, she
said to him in Hebrew, Rabboni! (which is to say, Master).

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Jesus said to her, Do not put your hand
on me, for I have not gone up to the Father: but go to my brothers and
say to them, I go up to my Father and your Father, to my God and your
God.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Mary Magdalene went with the news to
the disciples, and said she had seen the Lord and that he had said these
things to her.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> At evening on that day, the first day
of the week, when, for fear of the Jews, the doors were shut where the
disciples were, Jesus came among them and said to them, May peace be
with you!

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And when he had said this, he let them
see his hands and his side. Then the disciples were glad when they saw
the Lord.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And Jesus said to them again, May peace
be with you! As the Father sent me, even so I now send you.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And when he had said this, breathing on
them, he said to them, Let the Holy Spirit come on you:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Any to whom you give forgiveness, will
be made free from their sins; and any from whom you keep back
forgiveness, will still be in their sins.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Now Thomas, one of the twelve, named
Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> So the other disciples said to him, We
have seen the Lord. But he said to them, If I do not see in his hands
the print of the nails and put my finger into the print of the nails,
and if I do not put my hand into his side, I will never have belief.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And after eight days, his disciples
were again in the house and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were
shut, Jesus came, and taking his place in the middle of them, he said,
May peace be with you!

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Then he said to Thomas, Put out your
finger, and see my hands; and put your hand here into my side: and be no
longer in doubt but have belief.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Thomas said in answer, My Lord and
my God!

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Jesus said to him, Because you have
seen me you have belief: a blessing will be on those who have belief
though they have not seen me!

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> A number of other signs Jesus did
before his disciples which are not recorded in this book:

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> But these are recorded, so that you may
have faith that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and so that, having
this faith you may have life in his name.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> After these things Jesus let himself be
seen again by the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and it came about in
this way.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Simon Peter, Thomas named Didymus,
Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his
disciples were all together.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Simon Peter said to them, I am going
fishing. They said to him, And we will come with you. They went out and
got into the boat; but that night they took no fish.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Now very early in the morning Jesus was
there by the edge of the sea (though the disciples were not conscious
that it was Jesus).

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> So Jesus said to them, Children, have you
taken any fish? They made answer, No.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he said to them, Let down the net on
the right side of the boat and you will get some. So they put it in the
water and now they were not able to get it up again because of the great
number of fish.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> So the disciple who was dear to Jesus
said to Peter, It is the Lord! Hearing that it was the Lord, Peter put
his coat round him (because he was not clothed) and went into the sea.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the other disciples came in the
little boat (they were not far from land, only about two hundred cubits
off) pulling the net full of fish.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> When they got to land, they saw a fire of
coals there, with fish cooking on it, and bread.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Jesus said to them, Get some of the
fish which you have now taken.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> So Peter went to the boat and came back
pulling the net to land, full of great fish, a hundred and fifty-three;
and though there was such a number the net was not broken.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Jesus said to them, Come and take some
food. And all the disciples were in fear of putting the question, Who
are you? being conscious that it was the Lord.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Jesus came and took the bread and
gave it to them, and the fish in the same way.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Now this was the third time that Jesus
let himself be seen by the disciples after he had come back from the
dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Then when they had taken food, Jesus
said to Simon Peter, Simon, son of John, is your love for me greater
than the love of these others? He said to him, Yes, Lord; you are
certain of my love for you. He said to him, Then give my lambs food.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Again, a second time, he said to him,
Simon, son of John, have you any love for me? Yes, Lord, he said, you
are certain of my love for you. Then take care of my sheep, said Jesus.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He said to him a third time, Simon, son
of John, am I dear to you? Now Peter was troubled in his heart because
he put the question a third time, Am I dear to you? And he said to him,
Lord, you have knowledge of all things; you see that you are dear to me.
Jesus said to him, Then give my sheep food.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Truly I say to you, When you were
young, you made yourself ready and went wherever you had a desire to go:
but when you are old, you will put out your hands and another will make
you ready, and you will be taken where you have no desire to go.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Now this he said, pointing out the sort
of death by which he would give God glory. And after saying this, he
said to him, Come after me.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Then Peter, turning round, saw the
disciple who was dear to Jesus coming after them--the disciple who was
resting on his breast at the last meal, and said, Lord, who is it who
will be false to you?

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Seeing him, Peter said to Jesus, What
about this man?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Jesus said to him, If it is my desire
for him to be here till I come back, what is that to you? come yourself
after me.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> So this saying went about among the
brothers that this disciple would not undergo death: Jesus, however, did
not say that he would not undergo death, but, If it is my desire for him
to be here till I come back, what is that to you?

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> This is the disciple who gives witness
about these things and who put them in writing: and we have knowledge
that his witness is true.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And Jesus did such a number of other
things that, if every one was recorded, it is my opinion that even the
world itself is not great enough for the books there would be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts](act)
