[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](deu)  [Next](jdg) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Joshua

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now after the death of Moses, the servant
of the Lord, the word of the Lord came to Joshua, the son of Nun, Moses'
helper, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Moses my servant is dead; so now get up! Go
over Jordan, you and all this people, into the land which I am giving to
them, to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Every place on which you put your foot I
have given to you, as I said to Moses.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> From the waste land and this mountain
Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates, and all the
land of the Hittites to the Great Sea, in the west, will be your
country.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> While you are living, all will give way
before you: as I was with Moses, so I will be with you; I will not take
away my help from you or give you up.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Take heart and be strong; for you will give
to this people for their heritage the land which I gave by an oath to
their fathers.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Only take heart and be very strong; take
care to do all the law which Moses my servant gave you, not turning from
it to the right hand or to the left, so that you may do well in all your
undertakings.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Let this book of the law be ever on your
lips and in your thoughts day and night, so that you may keep with care
everything in it; then a blessing will be on all your way, and you will
do well.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Have I not given you your orders? Take
heart and be strong; have no fear and do not be troubled; for the Lord
your God is with you wherever you go,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Then Joshua gave their orders to those
who were in authority over the people, saying,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Go through the tents and give orders to
the people, saying, Get ready a store of food; for in three days you are
to go over this river Jordan and take for your heritage the land which
the Lord your God is giving you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And to the Reubenites and the Gadites and
the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua said,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Keep in mind what Moses, the servant of
the Lord, said to you, The Lord your God is sending you rest and will
give you this land.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Your wives, your little ones, and your
cattle will be kept here in the land which Moses gave you on this side
of Jordan; but you, the fighting-men, are to go over before your
brothers, armed, to give them help;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Till the Lord has given your brothers
rest, as he has given it to you, and they have taken their heritage in
the land which the Lord your God is giving them: then you will go back
to the land of your heritage which Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave
you on the east side of Jordan.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Then they said to Joshua in answer,
Whatever you say to us we will do, and wherever you send us we will go.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> As we gave attention to Moses in all
things, so we will give attention to you: and may the Lord your God be
with you as he was with Moses.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Whoever goes against your orders, and
does not give attention to all your words, will be put to death: only
take heart and be strong.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then Joshua, the son of Nun, sent two men
from Shittim secretly, with the purpose of searching out the land, and
Jericho. So they went and came to the house of a loose woman of the
town, named Rahab, where they took their rest for the night.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And it was said to the king of Jericho,
See, some men have come here tonight from the children of Israel with
the purpose of searching out the land.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Then the king of Jericho sent to Rahab,
saying, Send out the men who have come to you and are in your house; for
they have come with the purpose of searching out all the land.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the woman took the two men and put them
in a secret place; then she said, Yes, the men came to me, but I had no
idea where they came from;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And when it was the time for shutting the
doors at dark, they went out; I have no idea where the men went: but if
you go after them quickly, you will overtake them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But she had taken them up to the roof,
covering them with the stems of flax which she had put out in order
there.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So the men went after them on the road to
Jordan as far as the river-crossing: and when they had gone out after
them, the door into the town was shut.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And before the men went to rest, she came
up to them on the roof,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And said to them, It is clear to me that
the Lord has given you the land, and that the fear of you has come on
us;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For we have had news of how the Lord made
the Red Sea dry before you when you came out of Egypt; and what you did
to the two kings of the Amorites, on the other side of Jordan, to Sihon
and Og, whom you gave up to the curse.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And because of this news, our hearts
became like water, and there was no more spirit in any of us because of
you; for the Lord your God is God in heaven on high and here on earth.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So now, will you give me your oath by the
Lord, that, because I have been kind to you, you will be kind to my
father's house,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And that you will keep safe my father and
mother and my brothers and sisters and all they have, so that death may
not come on us?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the men said to her, Our life for
yours if you keep our business secret; and when the Lord has given us
the land, we will keep faith and be kind to you.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then she let them down from the window by
a cord, for the house where she was living was on the town wall.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And she said to them, Get away into the
hill-country, or the men who have gone after you will overtake you; keep
yourselves safe there for three days, till the searchers have come back,
and then go on your way.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the men said to her, We will only be
responsible for this oath which you have made us take,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> If, when we come into the land, you put
this cord of bright red thread in the window from which you let us down;
and get your father and mother and your brothers and all your family
into the house;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then if anyone goes out of your house
into the street, his blood will be on his head, we will not be
responsible; but if any damage comes to anyone in the house, his blood
will be on our heads.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But if you say anything about our
business here, then we will be free from the oath you have made us take.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And she said, Let it be as you say. Then
she sent them away, and they went; and she put the bright red cord in
the window.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And they went into the hill-country and
were there three days, till the men who had gone after them had come
back; and those who went after them were searching for them everywhere
without coming across them.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Then the two men came down from the
hill-country and went over and came back to Joshua, the son of Nun; and
they gave him a complete account of what had taken place.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And they said to Joshua, Truly, the Lord
has given all the land into our hands; and all the people of the land
have become like water because of us.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then Joshua got up early in the morning,
and, moving on from Shittim, he and all the children of Israel came to
Jordan and were there for the night before going over.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And at the end of three days, the men in
authority over the people went through the tents,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Giving the people their orders, and saying,
When you see the ark of the agreement of the Lord your God lifted up by
the priests, the Levites, then get up from your places and go after it;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But let there be a space between you and it
of about two thousand cubits: come no nearer to it, so that you may see
the way you have to go, for you have not been over this way before.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And Joshua said to the people, Make
yourselves holy, for tomorrow the Lord will do works of wonder among
you.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Then Joshua said to the priests, Take up
the ark of the agreement and go over in front of the people. So they
took up the ark of the agreement and went in front of the people.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the Lord said to Joshua, From now on I
will give you glory in the eyes of all Israel, so that they may see
that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with you.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And you are to give orders to the priests
who take up the ark of the agreement, and say, When you come to the edge
of the waters of Jordan, go no further.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And Joshua said to the children of Israel,
Come to me here: and give ear to the words of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And Joshua said, By this you will see
that the living God is among you, and that he will certainly send out
from before you the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Hivite and the
Perizzite and the Girgashite and the Amorite and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> See, the ark of the agreement of the Lord
of all the earth is going over before you into Jordan.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> So take twelve men out of the tribes of
Israel, a man from every tribe.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And when the feet of the priests who take
up the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, come to rest in the
waters of Jordan, the waters of Jordan will be cut off, all the waters
flowing down from higher up, and will come together in a mass.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So when the people went out from their
tents to go over Jordan, the priests who took up the ark of the
agreement were in front of the people;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And when those who took up the ark came
to Jordan, and the feet of the priests who took up the ark were touching
the edge of the water (for the waters of Jordan are overflowing all
through the time of the grain-cutting),

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then the waters flowing down from higher
up were stopped and came together in a mass a long way back at Adam, a
town near Zarethan; and the waters flowing down to the sea of the
Arabah, the Salt Sea, were cut off: and the people went across opposite
Jericho.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the priests who took up the ark of
the agreement of the Lord kept their places, with their feet on dry land
in the middle of Jordan, while all Israel went over on dry land, till
all the nation had gone over Jordan.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now when all the nation had come to the
other side of Jordan, the Lord said to Joshua,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Take twelve men from the people, a man for
every tribe,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And say to them, Take up from the middle of
Jordan, from the place where the feet of the priests were resting,
twelve stones, and take them over with you and put them down in the
place where you take your rest tonight.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> So Joshua sent for the twelve men, whom he
had ready, one man out of every tribe of the children of Israel,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And he said to them, Go over before the ark
of the Lord your God into the middle of Jordan, and let every one of you
take up a stone on his back, one for every tribe of the children of
Israel:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> So that this may be a sign among you; when
your children say to you in time to come, What is the reason for these
stones?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then you will say to them, Because the
waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the Lord's agreement;
when it went over Jordan the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these
stones will be a sign for the children of Israel, keeping it in their
memory for ever.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> So the children of Israel did as Joshua
gave them orders, and took twelve stones from the middle of Jordan, as
the Lord had said to Joshua, one for every tribe of the children of
Israel; these they took across with them to their night's resting-place
and put them down there.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And Joshua put up twelve stones in the
middle of Jordan, where the feet of the priests who took up the ark of
the agreement had been placed: and there they are to this day.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For the priests who took up the ark kept
there in the middle of Jordan till all the orders given to Joshua by
Moses from the Lord had been done: then the people went over quickly.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And when all the people had come to the
other side, the ark of the Lord went over, and the priests, before the
eyes of the people.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh went over armed before
the children of Israel as Moses had said to them:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> About forty thousand armed for war went
over before the Lord to the fight, to the lowlands of Jericho.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> That day the Lord made Joshua great in
the eyes of all Israel; and all the days of his life they went in fear
of him, as they had gone in fear of Moses.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then the Lord said to Joshua,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Give orders to the priests who take up
the ark of witness, to come up out of Jordan.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> So Joshua gave orders to the priests,
saying, Come up now out of Jordan.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And when the priests who took up the ark
of the Lord's agreement came up out of Jordan and their feet came out on
to dry land, the waters of Jordan went back to their place, overflowing
its edges as before.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> So on the tenth day of the first month
the people came up out of Jordan, and put up their tents in Gilgal, on
the east side of Jericho.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And the twelve stones which they took out
of Jordan, Joshua put up in Gilgal.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he said to the children of Israel,
When your children say to their fathers in time to come, What is the
reason for these stones?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Then give your children the story, and
say, Israel came over this river Jordan on dry land.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> For the Lord your God made the waters of
Jordan dry before you till you had gone across, as he did to the Red
Sea, drying it up before us till we had gone across:

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> So that all the peoples of the earth may
see that the hand of the Lord is strong; and that they may go in fear of
the Lord your God for ever.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now when the news came to all the kings of
the Amorites on the west side of Jordan, and all the kings of the
Canaanites living by the sea, how the Lord had made the waters of Jordan
dry before the children of Israel, till they had gone across, their
hearts became like water, and there was no more spirit in them, because
of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> At that time the Lord said to Joshua, Make
yourself stone knives and give the children of Israel circumcision a
second time.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> So Joshua made stone knives and gave the
children of Israel circumcision at Gibeath-ha-araloth.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And this is the reason why Joshua did so:
all the males of the people who came out of Egypt, all the fighting-men,
had been overtaken by death in the waste land on the way, after they
came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> All the people who came out had undergone
circumcision; but all the people whose birth had taken place in the
waste land on their journey from Egypt had not.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For the children of Israel were wandering
in the waste land for forty years, till all the nation, that is, all the
fighting-men, who had come out of Egypt, were dead, because they did not
give ear to the voice of the Lord: to whom the Lord said, with an oath,
that he would not let them see the land which the Lord had given his
word to their fathers to give us, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And their children, who came up in their
place, now underwent circumcision by the hands of Joshua, not having had
it before: for there had been no circumcision on the journey.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> So when all the nation had undergone
circumcision, they kept in their tents till they were well again.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And the Lord said to Joshua, Today the
shame of Egypt has been rolled away from you. So that place was named
Gilgal, to this day.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So the children of Israel put up their
tents in Gilgal; and they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the
month, in the evening, in the lowlands of Jericho.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And on the day after the Passover, they
had for their food the produce of the land, unleavened cakes and dry
grain on the same day.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And there was no more manna from the day
after they had for their food the produce of the land; the children of
Israel had manna no longer, but that year the produce of the land of
Canaan was their food.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Now when Joshua was near Jericho, lifting
up his eyes he saw a man in front of him, with his sword uncovered in
his hand: and Joshua went up to him and said, Are you for us or against
us?

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And he said, No; but I have come as
captain of the armies of the Lord. Then Joshua, falling down with his
face to the earth in worship, said, What has my lord to say to his
servant?

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the captain of the Lord's army said
to Joshua, Take off your shoes from your feet, for the place where you
are is holy. And Joshua did so.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> (Now Jericho was all shut up because of the
children of Israel: there was no going out or coming in.)

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the Lord said to Joshua, See, I have
given into your hands Jericho with its king and all its men of war.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Now let all your fighting-men make a circle
round the town, going all round it once. Do this for six days.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And let seven priests go before the ark
with seven loud-sounding horns in their hands: on the seventh day you
are to go round the town seven times, the priests blowing their horns.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And at the sound of a long note on the
horns, let all the people give a loud cry; and the wall of the town will
come down flat, and all the people are to go straight forward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then Joshua, the son of Nun, sent for the
priests and said to them, Take up the ark of the agreement, and let
seven priests take seven horns in their hands and go before the ark of
the Lord.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he said to the people, Go forward,
circling the town, and let the armed men go before the ark of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> So after Joshua had said this to the
people, the seven priests with their seven horns went forward before the
Lord, blowing on their horns: and the ark of the Lord's agreement went
after them.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the armed men went before the priests
who were blowing the horns, and the mass of the people went after the
ark, blowing their horns.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And to the people Joshua gave an order,
saying, You will give no cry, and make no sound, and let no word go out
of your mouth till the day when I say, Give a loud cry; then give a loud
cry.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So he made the ark of the Lord go all
round the town once: then they went back to the tents for the night.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And early in the morning Joshua got up,
and the priests took up the ark of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And the seven priests with their seven
horns went on before the ark of the Lord, blowing their horns: the armed
men went before them, and the mass of the people went after the ark of
the Lord, blowing their horns.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> The second day they went all round the
town once, and then went back to their tents: and so they did for six
days.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Then on the seventh day they got up
early, at the dawn of the day, and went round the town in the same way,
but that day they went round it seven times.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the seventh time, at the sound of the
priests' horns, Joshua said to the people, Now give a loud cry; for the
Lord has given you the town.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And the town will be put to the curse,
and everything in it will be given to the Lord: only Rahab, the loose
woman, and all who are in the house with her, will be kept safe, because
she kept secret the men we sent.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And as for you, keep yourselves from the
cursed thing, for fear that you may get a desire for it and take some of
it for yourselves, and so be the cause of a curse and great trouble on
the tents of Israel.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> But all the silver and gold and the
vessels of brass and iron are holy to the Lord: they are to come into
the store-house of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> So the people gave a loud cry, and the
horns were sounded; and on hearing the horns the people gave a loud cry,
and the wall came down flat, so that the people went up into the town,
every man going straight before him, and they took the town.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And they put everything in the town to
the curse; men and women, young and old, ox and sheep and ass, they put
to death without mercy.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Then Joshua said to the two men who had
been sent to make a search through the land, Go into the house of the
loose woman, and get her out, and all who are with her, as you gave her
your oath.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> So the searchers went in and got out
Rahab and her father and mother and her brothers and all she had, and
they got out all her family; and they took them outside the tents of
Israel.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Then, after burning up the town and
everything in it, they put the silver and gold and the vessels of brass
and iron into the store-house of the Lord's house.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> But Joshua kept Rahab, the loose woman,
and her father's family and all she had, from death, and so she got a
living-place among the children of Israel to this day; because she kept
safe the men whom Joshua had sent to make a search through the land.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Then Joshua gave the people orders with
an oath, saying, Let that man be cursed before the Lord who puts his
hand to the building up of this town: with the loss of his first son
will he put the first stone of it in place, and with the loss of his
youngest son he will put up its doors.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> So the Lord was with Joshua; and news of
him went through all the land.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> But the children of Israel did wrong about
the cursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son
of Zerah, of the family of Judah, took of the cursed thing, moving the
Lord to wrath against the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Now Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai,
which is by the side of Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-el, and said
to them, Go up and make a search through the land. And the men went up
and saw how Ai was placed.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Then they came back to Joshua and said to
him, Do not send all the people up, but let about two or three thousand
men go up and make an attack on Ai; there is no need for all the people
to be tired with the journey there, for it is only a small town.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> So about three thousand of the people went
up, and were sent in flight by the men of Ai.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> The men of Ai put to death about thirty-six
of them, driving them from before the town as far as the stoneworks, and
overcoming them on the way down: and the hearts of the people became
like water.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Then Joshua, in great grief, went down on
the earth before the ark of the Lord till the evening, and all the
chiefs of Israel with him, and they put dust on their heads.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Joshua said, O Lord God, why have you
taken us over Jordan only to give us up into the hands of the Amorites
for our destruction? If only it had been enough for us to keep on the
other side of Jordan!

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> O Lord, what am I to say now that Israel
have given way before their attackers?

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> For when the news comes to the Canaanites
and all the people of the land, they will come up, shutting us in and
cutting off our name from the earth: and what will you do for the honour
of your great name?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Then the Lord said to Joshua, Get up;
what are you doing with your face to the earth?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Israel has done wrong, sinning against
the agreement which I made with them: they have even taken of the cursed
thing; acting falsely like thieves they have put it among their goods.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For this reason the children of Israel
have given way, turning their backs in flight before their attackers,
because they are cursed: I will no longer be with you, if you do not put
the cursed thing away from among you.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Up! make the people holy; say to them,
Make yourselves holy before tomorrow, for the Lord, the God of Israel,
has said, There is a cursed thing among you, O Israel, and you will give
way before your attackers in the fight till the cursed thing has been
taken away from among you.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> So in the morning you are to come near,
tribe by tribe; and the tribe marked out by the Lord is to come near,
family by family; and the family marked out by the Lord is to come near,
house by house; and the house marked out by the Lord is to come near,
man by man.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Then the man who is taken with the cursed
thing is to be burned, with everything which is his; because he has gone
against the agreement of the Lord and has done an act of shame in
Israel.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> So Joshua got up early in the morning,
and made Israel come before him by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah
was taken;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Then he made Judah come forward, and the
family of the Zerahites was taken; and he made the family of the
Zerahites come forward man by man; and Zabdi was taken;

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Then the house of Zabdi came forward man
by man, and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah,
of the tribe of Judah, was taken.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And Joshua said to Achan, My son, give
glory and praise to the Lord, the God of Israel; give me word now of
what you have done, and keep nothing back from me.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Achan, answering, said to Joshua,
Truly I have done wrong against the Lord, the God of Israel, and this is
what I have done:

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> When I saw among their goods a fair robe
of Babylon and two hundred shekels of silver, and a mass of gold, fifty
shekels in weight, I was overcome by desire and took them; and they are
put away in the earth in my tent, and the silver is under it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> So Joshua sent men quickly, and looking
in his tent, they saw where the robe had been put away secretly with the
silver under it.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And they took them from the tent and came
back with them to Joshua and the children of Israel, and put them before
the Lord.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Then Joshua and all Israel took Achan,
the son of Zerah, and the silver and the robe and the mass of gold, and
his sons and his daughters and his oxen and his asses and his sheep and
his tent and everything he had; and they took them up into the valley of
Achor.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And Joshua said, Why have you been a
cause of trouble to us? Today the Lord will send trouble on you. And all
Israel took part in stoning him; they had him stoned to death and then
burned with fire.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And over him they put a great mass of
stones, which is there to this day; then the heat of the Lord's wrath
was turned away. So that place was named, The Valley of Achor, to this
day.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then the Lord said to Joshua, Have no fear
and do not be troubled: take with you all the fighting-men and go up
against Ai: for I have given into your hands the king of Ai and his
people and his town and his land:

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And you are to do to Ai and its king as you
did to Jericho and its king: but their goods and their cattle you may
take for yourselves: let a secret force be stationed to make a surprise
attack on the town from the back.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> So Joshua and the fighting-men got ready to
go up against Ai; and Joshua took thirty thousand men of war, and sent
them out by night.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And he gave them their orders, saying, Go
and take up your position secretly at the back of the town: do not go
very far away, and let all of you be ready:

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And I and all the people with me will come
near the town, and when they come out against us as they did before, we
will go in flight from them;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And they will come out after us, till we
have got them away from the town; for they will say, They have gone in
flight from us as before; so we will go in flight before them;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Then you will get up from your secret
position and take the town, for the Lord your God will give it up into
your hands.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And when you have taken the town, put fire
to it, as the Lord has said: see, I have given you your orders.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> So Joshua sent them out: and they took up a
secret position between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but
Joshua kept with the people that night.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And early in the morning Joshua got up,
and put the people in order, and he and the chiefs of Israel went up
before the people to Ai.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And all the fighting-men who were with
him went up and came near the town, and took up a position on the north
side of Ai facing the town, with a valley between him and the town.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And taking about five thousand men, he
put them in position for a surprise attack on the west side of Ai,
between Beth-el and Ai.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So all the people were in their places,
the army on the north side of the town and the secret force on the west;
and that night Joshua went down into the valley.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now when the king of Ai saw it, he got up
quickly and went out to war against Israel, he and all his people, to
the slope going down to the valley; but he had no idea that a secret
force was waiting at the back of the town.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then Joshua and all Israel, acting as if
they were overcome before them, went in flight by way of the waste land.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And all the people in Ai came together to
go after them; and they went after Joshua, moving away from the town.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> There was not a man in Ai and Beth-el who
did not go out after Israel; and the town was open and unwatched while
they went after Israel.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the Lord said to Joshua, Let your
spear be stretched out against Ai; for I will give it into your hands.
So Joshua took up his spear, stretching it out in the direction of the
town.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Then the secret force came quickly from
their place, and running forward when they saw his hand stretched out,
went into the town and took it, and put fire to it straight away.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Then the men of Ai, looking back, saw the
smoke of the town going up to heaven, and were unable to go this way or
that: and the people who had gone in flight to the waste land were
turned back on those who were coming after them.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And when Joshua and all Israel saw that
the town had been taken by the surprise attack, and that the smoke of
the town had gone up, turning round they overcame the men of Ai.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Then the other force came out of the town
against them, so that they were being attacked on this side and on that:
and Israel overcame them and let not one of them get away with his life.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> But the king of Ai they made prisoner,
and took him to Joshua.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Then, after the destruction of all the
people of Ai in the field and in the waste land where they went after
them, and when all the people had been put to death without mercy, all
Israel went back to Ai, and put to death all who were in it without
mercy.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> On that day twelve thousand were put to
death, men and women, all the people of Ai.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> For Joshua did not take back his hand
with the outstretched spear till the destruction of the people of Ai was
complete.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But the cattle and the goods from that
town, Israel took for themselves, as the Lord had given orders to
Joshua.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> So Joshua gave Ai to the flames, and made
it a waste mass of stones for ever, as it is to this day.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he put the king of Ai to death,
hanging him on a tree till evening: and when the sun went down, Joshua
gave them orders to take his body down from the tree, and put it in the
public place of the town, covering it with a great mass of stones, which
is there to this day.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Then Joshua put up an altar to the Lord,
the God of Israel, in Mount Ebal,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> In the way ordered by Moses, the servant
of the Lord, as it is recorded in the book of the law of Moses, an altar
of uncut stones, untouched by any iron instrument: and on it they made
burned offerings and peace-offerings to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he made there on the stones a copy of
the law of Moses, writing it before the eyes of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And all Israel, those who were Israelites
by birth, as well as the men from other lands living with them, and
their responsible men and their overseers and judges, took their places
round the ark, in front of the priests, the Levites, whose work it was
to take up the ark of the Lord's agreement; half of them were stationed
in front of Mount Gerizim and half in front of Mount Ebal, in agreement
with the orders for the blessing of the children of Israel which Moses,
the servant of the Lord, had given.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And after, he gave them all the words of
the law, the blessing and the curse, as it is all recorded in the book
of the law;

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Reading to all the meeting of Israel,
with the women and the children and the men from other lands who were
living among them, every word of the orders which Moses had given.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now on hearing the news of these things,
all the kings on the west side of Jordan, in the hill-country and the
lowlands and by the Great Sea in front of Lebanon, the Hittites and the
Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the
Jebusites,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Came together with one purpose, to make war
against Joshua and Israel.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And the men of Gibeon, hearing what Joshua
had done to Jericho and Ai,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Acting with deceit, got food together as if
for a long journey; and took old food-bags for their asses, and old and
cracked wine-skins kept together with cord;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And put old stitched-up shoes on their
feet, and old clothing on their backs; and all the food they had with
them was dry and broken up.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And they came to Joshua to the tent-circle
at Gilgal, and said to him and to the men of Israel, We have come from a
far country: so now make an agreement with us.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And the men of Israel said to the Hivites,
It may be that you are living among us; how then may we make an
agreement with you?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And they said to Joshua, We are your
servants. Then Joshua said to them, Who are you and where do you come
from?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And they said to him, Your servants have
come from a very far country, because of the name of the Lord your God:
for the story of his great name, and of all he did in Egypt has come to
our ears,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And what he did to the two kings of the
Amorites east of Jordan, to Sihon, king of Heshbon, and to Og, king of
Bashan, at Ashtaroth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> So the responsible men and all the people
of our country said to us, Take food with you for the journey and go to
them, and say to them, We are your servants: so now make an agreement
with us.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> This bread which we have with us for our
food, we took warm and new from our houses when starting on our journey
to you; but now see, it has become dry and broken up.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And these wine-skins were new when we put
the wine in them, and now they are cracked as you see; and our clothing
and our shoes have become old because of our very long journey here.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And the men took some of their food,
without requesting directions from the Lord.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> So Joshua made peace with them, and made
an agreement with them that they were not to be put to death: and the
chiefs of the people took an oath to them.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Now three days after, when they had made
this agreement with them, they had word that these men were their
neighbours, living near them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And the children of Israel went forward
on their journey, and on the third day came to their towns. Now their
towns were Gibeon and Chephirah and Beeroth and Kiriath-jearim.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And the children of Israel did not put
them to death, because the chiefs of the people had taken an oath to
them by the Lord, the God of Israel. And all the people made an outcry
against the chiefs.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> But all the chiefs said to the people, We
have taken an oath to them by the Lord, the God of Israel, and so we may
not put our hands on them.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> This is what we will do to them: we will
not put them to death, for fear that wrath may come on us because of our
oath to them.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Keep them living, and let them be
servants, cutting wood and getting water for all the people. And all the
people did as the chiefs had said to them.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Then Joshua sent for them, and said to
them, Why have you been false to us, saying, We are very far from you,
when you are living among us?

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Now because of this you are cursed, and
you will for ever be our servants, cutting wood and getting water for
the house of my God.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And, answering Joshua, they said, Because
it came to the ears of your servants that the Lord your God had given
orders to his servant Moses to give you all this land, and to send
destruction on all the people living in it, because of you; so, fearing
greatly for our lives because of you, we have done this.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And now we are in your hands: do to us
whatever seems good and right to you.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> So he kept them safe from the children of
Israel, and did not let them be put to death.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And that day Joshua made them servants,
cutting wood and getting water for the people and for the altar of the
Lord, in the place marked out by him, to this day.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now when it came to the ears of
Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem, that Joshua had taken Ai, and had given
it up to the curse (for as he had done to Jericho and its king, so he
had done to Ai and its king); and that the people of Gibeon had made
peace with Israel and were living among them;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> He was in great fear, because Gibeon was
a great town, like one of the king's towns, greater than Ai, and all the
men in it were men of war.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> So Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem, sent
to Hoham, king of Hebron, and to Piram, king of Jarmuth, and to Japhia,
king of Lachish, and to Debir, king of Eglon, saying,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Come up to me and give me help, and let
us make an attack on Gibeon: for they have made peace with Joshua and
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> So the five kings of the Amorites, the
king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of
Lachish, and the king of Eglon, were banded together, and went up with
all their armies and took up their position before Gibeon and made war
against it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And the men of Gibeon sent to Joshua to
the tent-circle at Gilgal, saying, Be not slow to send help to your
servants; come up quickly to our support and keep us safe: for all the
kings of the Amorites from the hill-country have come together against
us.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> So Joshua went up from Gilgal with all
his army and all his men of war.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the Lord said to Joshua, Have no fear
of them, for I have given them into your hands; they will all give way
before you.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> So Joshua, having come up from Gilgal all
night, made a sudden attack on them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And the Lord made them full of fear
before Israel, and they put great numbers of them to death at Gibeon,
and went after them by the way going up to Beth-horon, driving them back
to Azekah and Makkedah

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And in their flight before Israel, on
the way down from Beth-horon, the Lord sent down great stones from
heaven on them all the way to Azekah, causing their death: those whose
death was caused by the stones were more than those whom the children of
Israel put to death with the sword.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> It was on the day when the Lord gave up
the Amorites into the hands of the children of Israel that Joshua said
to the Lord, before the eyes of Israel, Sun, be at rest over Gibeon; and
you, O moon, in the valley of Aijalon.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And the sun was at rest and the moon
kept its place till the nation had given punishment to their attackers.
(Is it not recorded in the book of Jashar?) So the sun kept its place in
the middle of the heavens, and was waiting, and did not go down, for the
space of a day.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And there was no day like that, before
it or after it, when the Lord gave ear to the voice of a man; for the
Lord was fighting for Israel.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And Joshua, with all Israel, went back
to the tent-circle at Gilgal.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But these five kings went in flight
secretly to a hole in the rock at Makkedah.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And word was given to Joshua that the
five kings had been taken in a hole in the rock at Makkedah.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Joshua said, Let great stones be
rolled against the mouth of the hole, and let men keep watch by it:

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But do you, without waiting, go after
their army, attacking them from the back; do not let them get into their
towns, for the Lord your God has given them into your hands.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Now when Joshua and the children of
Israel had come to the end of their war of complete destruction, and had
put to death all but a small band who had got safely into the walled
towns,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> All the people went back to Joshua to
the tent-circle at Makkedah in peace: and no one said a word against the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Then Joshua said, Take away the stones
from the mouth of the hole in the rock, and make those five kings come
out to me.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And they did so, and made those five
kings come out of the hole to him, the king of Jerusalem, the king of
Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And when they had made those kings come
out to Joshua, Joshua sent for all the men of Israel, and said to the
chiefs of the men of war who had gone with him, Come near and put your
feet on the necks of these kings. So they came near and put their feet
on their necks.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And Joshua said to them, Have no fear
and do not be troubled; be strong and take heart: for so will the Lord
do to all against whom you make war.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Then Joshua had them put to death,
hanging them on five trees, where they were till evening.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And when the sun went down, they were
taken down from the trees, by Joshua's orders, and put into the hole
where they had gone to be safe; and great stones were placed at the
mouth of the hole, where they are to this day.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> That day Joshua took Makkedah, and put
it and its king to the sword; every soul in it he gave up to the curse
without mercy: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the
king of Jericho.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Then Joshua and all Israel with him
went on from Makkedah and came to Libnah, and made an attack on it;

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And again the Lord gave it and its king
into the hands of Israel; and he put it and every person in it to the
sword, till their destruction was complete; and he did to its king as he
had done to the king of Jericho.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Then Joshua and all Israel with him
went on from Libnah to Lachish, and took up their position against it
and made an attack on it,

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And the Lord gave Lachish into the
hands of Israel, and on the second day he took it, putting it and every
person in it to the sword without mercy, as he had done to Libnah.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Then Horam, king of Gezer, came up to
the help of Lachish; and Joshua overcame him and his people, putting all
of them to death.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And Joshua and all Israel with him went
on from Lachish to Eglon: and they took up their position against it and
made an attack on it;

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And that day they took it, putting it
and every person in it to the sword, as he had done to Lachish.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And Joshua and all Israel with him went
up from Eglon to Hebron, and made an attack on it;

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And took it, overcoming it and putting
it and its king and its towns and every person in it to the sword: as he
had done to Eglon, he put them all to death, and gave it up to the curse
with every person in it.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And Joshua and all Israel with him went
on to make an attack on Debir;

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And he took it, with its king and all
its towns: and he put them to the sword, giving every person in it to
the curse; all were put to death: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to
Debir and its king.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> So Joshua overcame all the land, the
hill-country and the South and the lowland and the mountain slopes, and
all their kings; all were put to death: and every living thing he gave
up to the curse, as the Lord, the God of Israel, had given him orders.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Joshua overcame them from Kadesh-barnea
to Gaza, and all the land of Goshen as far as Gibeon.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And all these kings and their land
Joshua took at the same time, because the Lord, the God of Israel, was
fighting for Israel.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> Then Joshua and all Israel with him
went back to their tents at Gilgal.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now Jabin, king of Hazor, hearing of
these things, sent to Jobab, king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron,
and to the king of Achshaph,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And to the kings on the north in the
hill-country, and in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, and in the lowland,
and in the highlands of Dor on the west,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And to the Canaanites on the east and on
the west, and to the Amorites and the Hittites and the Perizzites, and
the Jebusites in the hill-country, and the Hivites under Hermon in the
land of Mizpah.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they went out, they and all their
armies with them, a great people, in number like the sand on the
seaside, with horses and war-carriages in great number.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And all these kings came together, and
put their forces in position at the waters of Merom, to make war on
Israel.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the Lord said to Joshua, Have no fear
of them: for tomorrow at this time I will give them all up dead before
Israel; you are to have the leg-muscles of their horses cut and their
war-carriages burned with fire.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> So Joshua and all the men of war with him
came against them suddenly at the waters of Merom, and made an attack on
them.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the Lord gave them up into the hands
of Israel, and they overcame them driving them back to great Zidon and
to Misrephoth-maim and into the valley of Mizpeh to the east; and they
put them all to death, no man got away safely.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Joshua did to them as the Lord had
said to him; he had the leg-muscles of their horses cut and their
war-carriages burned with fire.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> At that time, Joshua went on to take
Hazor and put its king to the sword: for in earlier times Hazor was the
chief of all those kingdoms.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And they put every person in it to
death without mercy, giving every living thing up to the curse, and
burning Hazor.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And all the towns of these kings, and
all the kings, Joshua took, and put them to the sword: he gave them up
to the curse, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, had said.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> As for the towns made on hills of
earth, not one was burned by Israel but Hazor, which was burned by
Joshua.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And all the goods taken from these
towns, and their cattle, the children of Israel kept for themselves; but
every man they put to death without mercy, till their destruction was
complete, and there was no one living.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> As the Lord had given orders to Moses
his servant, so Moses gave orders to Joshua, and so Joshua did; every
order which the Lord had given to Moses was done.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> So Joshua took all that land, the
hill-country and all the South, and all the land of Goshen, and the
lowland and the Arabah, the hill-country of Israel and its lowland;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> From Mount Halak, which goes up to
Seir, as far as Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under Mount Hermon:
and all their kings he overcame and put to death.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For a long time Joshua made war on all
those kings.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Not one town made peace with the
children of Israel, but only the Hivites of Gibeon: they took them all
in war.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For the Lord made them strong in heart
to go to war against Israel, so that he might give them up to the curse
without mercy, and that destruction might come on them, as the Lord had
given orders to Moses.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Joshua came at that time and put an
end to the Anakim in the hill-country, in Hebron, in Debir, in Anab, and
in all the hill-country of Judah and Israel: Joshua gave them and their
towns to the curse.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Not one of the Anakim was to be seen in
the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in
Ashdod, some were still living.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> So Joshua took all the land, as the
Lord had said to Moses; and Joshua gave it to the children of Israel as
their heritage, making division of it among them by their tribes. And
the land had rest from war.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now these are the kings of the land whom
the children of Israel overcame, taking as their heritage their land on
the east side of Jordan, from the valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon,
and all the Arabah to the east:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was
living in Heshbon, ruling from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley
of the Arnon, and the town in the middle of the valley, and half Gilead,
as far as the river Jabbok, the limits of the children of Ammon;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And the Arabah to the sea of Chinneroth,
to the east, and to the sea of the Arabah, that is the Salt Sea, to the
east, the way to Beth-jeshimoth; and on the south, under the slopes of
Pisgah:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And the land of Og, king of Bashan, of
the rest of the Rephaim, who was living at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Ruling in the mountain of Hermon, and in
Salecah, and in all Bashan, as far as the limits of the Geshurites and
the Maacathites, and half Gilead, to the land of Sihon, king of Heshbon.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Moses, the servant of the Lord, and the
children of Israel overcame them; and Moses, the servant of the Lord,
gave their land for a heritage to the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and
the half-tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And these are the kings of the land whom
Joshua and the children of Israel overcame on the west side of Jordan,
from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon to Mount Halak, which goes up to
Seir; and Joshua gave the land to the tribes of Israel for a heritage,
in keeping with their divisions;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> In the hill-country, and in the lowland,
and in the Arabah, and on the mountain slopes, and in the waste land,
and in the South; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Canaanites, the
Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai,
which is near Beth-el, one;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of
Hebron, one;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of
Lachish, one;

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The king of Eglon, one; the king of
Gezer, one;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The king of Debir, one; the king of
Geder, one;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> The king of Hormah, one; the king of
Arad, one;

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The king of Libnah, one; the king of
Adullam, one;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The king of Makkedah, one; the king of
Beth-el, one;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The king of Tappuah, one; the king of
Hepher, one;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> The king of Aphek, one; the king of
Lassharon, one;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The king of Madon, one; the king of
Hazor, one;

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> The king of Shimron-meron, one; the
king of Achshaph, one;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> The king of Taanach, one; the king of
Megiddo, one;

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> The king of Kedesh, one; the king of
Jokneam in Carmel, one;

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> The king of Dor on the hill of Dor,
one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The king of Tirzah, one; all the kings
together were thirty-one.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now Joshua was old and full of years; and
the Lord said to him, You are old and full of years, and there is still
very much land to be taken.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> This is the land which is still to be
taken: all the country of the Philistines, and all the Geshurites;

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> From the Shihor, which is before Egypt,
to the edge of Ekron to the north, which is taken to be Canaanite
property: the five chiefs of the Philistines; the Gazites, and the
Ashdodites, the Ashkelonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites, as well
as the Avvim;

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> On the south: all the land of the
Canaanites, and Mearah which is the property of the Zidonians, to Aphek,
as far as the limit of the Amorites:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And the land of the Gebalites, and all
Lebanon, looking east, from Baal-gad under Mount Hermon as far as
Hamath:

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> All the people of the hill-country from
Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, all the Zidonians; them will I send out from
before the children of Israel: only make division of it to Israel for a
heritage, as I have given you orders to do.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> So now make division of this land for a
heritage to the nine tribes, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> With him the Reubenites and the Gadites
have been given their heritage, which Moses gave them, on the east side
of Jordan, as Moses, the servant of the Lord, gave them;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> From Aroer, on the edge of the valley of
the Arnon, and the town in the middle of the valley, and all the
table-land from Medeba to Dibon;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And all the towns of Sihon, king of the
Amorites, who was ruling in Heshbon, to the limits of the children of
Ammon;

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And Gilead, and the land of the
Geshurites and the Maacathites, and all Mount Hermon, and all Bashan to
Salecah;

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who
was ruling in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (he was one of the last of the
Rephaim); these did Moses overcome, driving them out of their country.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> However, the people of Israel did not
send out the Geshurites, or the Maacathites: but Geshur and Maacath are
living among Israel to this day.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Only to the tribe of Levi he gave no
heritage; the offerings of the Lord, the God of Israel, made by fire are
his heritage, as he said to him.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Moses gave their heritage to the
tribe of Reuben by their families.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Their limit was from Aroer, on the edge
of the valley of the Arnon, and the town in the middle of the valley,
and all the table-land by Medeba;

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Heshbon and all her towns in the
table-land; Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath;

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Kiriathaim, and Sibmah, and
Zereth-shahar in the mountain of the valley;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And Beth-peor, and the slopes of
Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And all the towns of the table-land,
and all the kingdom of Sihon, king of the Amorites, who was ruling in
Heshbon, whom Moses overcame, together with the chiefs of Midian, Evi,
and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the chiefs of Sihon, who were
living in the land.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And Balaam, the son of Beor, the
prophet, the children of Israel put to death with the sword.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And the limit of the children of Reuben
was the edge of Jordan. This was the heritage of the children of Reuben
by their families, with its towns and its unwalled places.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And Moses gave their heritage to the
tribe of Gad by their families.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And their limit was Jazer, and all the
towns of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, to Aroer
before Rabbah;

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh, and
Betonim; and from Mahanaim to the edge of Debir;

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And in the valley, Beth-haram, and
Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon,
king of Heshbon, having Jordan for its limit, to the end of the sea of
Chinnereth on the east side of Jordan.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> This is the heritage of the children of
Gad by their families, with its towns and its unwalled places

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And Moses gave their heritage to the
half-tribe of Manasseh by their families.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And their limit was from Mahanaim, all
Bashan, all the kingdom of Og, king of Bashan, and all Havvoth-Jair, in
Bashan, sixty towns;

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and
Edrei, towns of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were for the children of
Machir, the son of Manasseh, for half of the children of Machir by their
families.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> These are the heritages of which Moses
made distribution in the lowlands of Moab, on the other side of Jordan
in Jericho, to the east.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> But to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no
heritage: the Lord, the God of Israel, is their heritage, as he said to
them.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And these are the heritages which the
children of Israel took in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar, the
priest, and Joshua, the son of Nun, and the heads of the tribes of the
children of Israel, gave out to them;

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Their heritage by the Lord's decision, as
he gave orders by Moses, for the nine tribes and the half-tribe.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Moses had given their heritage to the
two tribes and the half-tribe on the other side of Jordan, but to the
Levites he gave no heritage among them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Because the children of Joseph were two
tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim; and they gave the Levites no part in the
land, only towns for their living-places, with the grass-lands for their
cattle and for their property.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> As the Lord had given orders to Moses, so
the people of Israel did, and they made division of the land.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Then the children of Judah went to Joshua
in Gilgal; and Caleb, the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, said to him,
You have knowledge of what the Lord said to Moses, the man of God, about
me and about you in Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> I was forty years old when Moses, the
servant of the Lord, sent me from Kadesh-barnea to make a search through
the land; and the account which I gave him was in keeping with his
desire.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> My brothers, however, who went up with
me, made the heart of the people like water: but I was true to the Lord
with all my heart.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And on that day Moses took an oath,
saying, Truly the land where your feet have been placed will become a
heritage for you and your children for ever, because you have been true
to the Lord your God with all your heart.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And now, as you see, the Lord has kept
me safe these forty-five years, from the time when the Lord said this to
Moses, while Israel was wandering in the waste land: and now I am
eighty-five years old.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And still, I am as strong today as I
was when Moses sent me out: as my strength was then, so is it now, for
war and for all the business of life.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So now, give me this hill-country named
by the Lord at that time; for you had an account of it then, how the
Anakim were there, and great walled towns: it may be that the Lord will
be with me, and I will be able to take their land, as the Lord said.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Joshua gave him his blessing; and
he gave Hebron to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, for his heritage.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> So Hebron became the heritage of Caleb,
the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, to this day, because with all his
heart he was true to the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> In earlier times the name of Hebron had
been Kiriath-arba, named after Arba, the greatest of the Anakim. And the
land had rest from war.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now the part of the land marked out for
the children of Judah by families, went up to the edge of Edom, as far
as the waste land of Zin to the south, to the farthest point of it on
the south.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Their south limit was from the farthest
part of the Salt Sea, from the inlet looking to the south:

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> From there it goes south of the slope up
to Akrabbim, and on to Zin, then south past Kadesh-barnea, and on by
Hezron and up to Addar, turning in the direction of Karka:

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Then on to Azmon, ending at the stream of
Egypt: and the end of the limit is at the sea; this will be your limit
on the south.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And the east limit is the Salt Sea as far
as the end of Jordan. And the limit of the north part of the land is
from the inlet of the sea at the end of Jordan:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Then the line goes up to Beth-hoglah,
past the north of Beth-arabah, and up to the stone of Bohan, the son of
Reuben;

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Then the line goes up to Debir from the
valley of Achor, and so to the north, in the direction of Gilgal, which
is opposite the slope up to Adummim, on the south side of the river: and
the line goes on to the waters of En-shemesh, ending at En-rogel:

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Then the line goes up by the valley of
the son of Hinnom to the south side of the Jebusite (which is
Jerusalem): then up to the top of the mountain in front of the valley of
Hinnom to the west, which is at the farthest point of the valley of
Rephaim on the north:

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And the limit is marked out from the top
of the mountain to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah, and out to
the towns of Mount Ephron, as far as Baalah (which is Kiriath-jearim):

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Then turning west, the line goes from
Baalah to Mount Seir, and on to the side of Mount Jearim (which is
Chesalon) on the north, then down to Beth-shemesh, and on past Timnah:

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And out to the side of Ekron to the
north: then it is marked out to Shikkeron and on to Mount Baalah, ending
at Jabneel; the end of the line is at the sea.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And the limit on the west is the edge
of the Great Sea. This is the line going round the land marked out for
the children of Judah, by their families.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, he
gave a part among the children of Judah, as the Lord had given orders to
Joshua, that is, Kiriath-arba, named after Arba, the father of Anak
which is Hebron.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And the three sons of Anak, Sheshai and
Ahiman and Talmai, the children of Anak, were forced out from there by
Caleb.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> From there he went up against the
people of Debir: (now the name of Debir before that was Kiriath-sepher.)

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And Caleb said, I will give Achsah, my
daughter, as wife to the man who overcomes Kiriath-sepher and takes it.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's
brother, took it: so he gave him his daughter Achsah for his wife.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Now when she came to him, he put into
her mind the idea of requesting a field from her father: and she got
down from her ass; and Caleb said to her, What is it?

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And she said, Give me a blessing;
because you have put me in dry south-land, now give me springs of water.
So he gave her the higher spring and the lower spring.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> This is the heritage of the tribe of
Judah, by their families.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> The farthest towns of the tribe of
Judah in the direction of the limits of Edom to the south, were Kabzeel,
and Eder, and Jagur;

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah;

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And Hazor-hadattah, and Kerioth-hezron
(which is Hazor);

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Amam, and Shema, and Moladah;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And Hazar-gaddah, and Heshmon, and
Beth-pelet;

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And Hazar-shual, and Beer-sheba, and
Biziothiah;

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Baalah, and Iim, and Ezem;

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah;

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And Ziklag, and Madmannah, and
Sansannah;

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and
Rimmon; all the towns are twenty-nine, with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> In the lowland, Eshtaol, and Zorah, and
Ashnah;

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and
Enam;

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and
Azekah;

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And Shaaraim, and Adithaim, and
Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-gad;

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And Dilan, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel;

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And Cabbon, and Lahmas, and Chithlish;

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah,
and Makkedah; sixteen towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan;

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> And Iphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib;

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah;
nine towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> Ekron, with her daughter-towns and her
unwalled places;

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> From Ekron to the sea, all the towns by
the side of Ashdod, with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> Ashdod, with her daughter-towns and her
unwalled places; Gaza, with her daughter-towns and her unwalled places,
to the stream of Egypt, with the Great Sea as a limit.

<span id="an_15:48">15:48</span> And in the hill-country, Shamir, and
Jattir, and Socoh;

<span id="an_15:49">15:49</span> And Dannah, and Kiriath-sannah (which
is Debir);

<span id="an_15:50">15:50</span> And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim;

<span id="an_15:51">15:51</span> And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh;
eleven towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:52">15:52</span> Arab, and Dumah, and Eshan;

<span id="an_15:53">15:53</span> And Janim, and Beth-tappuah, and
Aphekah;

<span id="an_15:54">15:54</span> And Humtah, and Kiriath-arba (which is
Hebron), and Zior; nine towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:55">15:55</span> Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Jutah;

<span id="an_15:56">15:56</span> And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah;

<span id="an_15:57">15:57</span> Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten towns
with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:58">15:58</span> Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor;

<span id="an_15:59">15:59</span> And Maarath, and Beth-anoth, and
Eltekon; six towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:60">15:60</span> Kiriath-baal (which is Kiriath-jearim),
and Rabbah; two towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:61">15:61</span> In the waste land, Beth-arabah, Middin,
and Secacah;

<span id="an_15:62">15:62</span> And Nibshan, and the Town of Salt, and
En-gedi; six towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_15:63">15:63</span> And as for the Jebusites living in
Jerusalem, the children of Judah were unable to make them go out; but
the Jebusites are living with the children of Judah at Jerusalem, to
this day.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the limit of the land marked out for
the children of Joseph went out from Jordan at Jericho, at the waters of
Jericho on the east, in the waste land, going up from Jericho through
the hill-country to Beth-el;

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And it goes out from Beth-el to Luz, and
on as far as the limit of the Archites to Ataroth;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And it goes down to the west to the limit
of the Japhletites, to the limit of Beth-horon the lower, as far as
Gezer; ending at the sea.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And the children of Joseph, Manasseh and
Ephraim, took their heritage.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the limit of the land of the children
of Ephraim by their families was marked out in this way: the limit of
their heritage to the east was Ataroth-addar, to Beth-horon the higher;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> The line goes out to the west at
Michmethath on the north; then turning to the east to Taanath-shiloh,
going past it on the east of Janoah;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And from Janoah down to Ataroth, and to
Naarah, and touching Jericho, it goes on to Jordan.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> From Tappuah the line goes on to the west
to the river of Kanah; ending at the sea. This is the heritage of the
children of Ephraim by their families;

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Together with the towns marked out for
the children of Ephraim in the heritage of Manasseh, all the towns with
their unwalled places.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And the Canaanites who were living in
Gezer were not forced out; but the Canaanites have been living among
Ephraim, to this day, as servants, doing forced work.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And this was the part marked out for the
tribe of Manasseh, because he was the oldest son of Joseph. As for
Machir, the oldest son of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, because he was
a man of war he had Gilead and Bashan.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And as for the rest of the children of
Manasseh, their heritage was given to them by families; for the children
of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of
Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher,
and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of
Manasseh, the son of Joseph, by their families.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the
son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but
only daughters; and these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, and
Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And they came before Eleazar the priest,
and Joshua, the son of Nun, and before the chiefs, saying, The Lord gave
orders to Moses to give us a heritage among our brothers: so in
agreement with the orders of the Lord he gave them a heritage among
their father's brothers.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And ten parts were given to Manasseh, in
addition to the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is on the other side of
Jordan;

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Because the daughters of Manasseh had a
heritage among his sons, and the land of Gilead was the property of the
other sons of Manasseh.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And the limit of Manasseh's land was from
Asher to Michmethath, which is before Shechem; the line goes on to the
right hand, to the people of En-tappuah.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The land of Tappuah was the property of
Manasseh; but Tappuah on the edge of Manasseh was the property of the
children of Ephraim.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And the limit goes down to the stream
Kanah, to the south of the stream: these towns were Ephraim's among the
towns of Manasseh; Manasseh's limit was on the north side of the stream,
ending at the sea:

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> To the south it is Ephraim's, and to
the north it is Manasseh's, and the sea is his limit; and they are
touching Asher on the north, and Issachar on the east.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> In Issachar and Asher, Manasseh had
Beth-shean and its daughter-towns, and Ibleam and its daughter-towns,
and the people of Dor and its daughter-towns, and the people of En-dor
and its daughter-towns, and the people of Taanach and its
daughter-towns, and the people of Megiddo and its daughter-towns, that
is, the three hills.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But the children of Manasseh were not
able to make the people of those towns go out; but the Canaanites would
go on living in that land.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And when the children of Israel had
become strong, they put the Canaanites to forced work, in place of
driving them out.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Then the children of Joseph said to
Joshua, Why have you given me only one part and one stretch of land for
my heritage? For through the blessing given to me by the Lord up to now,
I am a great people.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Then Joshua said to them, If you are
such a great people, go up into the woodlands, clearing a place there
for yourselves in the land of the Perizzites and the Rephaim, if the
hill-country of Ephraim is not wide enough for you.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And the children of Joseph said, The
hill-country is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites living in the
valley have iron war-carriages, those in Beth-shean and its towns as
well as those in the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Then Joshua said to the children of
Joseph, to Ephraim and Manasseh, You are a great people, and have great
power: you are not to have one property only,

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> For the hill-country of Gilead will be
yours ... the woodland and cut down ... its outskirts will be yours ...
get the Canaanites out, for they have iron war-carriages ... strong.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And all the meeting of the children of
Israel came together at Shiloh and put up the Tent of meeting there: and
the land was crushed before them.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> But there were still seven tribes among
the children of Israel who had not taken up their heritage.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Then Joshua said to the children of
Israel, Why are you so slow to go in and take up your heritage in the
land which the Lord, the God of your fathers, has given you?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Take from among you three men from every
tribe; and I will send them to go through the land and make a record of
it for distribution as their heritage; then let them come back to me.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And let them make division of it into
seven parts: let Judah keep inside his limit on the south, and let the
children of Joseph keep inside their limit on the north.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And you are to have the land marked out
in seven parts, and come back to me with the record; and I will make the
distribution for you here by the decision of the Lord our God.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> For the Levites have no part among you;
to be the Lord's priests is their heritage; and Gad and Reuben and the
half-tribe of Manasseh have had their heritage on the east side of
Jordan, given to them by Moses, the servant of the Lord.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> So the men got up and went; and Joshua
gave orders to those who went, to make a record of the land, saying, Go
up and down through the land, and make a record of it and come back here
to me, and I will make the distribution for you here by the decision of
the Lord in Shiloh.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> So the men went, travelling through the
land, and made a record of it by towns in seven parts in a book, and
came back to Joshua to the tent-circle at Shiloh.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And Joshua made the distribution for
them in Shiloh by the decision of the Lord, marking out the land for the
children of Israel by their divisions.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And the first heritage came out for the
tribe of Benjamin by their families: and the limit of their heritage
went between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And their limit on the north was from
the Jordan, and the line goes up to the side of Jericho on the north and
through the hill-country to the west, ending at the waste land of
Beth-aven.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And from there the line goes south to
Luz, to the side of Luz (which is Beth-el), then down to Ataroth-addar,
by the mountain to the south of Beth-horon the lower.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And the limit is marked as coming round
to the south on the west side from the mountain which is south of
Beth-horon, and ending at Kiriath-baal (which is Kiriath-jearim), a town
of the children of Judah: this is the west part.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And the south part is from the farthest
point of Kiriath-jearim, and the line goes out to the west to the
fountain of the waters of Nephtoah:

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And the line goes down to the farthest
part of the mountain facing the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is on
the north of the valley of Rephaim: from there it goes down to the
valley of Hinnom, to the side of the Jebusite on the south as far as
En-rogel;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And it goes to En-shemesh and on to
Geliloth, opposite the way up to Adummim, and it goes down to the stone
of Bohan, the son of Reuben;

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And it goes on to the side facing the
Arabah to the north, and down to the Arabah;

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And on to the north side of
Beth-hoglah, ending at the north inlet of the Salt Sea at the south end
of Jordan; this is their limit on the south.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And the limit of the east part is the
Jordan. This is the heritage of the children of Benjamin, marked out for
their families by these limits on all sides.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And the towns of the children of
Benjamin, given to them in the order of their families, are Jericho and
Beth-hoglah and Emek-kezziz

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And Beth-arabah and Zemaraim and
Beth-el

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And Avvim and Parah and Ophrah

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And Chephar-Ammoni and Ophni and Geba;
twelve towns with their unwalled places;

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Gibeon and Ramah and Beeroth

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And Mizpeh and Chephirah and Mozah

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Rekem and Irpeel and Taralah

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And Zela, Eleph and the Jebusite (which
is Jerusalem), Gibeath and Kiriath; fourteen towns with their unwalled
places. This is the heritage of the children of Benjamin by their
families.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And the second heritage came out for the
tribe of Simeon by their families; and their heritage was in the middle
of the heritage of the children of Judah.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And they had for their heritage
Beer-sheba and Shema and Moladah

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Hazar-shual and Balah and Ezem

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Eltolad and Bethul and Hormah

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And Ziklag and Beth-marcaboth and
Hazar-susah

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Beth-lebaoth and Sharuhen; thirteen
towns with their unwalled places;

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Ain, Rimmon, and Ether and Ashan; four
towns with their unwalled places;

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And all the unwalled places round about
these towns as far as Baalath-beer-ramah to the south. This is the
heritage of the tribe of Simeon by their families.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> The heritage of Simeon was taken out of
Judah's stretch of land, for Judah's part was more than they had need
of, so the heritage of the children of Simeon was inside their heritage.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And the third heritage came out for
Zebulun by their families; the limit of their heritage was as far as
Sarid;

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And their limit goes up to the west to
Maralah, stretching to Dabbesheth, and to the stream in front of
Jokneam;

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Then turning east from Sarid to the
limit of Chisloth-tabor, it goes out to Daberath, and up to Japhia;

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And from there it goes on east to
Gath-hepher, to Eth-kazin; ending at Rimmon which goes as far as Neah;

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And the line goes round it on the north
to Hannathon, ending at the valley of Iphtah-el;

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Kattath and Nahalal and Shimron and
Idalah and Beth-lehem; twelve towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> This is the heritage of the children of
Zebulun by their families, these towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> For Issachar the fourth heritage came
out, for the children of Issachar by their families;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And their limit was to Jezreel and
Chesulloth and Shunem

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And Hapharaim and Shion and Anaharath

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Rabbith and Kishion and Ebez

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And Remeth and En-gannim and En-haddah
and Beth-pazzez;

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And their limit goes as far as Tabor
and Shahazimah and Beth-shemesh, ending at Jordan; sixteen towns with
their unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> This is the heritage of the tribe of
the children of Issachar by their families, these towns with their
unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And the fifth heritage came out for the
tribe of Asher by their families.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And their limit was Helkath and Hali
and Beten and Achshaph

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And Alammelech and Amad and Mishal,
stretching to Carmel on the west and Shihor-libnath;

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Turning to the east to Beth-dagon and
stretching to Zebulun and the valley of Iphtah-el as far as Beth-emek
and Neiel to the north; on the left it goes as far as Cabul

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And Ebron and Rehob and Hammon and
Kanah, to great Zidon;

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the limit goes round to Ramah and
the walled town of Tyre and Hosah, ending at the sea by Heleb and
Achzib;

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And Ummah and Aphek and Rehob;
twenty-two towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> This is the heritage of the tribe of
the children of Asher by their families, these towns with their unwalled
places.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> For the children of Naphtali the sixth
heritage came out, for the children of Naphtali by their families;

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And their limit was from Heleph, from
the oak-tree in Zaanannim, and Adami-hannekeb and Jabneel, as far as
Lakkum, ending at Jordan;

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And turning west to Aznoth-tabor, the
limit goes out from there to Hukkok, stretching to Zebulun on the south,
and Asher on the west, and Judah at Jordan on the east.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And the walled towns are Ziddim, Zer,
and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> And Adamah and Ramah and Hazor

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And Kedesh and Edrei and En-Hazor

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And Iron and Migdal-el, Horem and
Beth-anath and Beth-shemesh; nineteen towns with their unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> This is the heritage of the tribe of
the children of Naphtali by their families, these towns with their
unwalled places.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For the tribe of Dan by their families
the seventh heritage came out;

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And the limit of their heritage was
Zorah and Eshtaol and Ir-shemesh

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> And Shaalabbin and Aijalon and Ithlah

<span id="an_19:43">19:43</span> And Elon and Timnah and Ekron

<span id="an_19:44">19:44</span> And Eltekeh and Gibbethon and Baalath

<span id="an_19:45">19:45</span> And Jehud and Bene-berak and
Gath-rimmon;

<span id="an_19:46">19:46</span> And on the west was ... opposite Joppa.

<span id="an_19:47">19:47</span> (But the limit of the children of Dan
was not wide enough for them; so the children of Dan went up and made
war on Leshem and took it, putting it to the sword without mercy, and
they took it for their heritage and made a place for themselves there,
giving it the name of Leshem-dan, after the name of their father, Dan.)

<span id="an_19:48">19:48</span> This is the heritage of the tribe of
the children of Dan by their families, these towns with their unwalled
places.

<span id="an_19:49">19:49</span> So the distribution of the land and its
limits was complete; and the children of Israel gave Joshua, the son of
Nun, a heritage among them;

<span id="an_19:50">19:50</span> By the orders of the Lord they gave him
the town for which he made request, Timnath-serah in the hill-country of
Ephraim: there, after building the town, he made his living-place.

<span id="an_19:51">19:51</span> These are the heritages which Eleazar
the priest and Joshua, the son of Nun, and the heads of families of the
tribes of the children of Israel gave out at Shiloh, by the decision of
the Lord, at the door of the Tent of meeting. So the distribution of the
land was complete.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And the Lord said to Joshua,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Say to the children of Israel, Let
certain towns be marked out as safe places, as I said to you by the
mouth of Moses,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> So that any man who in error and without
design has taken the life of another, may go in flight to them: and they
will be safe places for you from him who has the right of punishment for
blood.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And if anyone goes in flight to one of
those towns, and comes into the public place of the town, and puts his
cause before the responsible men of the town, they will take him into
the town and give him a place among them where he may be safe.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And if the one who has the right of
punishment comes after him, they are not to give the taker of life up to
him; because he was the cause of his neighbour's death without designing
it and not in hate.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And he is to go on living in that town
till he has to come before the meeting of the people to be judged; (till
the death of him who is high priest at that time:) then the taker of
life may come back to his town and to his house, to the town from which
he had gone in flight.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> So they made selection of Kedesh in
Galilee in the hill-country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill-country
of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron) in the hill-country of
Judah.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And on the east side of Jordan at
Jericho, they made selection of Bezer in the waste land, in the
table-land, out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the
tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> These were the towns marked out for all
the children of Israel and for the man from a strange country living
among them, so that anyone causing the death of another in error, might
go in flight there, and not be put to death by him who has the right of
punishment for blood till he had come before the meeting of the people.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Then the heads of the families of the
Levites came to Eleazar the priest and Joshua, the son of Nun, and to
the heads of families of the tribes of the children of Israel;

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And said to them in Shiloh in the land of
Canaan, The Lord gave orders by Moses that we were to have towns for
living in, with their grass-lands for our cattle.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And the children of Israel out of their
heritage gave to the Levites these towns with their grass-lands, by the
order of the Lord.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And the heritage came out for the
families of the Kohathites: the children of Aaron the priest, who were
of the Levites, were given thirteen towns from the tribes of Judah,
Simeon, and Benjamin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The rest of the children of Kohath by
their families were given ten towns from the tribes of Ephraim and Dan
and the half-tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> The children of Gershon by their families
were given thirteen towns from the tribes of Issachar and Asher and
Naphtali and the half-tribe of Manasseh which was in Bashan.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The children of Merari by their families
were given twelve towns from the tribes of Reuben and Gad and Zebulun.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> All these towns with their grass-lands
the children of Israel gave by the decision of the Lord to the Levites,
as the Lord had given orders by Moses.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> From the tribes of the children of Judah
and the children of Simeon they gave these towns, listed here by name:

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> These were for the children of Aaron
among the families of the Kohathites, of the children of Levi: for they
came first in the distribution.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> They gave them Kiriath-arba, the town
of Arba, the father of Anak, (which is Hebron) in the hill-country of
Judah, with its grass-lands.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> But the open country round the town,
and its unwalled places, they gave to Caleb, the son of Jephunneh, as
his property.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And to the children of Aaron the priest
they gave Hebron with its grass-lands, the town where the taker of life
might be safe, and Libnah with its grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And Jattir with its grass-lands, and
Eshtemoa with its grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And Holon with its grass-lands, and
Debir with its grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And Ain, and Juttah, and Beth-shemesh,
with their grass-lands; nine towns from those two tribes.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And from the tribe of Benjamin they
gave Gibeon and Geba with their grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Anathoth and Almon with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Thirteen towns with their grass-lands
were given to the children of Aaron, the priests.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> The rest of the families of the
children of Kohath, the Levites, were given towns from the tribe of
Ephraim.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And they gave them Shechem with its
grass-lands in the hill-country of Ephraim, the town where the taker of
life might be safe, and Gezer with its grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And Kibzaim and Beth-horon with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And from the tribe of Dan, Elteke and
Gibbethon with their grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Aijalon and Gath-rimmon with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And from the half-tribe of Manasseh,
Taanach and Gath-rimmon with their grass-lands, two towns.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> All the towns of the rest of the
families of the children of Kohath were ten with their grass-lands.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And to the children of Gershon, of the
families of the Levites, they gave from the half-tribe of Manasseh,
Golan in Bashan with its grass-lands, the town where the taker of life
might be safe, and Ashtaroth with its grass-lands, two towns.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And from the tribe of Issachar, Kishion
and Daberath with their grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Jarmuth and En-gannim with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And from the tribe of Asher, Mishal and
Abdon, with their grass-lands:

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Helkath and Rehob with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And from the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh
in Galilee with its grass-lands, the town where the taker of life might
be safe, and Hammoth-dor and Kartan with their grass-lands, three towns.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> All the towns of the Gershonites with
their families were thirteen with their grass-lands.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And to the rest of the Levites, that
is, the families of the children of Merari, they gave from the tribe of
Zebulun, Jokneam and Kartah with their grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> Dimnah and Nahalal with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> And from the tribe of Reuben, Bezer and
Jahaz with their grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> Kedemoth and Mephaath with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> And from the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in
Gilead, the town where the taker of life might be safe, and Mahanaim
with their grass-lands;

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> Heshbon and Jazer with their
grass-lands, four towns.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> All these towns were given to the
children of Merari by their families, that is, the rest of the families
of the Levites; and their heritage was twelve towns.

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> All the towns of the Levites, among the
heritage of the children of Israel, were forty-eight towns with their
grass-lands.

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> Every one of these towns had
grass-lands round it.

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> So the Lord gave to Israel all the land
which he gave by oath to their fathers; so it became their heritage and
their living-place.

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> And the Lord gave them peace on every
side, as he had said to their fathers: all those who were against them
gave way before them, for the Lord gave them all up into their hands.

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> The Lord kept faith with the house of
Israel about all the good which he said he would do for them, and all
his words came true.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Then Joshua sent for the Reubenites and
the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And said to them, You have kept all the
orders of Moses, the Lord's servant, and have done everything I gave you
orders to do:

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> You have now been with your brothers for
a long time; till this day you have been doing the orders of the Lord
your God.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And now the Lord your God has given your
brothers rest, as he said: so now you may go back to your tents, to the
land of your heritage, which Moses, the Lord's servant, gave to you on
the other side of Jordan.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Only take great care to do the orders and
the law which Moses, the Lord's servant, gave you; to have love for the
Lord your God and to go in all his ways; and to keep his laws and to be
true to him and to be his servants with all your heart and with all your
soul.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Then Joshua gave them his blessing and
sent them away: and they went back to their tents.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Now to the one half of the tribe of
Manasseh, Moses had given a heritage in Bashan; but to the other half,
Joshua gave a heritage among their brothers on the west side of Jordan.
Now when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he gave them his
blessing,

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And said to them, Go back with much
wealth to your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver and gold
and brass and iron, and with a very great store of clothing; give your
brothers a part of the goods taken in the war.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> So Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of
Manasseh went back, parting from the children of Israel at Shiloh in the
land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their
heritage which had been given to them by the Lord's order to Moses.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Now when they came to the country by
Jordan in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of
Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh put up there, by Jordan, a great
altar, seen from far.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And news came to the children of
Israel, See, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half-tribe of Manasseh have put up an altar opposite the land of Canaan,
in the country by Jordan on the side which is Israel's.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Then all the meeting of the children of
Israel, hearing this, came together at Shiloh to go up against them to
war.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And the children of Israel sent
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, to the children of Reuben and
the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, to the land of
Gilead,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And with him they sent ten chiefs, one
for every tribe of the children of Israel, every one of them the head of
his house among the families of Israel.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And they came to the children of Reuben
and the children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, to the land of
Gilead, and said to them,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> This is what all the meeting of the
people of the Lord has said, What is this wrong which you have done
against the God of Israel, turning back this day from the Lord and
building an altar for yourselves, and being false to the Lord?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Was not the sin of Baal-peor great
enough, from which we are not clear even to this day, though punishment
came on the people of the Lord,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> That now you are turned back from the
Lord? and, because you are false to him today, tomorrow his wrath will
be let loose on all the people of Israel.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> But if the land you now have is
unclean, come over into the Lord's land where his House is, and take up
your heritage among us: but do not be false to the Lord and to us by
building yourselves an altar in addition to the altar of the Lord our
God.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Did not Achan, the son of Zerah, do
wrong about the cursed thing, causing wrath to come on all the people of
Israel? And not on him only came the punishment of death.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Then the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh said in answer to the
heads of the families of Israel,

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> God, even God the Lord, God, even God
the Lord, he sees, and Israel will see--if it is in pride or in sin
against the Lord,

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> That we have made ourselves an altar,
being false to the Lord, keep us not safe from death this day; and if
for the purpose of offering burned offerings on it and meal offerings,
or peace-offerings, let the Lord himself send punishment for it;

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And if we have not, in fact, done this
designedly and with purpose, having in our minds the fear that in time
to come your children might say to our children, What have you to do
with the Lord, the God of Israel?

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> For the Lord has made Jordan a line of
division between us and you, the children of Reuben and the children of
Gad; you have no part in the Lord: so your children will make our
children give up fearing the Lord.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> So we said, Let us now make an altar
for ourselves, not for burned offerings or for the offerings of beasts:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> But to be a witness between us and you,
and between the future generations, that we have the right of
worshipping the Lord with our burned offerings and our offerings of
beasts and our peace-offerings; so that your children will not be able
to say to our children in time to come, You have no part in the Lord.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> For we said to ourselves, If they say
this to us or to future generations, then we will say, See this copy of
the Lord's altar which our fathers made, not for burned offerings or
offerings of beasts, but for a witness between us and you.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Never let it be said that we were false
to the Lord, turning back this day from him and building an altar for
burned offerings and meal offerings and offerings of beasts, in addition
to the altar of the Lord our God which is before his House.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Then Phinehas the priest and the chiefs
of the meeting and the heads of the families of Israel who were with
him, hearing what the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
children of Manasseh said, were pleased.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the
priest, said to the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
children of Manasseh, Now we are certain that the Lord is among us,
because you have not done this wrong against the Lord: and you have kept
us from falling into the hands of the Lord.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> Then Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the
priest, and the chiefs went back from the land of Gilead, from the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad, and came to the children of
Israel in Canaan and gave them the news.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And the children of Israel were pleased
about this; and they gave praise to God, and had no more thought of
going to war against the children of Reuben and the children of Gad for
the destruction of their land.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad gave to that altar the name of Ed. For, they said, It is
a witness between us that the Lord is God.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Now after a long time, when the Lord had
given Israel rest from wars on every side, and Joshua was old and full
of years,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Joshua sent for all Israel, for their
responsible men and their chiefs and their judges and their overseers,
and said to them, I am old, and full of years:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> You have seen everything the Lord your
God has done to all these nations because of you; for it is the Lord
your God who has been fighting for you.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Now I have given to you, as the heritage
of your tribes, all these nations which are still in the land, together
with those cut off by me, from Jordan as far as the Great Sea on the
west.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> The Lord your God will send them away by
force, driving them out before you; and you are to take their land for
your heritage, as the Lord your God said to you.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> So be very strong to keep and do whatever
is recorded in the book of the law of Moses, not turning away from it to
the right or to the left;

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Have nothing to do with these nations who
still are living among you; let not their gods be named by you or used
in your oaths; do not be their servants or give them worship:

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But be true to the Lord your God as you
have been till this day.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> For the Lord has sent out from before you
nations great and strong: and they have all given way before you till
this day.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> One man of you is able to put to flight
a thousand; for it is the Lord your God who is fighting for you, as he
has said to you.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> So keep watch on yourselves, and see
that you have love for the Lord your God.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> For if you go back, joining yourselves
to the rest of these nations who are still among you, getting married to
them and living with them and they with you:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Then you may be certain that the Lord
your God will not go on driving these nations out from before you; but
they will become a danger and a cause of sin to you, a whip for your
sides and thorns in your eyes, till you are cut off from this good land
which the Lord your God has given you.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Now I am about to go the way of all the
earth: and you have seen and are certain, all of you, in your hearts and
souls, that in all the good things which the Lord said about you, he has
kept faith with you; everything has come true for you.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And you will see that, as all the good
things which the Lord your God undertook to do for you, have come to
you, so the Lord will send down on you all the evil things till he has
made your destruction complete, and you are cut off from the good land
which the Lord your God has given you.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> If the agreement of the Lord your God,
which was given to you by his orders, is broken, and you become the
servants of other gods and give them worship, then the wrath of the Lord
will be burning against you, and you will quickly be cut off from the
good land which he has given you.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Then Joshua got all the tribes of Israel
together at Shechem; and he sent for the responsible men of Israel and
their chiefs and their judges and their overseers; and they took their
place before God.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Joshua said to all the people, These
are the words of the Lord, the God of Israel: In the past your fathers,
Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor, were living on
the other side of the River: and they were worshipping other gods.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And I took your father Abraham from the
other side of the River, guiding him through all the land of Canaan; I
made his offspring great in number, and gave him Isaac.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And to Isaac I gave Jacob and Esau: to
Esau I gave Mount Seir, as his heritage; but Jacob and his children went
down to Egypt.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And I sent Moses and Aaron, troubling
Egypt by all the signs I did among them: and after that I took you out.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> I took your fathers out of Egypt: and you
came to the Red Sea; and the Egyptians came after your fathers to the
Red Sea, with their war-carriages and their horsemen.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And at their cry, the Lord made it dark
between you and the Egyptians, and made the sea go over them, covering
them with its waters; your eyes have seen what I did in Egypt: then for
a long time you were living in the waste land.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And I took you into the lands of the
Amorites on the other side of Jordan; and they made war on you, and I
gave them into your hands and you took their land; and I sent
destruction on them before you.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then Balak, the son of Zippor, king of
Moab, went up to war against Israel; and he sent for Balaam, the son of
Beor, to put a curse on you:

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> But I did not give ear to Balaam; and
so he went on blessing you; and I kept you safe from him.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Then you went over Jordan and came to
Jericho: and the men of Jericho made war on you, the Amorites and the
Perizzites and the Canaanites and the Hittites and the Girgashites and
the Hivites and the Jebusites: and I gave them up into your hands.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And I sent the hornet before you,
driving out the two kings of the Amorites before you, not with your
sword and your bow.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And I gave you a land on which you had
done no work, and towns not of your building, and you are now living in
them; and your food comes from vine-gardens and olive-gardens not of
your planting.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> So now, go in fear of the Lord, and be
his servants with true hearts: put away the gods worshipped by your
fathers across the River and in Egypt, and be servants of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And if it seems evil to you to be the
servants of the Lord, make the decision this day whose servants you will
be: of the gods whose servants your fathers were across the River, or of
the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are living: but I and my
house will be the servants of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Then the people in answer said, Never
will we give up the Lord to be the servants of other gods;

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> For it is the Lord our God who has
taken us and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the
prison-house, and who did all those great signs before our eyes, and
kept us safe on all our journeys, and among all the peoples through whom
we went:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And the Lord sent out from before us
all the peoples, the Amorites living in the land: so we will be the
servants of the Lord, for he is our God.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And Joshua said to the people, You are
not able to be the servants of the Lord, for he is a holy God, a God who
will not let his honour be given to another: he will have no mercy on
your wrongdoing or your sins.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> If you are turned away from the Lord
and become the servants of strange gods, then turning against you he
will do you evil, cutting you off, after he has done you good.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And the people said to Joshua, No! But
we will be the servants of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And Joshua said to the people, You are
witnesses against yourselves that you have made the decision to be the
servants of the Lord. And they said, We are witnesses.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then, he said, put away the strange
gods among you, turning your hearts to the Lord, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And the people said to Joshua, We will
be the servants of the Lord our God, and we will give ear to his voice.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> So Joshua made an agreement with the
people that day, and gave them a rule and a law in Shechem.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> And Joshua put these words on record,
writing them in the book of the law of God; and he took a great stone,
and put it up there under the oak-tree which was in the holy place of
the Lord.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> And Joshua said to all the people, See
now, this stone is to be a witness against us; for all the words of the
Lord have been said to us in its hearing: so it will be a witness
against you if you are false to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Then Joshua let the people go away,
every man to his heritage.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Now after these things, the death of
Joshua, the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, took place, he being
then a hundred and ten years old.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And they put his body in the earth in
the land of his heritage in Timnath-serah, in the hill-country of
Ephraim, to the north of Mount Gaash.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And Israel was true to the Lord all the
days of Joshua, and all the days of the older men who were still living
after Joshua's death, and had seen what the Lord had done for Israel.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> And the bones of Joseph, which the
children of Israel had taken up from Egypt, they put in the earth in
Shechem, in the property which Jacob had got from the sons of Hamor, the
father of Shechem, for a hundred shekels: and they became the heritage
of the children of Joseph.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Then the death of Eleazar, the son of
Aaron, took place; and his body was put in the earth in the hill of
Phinehas his son, which had been given to him in the hill-country of
Ephraim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges](jdg)
