[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jer)  [Next](eze) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Lamentations

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> See her seated by herself, the town which
was full of people! She who was great among the nations has become like
a widow! She who was a princess among the countries has come under the
yoke of forced work!

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> She is sorrowing bitterly in the night, and
her face is wet with weeping; among all her lovers she has no comforter:
all her friends have been false to her, they have become her haters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Judah has been taken away as a prisoner
because of trouble and hard work; her living-place is among the nations,
there is no rest for her: all her attackers have overtaken her in a
narrow place.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> The ways of Zion are sad, because no one
comes to the holy meeting; all her doorways are made waste, her priests
are breathing out sorrow: her virgins are troubled, and it is bitter for
her.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Those who are against her have become the
head, everything goes well for her haters; for the Lord has sent sorrow
on her because of the great number of her sins: her young children have
gone away as prisoners before the attacker.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And all her glory has gone from the
daughter of Zion: her rulers have become like harts with no place for
food, and they have gone in flight without strength before the attacker.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Jerusalem keeps in mind, in the days of her
sorrow and of her wanderings, all the desired things which were hers in
days gone by; when her people came into the power of her hater and she
had no helper, her attackers saw their desire effected on her and made
sport of her destruction.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Great is the sin of Jerusalem; for this
cause she has become an unclean thing: all those who gave her honour are
looking down on her, because they have seen her shame: now truly,
breathing out grief, she is turned back.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> In her skirts were her unclean ways; she
gave no thought to her end; and her fall has been a wonder; she has no
comforter: see her sorrow, O Lord; for the attacker is lifted up.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The hand of her hater is stretched out
over all her desired things; for she has seen that the nations have come
into her holy place, about whom you gave orders that they were not to
come into the meeting of your people.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Breathing out grief all her people are
looking for bread; they have given their desired things for food to give
them life: see, O Lord, and take note; for she has become a thing of
shame.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Come to me, all you who go by! Keep your
eyes on me, and see if there is any pain like the pain of my wound,
which the Lord has sent on me in the day of his burning wrath.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> From on high he has sent fire into my
bones, and it has overcome them: his net is stretched out for my feet, I
am turned back by him; he has made me waste and feeble all the day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> A watch is kept on my sins; they are
joined together by his hand, they have come on to my neck; he has made
my strength give way: the Lord has given me up into the hands of those
against whom I have no power.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> The Lord has made sport of all my men of
war in me, he has got men together against me to send destruction on my
young men: the virgin daughter of Judah has been crushed like grapes
under the feet of the Lord.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For these things I am weeping; my eye is
streaming with water; because the comforter who might give me new life
is far from me: my children are made waste, because the hater is strong.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Zion's hands are outstretched; she has no
comforter; the Lord has given orders to the attackers of Jacob round
about him: Jerusalem has become like an unclean thing among them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> The Lord is upright; for I have gone
against his orders: give ear, now, all you peoples, and see my pain, my
virgins and my young men have gone away as prisoners.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> I sent for my lovers, but they were false
to me: my priests and my responsible men were breathing their last
breath in the town, while they were looking for food to give them new
life.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> See, O Lord, for I am in trouble; the
inmost parts of my body are deeply moved; my heart is turned in me; for
I have been uncontrolled: outside the children are put to the sword, and
in the house there is death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Give ear to the voice of my grief; I have
no comforter; all my haters have news of my troubles, they are glad
because you have done it: let the day of fate come when they will be
like me.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Let all their evil-doing come before you;
do to them as you have done to me for all my sins: for loud is the sound
of my grief, and the strength of my heart is gone.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> How has the daughter of Zion been covered
with a cloud by the Lord in his wrath! he has sent down from heaven to
earth the glory of Israel, and has not kept in memory the resting-place
of his feet in the day of his wrath.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The Lord has given up to destruction all
the living-places of Jacob without pity; pulling down in his wrath the
strong places of the daughter of Judah, stretching out on the earth the
wounded, even her king and her rulers.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> In his burning wrath every horn of Israel
has been cut off; his right hand has been turned back before the
attacker: he has put a fire in Jacob, causing destruction round about.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> His bow has been bent for the attack, he
has taken his place with his hand ready, in his hate he has put to death
all who were pleasing to the eye: on the tent of the daughter of Zion he
has let loose his passion like fire.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The Lord has become like one fighting
against her, sending destruction on Israel; he has sent destruction on
all her great houses, making waste his strong places: increasing the
grief and the sorrow of the daughter of Judah.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And he has violently taken away his tent,
as from a garden; he has made waste his meeting-place: the Lord has
taken away the memory of feast and Sabbath in Zion, and in the passion
of his wrath he is against king and priest.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The Lord has given up his altar and has
been turned in hate from his holy place; he has given up into the hands
of the attacker the walls of her great houses: their voices have been
loud in the house of the Lord as in the day of a holy meeting.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> It is the Lord's purpose to make waste the
wall of the daughter of Zion; his line has been stretched out, he has
not kept back his hand from destruction: he has sent sorrow on tower and
wall, they have become feeble together.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Her doors have gone down into the earth; he
has sent destruction on her locks: her king and her princes are among
the nations where the law is not; even her prophets have had no vision
from the Lord.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The responsible men of the daughter of
Zion are seated on the earth without a word; they have put dust on their
heads, they are clothed in haircloth: the heads of the virgins of
Jerusalem are bent down to the earth.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> My eyes are wasted with weeping, the
inmost parts of my body are deeply moved, my inner parts are drained out
on the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because
of the young children and babies at the breast who are falling without
strength in the open squares of the town.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> They say to their mothers, Where is grain
and wine? when they are falling like the wounded in the open squares of
the town, when their life is drained out on their mother's breast.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> What example am I to give you? what
comparison am I to make for you, O daughter of Jerusalem? what am I to
make equal to you, so that I may give you comfort, O virgin daughter of
Zion? for your destruction is great like the sea: who is able to make
you well?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The visions which your prophets have seen
for you are false and foolish; they have not made clear to you your sin
so that your fate might be changed: but they have seen for you false
words, driving you away.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> All who go by make a noise with their
hands at you; they make hisses, shaking their heads at the daughter of
Jerusalem, and saying, Is this the town which was the crown of
everything beautiful, the joy of all the earth?

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> All your haters are opening their mouths
wide against you; making hisses and whistling through their teeth, they
say, We have made a meal of her: certainly this is the day we have been
looking for; it has come, we have seen it.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The Lord has done that which was his
purpose; he has put into force the orders which he gave in the days
which are past; pulling down without pity, he has made your hater glad
over you, lifting up the horn of those who were against you.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Let your cry go up to the Lord: O wall of
the daughter of Zion, let your weeping be flowing down like a stream day
and night; give yourself no rest, let not your eyes keep back the drops
of sorrow.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Up! give cries in the night, at the
starting of the night-watches; let your heart be flowing out like water
before the face of the Lord, lifting up your hands to him for the life
of your young children who are falling down, feeble for need of food, at
the top of every street.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Look! O Lord, see to whom you have done
this! Are the women to take as their food the fruit of their bodies, the
children who are folded in their arms? are the priest and the prophet to
be put to death in the holy place of the Lord?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The young men and the old are stretched
on the earth in the streets; my virgins and my young men have been put
to the sword: you have sent death on them in the day of your wrath,
causing death without pity.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> As in the day of a holy meeting you have
made fears come round me on every side, and no one got away or was kept
safe in the day of the Lord's wrath: those who were folded in my arms,
whom I took care of, have been sent to their destruction by my hater.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> I am the man who has seen trouble by the
rod of his wrath.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> By him I have been made to go in the dark
where there is no light.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Truly against me his hand has been turned
again and again all the day.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> My flesh and my skin have been used up by
him and my bones broken.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He has put up a wall against me, shutting
me in with bitter sorrow.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He has kept me in dark places, like those
who have been long dead.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He has put a wall round me, so that I am
not able to go out; he has made great the weight of my chain.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Even when I send up a cry for help, he
keeps my prayer shut out.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> He has put up a wall of cut stones about my
ways, he has made my roads twisted.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He is like a bear waiting for me, like a
lion in secret places.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> By him my ways have been turned on one
side and I have been pulled in bits; he has made me waste.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> With his bow bent, he has made me the
mark for his arrows.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He has let loose his arrows into the
inmost parts of my body.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I have become the sport of all the
peoples; I am their song all the day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> He has made my life nothing but pain, he
has given me the bitter root in full measure.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> By him my teeth have been broken with
crushed stones, and I am bent low in the dust.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> My soul is sent far away from peace, I
have no more memory of good.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And I said, My strength is cut off, and
my hope from the Lord.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Keep in mind my trouble and my wandering,
the bitter root and the poison.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> My soul still keeps the memory of them;
and is bent down in me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> This I keep in mind, and because of this
I have hope.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> It is through the Lord's love that we
have not come to destruction, because his mercies have no limit.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> They are new every morning; great is your
good faith.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> I said to myself, The Lord is my
heritage; and because of this I will have hope in him.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> The Lord is good to those who are waiting
for him, to the soul which is looking for him.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> It is good to go on hoping and quietly
waiting for the salvation of the Lord.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> It is good for a man to undergo the yoke
when he is young.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Let him be seated by himself, saying
nothing, because he has put it on him.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Let him put his mouth in the dust, if by
chance there may be hope.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Let his face be turned to him who gives
him blows; let him be full of shame.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> For the Lord does not give a man up for
ever.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For though he sends grief, still he will
have pity in the full measure of his love.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> For he has no pleasure in troubling and
causing grief to the children of men.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> In a man's crushing under his feet all
the prisoners of the earth,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> In his turning away the right of a man
before the face of the Most High.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> In his doing wrong to a man in his cause,
the Lord has no pleasure.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> Who is able to say a thing, and give
effect to it, if it has not been ordered by the Lord?

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Do not evil and good come from the mouth
of the Most High?

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> What protest may a living man make, even
a man about the punishment of his sin?

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> Let us make search and put our ways to
the test, turning again to the Lord;

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> Lifting up our hearts with our hands to
God in the heavens.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> We have done wrong and gone against your
law; we have not had your forgiveness.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> Covering yourself with wrath you have
gone after us, cutting us off without pity;

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> Covering yourself with a cloud, so that
prayer may not get through.

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> You have made us like waste and that for
which there is no use, among the peoples.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> The mouths of all our haters are open
wide against us.

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> Fear and deep waters have come on us,
wasting and destruction.

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> Rivers of water are running down from my
eyes, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> My eyes are streaming without stopping,
they have no rest,

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> Till the Lord's eye is turned on me, till
he sees my trouble from heaven.

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> The Lord is unkind to my soul, more than
all the daughters of my town.

<span id="an_3:52">3:52</span> They who are against me without cause
have gone hard after me as if I was a bird;

<span id="an_3:53">3:53</span> They have put an end to my life in the
prison, stoning me with stones.

<span id="an_3:54">3:54</span> Waters were flowing over my head; I said,
I am cut off.

<span id="an_3:55">3:55</span> I was making prayer to your name, O Lord,
out of the lowest prison.

<span id="an_3:56">3:56</span> My voice came to you; let not your ear be
shut to my breathing, to my cry.

<span id="an_3:57">3:57</span> You came near in the day when I made my
prayer to you: you said, Have no fear.

<span id="an_3:58">3:58</span> O Lord, you have taken up the cause of my
soul, you have made my life safe.

<span id="an_3:59">3:59</span> O Lord, you have seen my wrong; be judge
in my cause.

<span id="an_3:60">3:60</span> You have seen all the evil rewards they
have sent on me, and all their designs against me.

<span id="an_3:61">3:61</span> Their bitter words have come to your
ears, O Lord, and all their designs against me;

<span id="an_3:62">3:62</span> The lips of those who came up against me,
and their thoughts against me all the day.

<span id="an_3:63">3:63</span> Take note of them when they are seated,
and when they get up; I am their song.

<span id="an_3:64">3:64</span> You will give them their reward, O Lord,
answering to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_3:65">3:65</span> You will let their hearts be covered over
with your curse on them.

<span id="an_3:66">3:66</span> You will go after them in wrath, and put
an end to them from under the heavens of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> How dark has the gold become! how changed
the best gold! the stones of the holy place are dropping out at the top
of every street.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The valued sons of Zion, whose price was
the best gold, are looked on as vessels of earth, the work of the hands
of the potter!

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Even the beasts of the waste land have full
breasts, they give milk to their young ones: the daughter of my people
has become cruel like the ostriches in the waste land.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> The tongue of the child at the breast is
fixed to the roof of his mouth for need of drink: the young children are
crying out for bread, and no man gives it to them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Those who were used to feasting on delicate
food are wasted in the streets: those who as children were dressed in
purple are stretched out on the dust.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For the punishment of the daughter of my
people is greater than the punishment of Sodom, which was overturned
suddenly without any hand falling on her.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Her holy ones were cleaner than snow, they
were whiter than milk, their bodies were redder than corals, their form
was as the sapphire:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Their face is blacker than night; in the
streets no one has knowledge of them: their skin is hanging on their
bones, they are dry, they have become like wood.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Those who have been put to the sword are
better off than those whose death is caused by need of food; for these
come to death slowly, burned up like the fruit of the field.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The hands of kind-hearted women have been
boiling their children; they were their food in the destruction of the
daughter of my people.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The Lord has given full effect to his
passion, he has let loose his burning wrath; he has made a fire in Zion,
causing the destruction of its bases.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> To the kings of the earth and to all the
people of the world it did not seem possible that the attackers and the
haters would go into the doors of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> It is because of the sins of her prophets
and the evil-doing of her priests, by whom the blood of the upright has
been drained out in her.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> They are wandering like blind men in the
streets, they are made unclean with blood, so that their robes may not
be touched by men.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Away! unclean! they were crying out to
them, Away! away! let there be no touching: when they went away in
flight and wandering, men said among the nations, There is no further
resting-place for them.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The face of the Lord has sent them in all
directions; he will no longer take care of them: they had no respect for
the priests, they gave no honour to the old men.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Our eyes are still wasting away in
looking for our false help: we have been watching for a nation unable to
give salvation.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> They go after our steps so that we may
not go in our streets: our end is near, our days are numbered; for our
end has come.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Those who went after us were quicker than
the eagles of the heaven, driving us before them on the mountains,
waiting secretly for us in the waste land.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Our breath of life, he on whom the holy
oil was put, was taken in their holes; of whom we said, Under his shade
we will be living among the nations.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Have joy and be glad, O daughter of Edom,
living in the land of Uz: the cup will be given to you in your turn, and
you will be overcome with wine and your shame will be seen.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The punishment of your evil-doing is
complete, O daughter of Zion; never again will he take you away as a
prisoner: he will give you the reward of your evil-doing, O daughter of
Edom; he will let your sin be uncovered.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Keep in mind, O Lord, what has come to us:
take note and see our shame.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Our heritage is given up to men of strange
lands, our houses to those who are not our countrymen.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> We are children without fathers, our
mothers are like widows.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> We give money for a drink of water, we get
our wood for a price.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Our attackers are on our necks: overcome
with weariness, we have no rest.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> We have given our hands to the Egyptians
and to the Assyrians so that we might have enough bread.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Our fathers were sinners and are dead; and
the weight of their evil-doing is on us.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Servants are ruling over us, and there is
no one to make us free from their hands.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> We put our lives in danger to get our
bread, because of the sword of the waste land.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Our skin is heated like an oven because
of our burning heat from need of food.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> They took by force the women in Zion, the
virgins in the towns of Judah.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Their hands put princes to death by
hanging: the faces of old men were not honoured.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> The young men were crushing the grain,
and the boys were falling under the wood.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> The old men are no longer seated in the
doorway, and the music of the young men has come to an end.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The joy of our hearts is ended; our
dancing is changed into sorrow.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> The crown has been taken from our head:
sorrow is ours, for we are sinners.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Because of this our hearts are feeble;
for these things our eyes are dark;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Because of the mountain of Zion which is
a waste; jackals go over it.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> You, O Lord, are seated as King for ever;
the seat of your power is eternal.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why have we gone from your memory for
ever? why have you been turned away from us for so long?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Make us come back to you, O Lord, and let
us be turned; make our days new again as in the past.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But you have quite given us up; you are
full of wrath against us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel](eze)
