[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simon Peter, a servant and Apostle of Jesus
Christ, to those who with us have a part in the same holy faith in the
righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> May grace and peace ever be increasing in
you, in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Because by his power he has given us
everything necessary for life and righteousness, through the knowledge
of him who has been our guide by his glory and virtue;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And through this he has given us the hope
of great rewards highly to be valued; so that by them we might have our
part in God's being, and be made free from the destruction which is in
the world through the desires of the flesh.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> So, for this very cause, take every care;
joining virtue to faith, and knowledge to virtue,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And self-control to knowledge, and a quiet
mind to self-control, and fear of God to a quiet mind,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And love of the brothers to fear of God,
and to love of the brothers, love itself.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For if you have these things in good
measure, they will make you fertile and full of fruit in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For the man who has not these things is
blind, seeing only what is near, having no memory of how he was made
clean from his old sins.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For this reason, my brothers, take all
the more care to make your selection and approval certain; for if you do
these things you will never have a fall:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For so the way will be open to you into
the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For this reason I will be ready at all
times to keep your memory of these things awake, though you have the
knowledge of them now and are well based in your present faith.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And it seems right to me, as long as I am
in this tent of flesh, to keep your minds awake by working on your
memory;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> For I am conscious that in a short time I
will have to put off this tent of flesh, as our Lord Jesus Christ has
made clear to me.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And I will take every care so that you
may have a clear memory of these things after my death.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For when we gave you news of the power
and the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, our teaching was not based on
stories put together by art, but we were eye-witnesses of his glory.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For God the Father gave him honour and
glory, when such a voice came to him out of the great glory, saying,
This is my dearly loved Son, with whom I am well pleased.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And this voice came from heaven even to
our ears, when we were with him on the holy mountain.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And so the words of the prophets are made
more certain; and it is well for you to give attention to them as to a
light shining in a dark place, till the dawn comes and the morning star
is seen in your hearts;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Being conscious in the first place that
no man by himself may give a special sense to the words of the prophets.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For these words did not ever come through
the impulse of men: but the prophets had them from God, being moved by
the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But there were false prophets among the
people, as there will be false teachers among you, who will secretly put
forward wrong teachings for your destruction, even turning away from the
Lord who gave himself for them; whose destruction will come quickly, and
they themselves will be the cause of it.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And a great number will go with them in
their evil ways, through whom the true way will have a bad name.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And in their desire for profit they will
come to you with words of deceit, like traders doing business in souls:
whose punishment has been ready for a long time and their destruction is
watching for them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For if God did not have pity for the angels
who did evil, but sent them down into hell, to be kept in chains of
eternal night till they were judged;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And did not have mercy on the world which
then was, but only kept safe Noah, a preacher of righteousness, with
seven others, when he let loose the waters over the world of the
evil-doers;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And sent destruction on Sodom and Gomorrah,
burning them up with fire as an example to those whose way of life might
in the future be unpleasing to him;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And kept safe Lot, the upright man, who was
deeply troubled by the unclean life of the evil-doers

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (Because the soul of that upright man
living among them was pained from day to day by seeing and hearing their
crimes):

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The Lord is able to keep the upright safe
in the time of testing, and to keep evil-doers under punishment till the
day of judging;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But specially those who go after the
unclean desires of the flesh, and make sport of authority. Ready to take
chances, uncontrolled, they have no fear of saying evil of those in high
places:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Though the angels, who are greater in
strength and power, do not make use of violent language against them
before the Lord.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But these men, like beasts without
reason, whose natural use is to be taken and put to death, crying out
against things of which they have no knowledge, will undergo that same
destruction which they are designing for others;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For the evil which overtakes them is the
reward of their evil-doing: such men take their pleasure in the delights
of the flesh even in the daytime; they are like the marks of a disease,
like poisoned wounds among you, feasting together with you in joy;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Having eyes full of evil desire, never
having enough of sin; turning feeble souls out of the true way; they are
children of cursing, whose hearts are well used to bitter envy;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Turning out of the true way, they have
gone wandering in error, after the way of Balaam, the son of Beor, who
was pleased to take payment for wrongdoing;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But his wrongdoing was pointed out to
him: an ass, talking with a man's voice, put a stop to the error of the
prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These are fountains without water, and
mists before a driving storm; for whom the eternal night is kept in
store.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For with high-sounding false words,
making use of the attraction of unclean desires of the flesh, they get
into their power those newly made free from those who are living in
error;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Saying that they will be free, while they
themselves are the servants of destruction; because whatever gets the
better of a man makes a servant of him.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For if, after they have got free from the
unclean things of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again taken in the net and overcome,
their last condition is worse than their first.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For it would have been better for them to
have had no knowledge of the way of righteousness, than to go back again
from the holy law which was given to them, after having knowledge of it.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> They are an example of that true saying,
The dog has gone back to the food it had put out, and the pig which had
been washed to its rolling in the dirty earth.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My loved ones, this is now my second letter
to you, and in this as in the first, I am attempting to keep your true
minds awake;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So that you may keep in mind the words of
the holy prophets in the past, and the law of the Lord and Saviour which
was given to you by his Apostles.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Having first of all the knowledge that in
the last days there will be men who, ruled by their evil desires, will
make sport of holy things,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Saying, Where is the hope of his coming?
From the death of the fathers till now everything has gone on as it was
from the making of the world.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But in taking this view they put out of
their minds the memory that in the old days there was a heaven, and an
earth lifted out of the water and circled by water, by the word of God;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And that the world which then was came to
an end through the overflowing of the waters.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the present heaven and the present
earth have been kept for destruction by fire, which is waiting for them
on the day of the judging and destruction of evil men.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But, my loved ones, keep in mind this one
thing, that with the Lord one day is the same as a thousand years, and a
thousand years are no more than one day.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The Lord is not slow in keeping his word,
as he seems to some, but he is waiting in mercy for you, not desiring
the destruction of any, but that all may be turned from their evil ways.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But the day of the Lord will come like a
thief; and in that day the heavens will be rolled up with a great noise,
and the substance of the earth will be changed by violent heat, and the
world and everything in it will be burned up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Seeing then that all these things are
coming to such an end, what sort of persons is it right for you to be,
in all holy behaviour and righteousness,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Looking for and truly desiring the coming
of the day of God, when the heavens will come to an end through fire,
and the substance of the earth will be changed by the great heat?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But having faith in his word, we are
looking for a new heaven and a new earth, which will be the
resting-place of righteousness.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this reason, my loved ones, as you
are looking for these things, take great care that when he comes you may
be in peace before him, free from sin and every evil thing.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And be certain that the long waiting of
the Lord is for salvation; even as our brother Paul has said in his
letters to you, from the wisdom which was given to him;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And as he said in all his letters, which
had to do with these things; in which are some hard sayings, so that,
like the rest of the holy Writings, they are twisted by those who are
uncertain and without knowledge, to the destruction of their souls.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For this reason, my loved ones, having
knowledge of these things before they take place, take care that you are
not turned away by the error of the uncontrolled, so falling from your
true faith.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But be increased in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. May he have glory now
and for ever. So be it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1)
