[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti2)  [Next](plm) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Basic English Bible: Titus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of God, and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, in agreement with the faith of the saints of God and the
full knowledge of what is true in harmony with religion,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In the hope of eternal life, which was made
certain before eternal time, by the word of God who is ever true;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Who, in his time, made clear his word in
the good news, of which, by the order of God our Saviour, I became a
preacher;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To Titus, my true child in our common
faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Saviour.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I did not take you with me when I went away
from Crete, so that you might do what was necessary to put things in
order there, placing men in authority over the churches in every town,
as I said to you;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Men having a good record, husbands of one
wife, whose children are of the faith, children of whom it may not be
said that they are given to loose living or are uncontrolled.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For it is necessary for a Bishop to be a
man of virtue, as God's servant; not pushing himself forward, not
quickly moved to wrath or blows, not desiring profit for himself;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But opening his house freely to guests; a
lover of what is good, serious-minded, upright, holy, self-controlled;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Keeping to the true word of the teaching,
so that he may be able to give comfort by right teaching and overcome
the arguments of the doubters.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For there are men who are not ruled by
law; foolish talkers, false teachers, specially those of the
circumcision,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> By whom some families have been
completely overturned; who take money for teaching things which are not
right; these will have to be stopped.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> One of their prophets has said, The men
of Crete are ever false, evil beasts, lovers of food, hating work.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> This witness is true. So say sharp words
to them so that they may come to the right faith,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Giving no attention to the fictions of
the Jews and the rules of men who have no true knowledge.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To the clean in heart all things are
clean: but to those who are unclean and without faith nothing is clean;
they become unclean in mind and in thought.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> They say that they have knowledge of God,
while by their acts they are turning their backs on him; they are hated
by all, hard-hearted, and judged to be without value for any good work.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But let your words be in agreement with
true and right teaching:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That old men are to be simple in their
tastes, serious, wise, true in faith, in love, and of a quiet mind.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> That old women are to be self-respecting in
behaviour, not saying evil of others, not given to taking much wine,
teachers of that which is good,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Training the younger women to have love for
their husbands and children,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> To be wise in mind, clean in heart, kind;
working in their houses, living under the authority of their husbands;
so that no evil may be said of the word of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> To the young men give orders to be wise and
serious-minded:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> In all things see that you are an example
of good works; holy in your teaching, serious in behaviour,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Saying true and right words, against which
no protest may be made, so that he who is not on our side may be put to
shame, unable to say any evil of us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Servants are to be under the authority of
their masters, pleasing them in all things, without argument;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Not taking what is not theirs, but giving
clear signs of their good faith, in all things doing credit to the
teaching of God our Saviour.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the grace of God has come, giving
salvation to all men,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Training us so that, turning away from
evil and the desires of this world, we may be living wisely and
uprightly in the knowledge of God in this present life;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Looking for the glad hope, the revelation
of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who gave himself for us, so that he might
make us free from all wrongdoing, and make for himself a people clean in
heart and on fire with good works.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> On all these points give teaching and
help, and make clear what is right with all authority. Let all men give
you honour.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Make clear to them that they are to put
themselves under rulers and authorities, to do what they are ordered, to
be ready for every good work,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> To say no evil of any man, not to be
fighters, to give way to others, to be gentle in behaviour to all men.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For in the past we were foolish, hard in
heart, turned from the true way, servants of evil desires and pleasures,
living in bad feeling and envy, hated and hating one another.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But when the mercy of God our Saviour, and
his love to man was seen,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Not by works of righteousness which we did
ourselves, but in the measure of his mercy, he gave us salvation,
through the washing of the new birth and the giving of new life in the
Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Which he gave us freely through Jesus
Christ our Saviour;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> So that, having been given righteousness
through grace, we might have a part in the heritage, the hope of eternal
life.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> This is a true saying; and it is my desire
that you may give certain witness about these things, so that those who
have had faith in God may give attention to good works. These things are
good and of profit to men;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But have nothing to do with foolish
questionings, and lists of generations, and fights and arguments about
the law; for they are of no profit and foolish.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> A man whose opinions are not those of the
church, after a first and second protest, is to be kept out of your
society;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Clearly he is in error and a sinner,
being self-judged.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> When I send Artemas or Tychicus to you,
do your best to come to me at Nicopolis: for it is my purpose to be
there for the winter.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Send Zenas, the man of law, and Apollos
on their journey with all care, so that they may be in need of nothing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And let our people go on with good works
for necessary purposes, so that they may not be without fruit.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> All who are with me send you their love.
Give our love to our friends in the faith. Grace be with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon](plm)
