<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cig07)  [Next](cig09.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Coffee in the Gourd*, ed. J. Frank Dobie \[1923\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### INDIAN PICTOGRAPHS OF THE BIG BEND IN TEXAS

### BY VICTOR J. SMITH

    A pictograph is the graphical expression of thought without the use
of words. Remains of crude picture writings by primitive man have been
found all over the world. In the study of the Indian pictograph of North
America, archeologists generally concede that little information of
value regarding important points of aboriginal history can be obtained
from rock carvings or paintings; that is, few such records preserve the
story of ancient migrations or similar matters of real scientific
importance. Although many records of great value exist, there is no
likelihood of satisfactory interpretation of any save a few inscriptions
concerning which tradition has kept the significance alive. It should
not be supposed, however, that such pictographs as are described in this
paper are mere idle scrawls. As a rule, the significance of such
drawings applies to some event of temporary local importance, the full
meaning of which was known only to those who had some knowledge of the
thoughts portrayed. Nevertheless, as new records and investigations are
continually being made, and as deeper studies of symbolism are
developed, it is apparent that a careful record of all existing
inscriptions is of great importance to this branch of archeology. In a
recent letter to the writer, Mr. W. A. Dorsey, of the Smithsonian
Institution, says: "It is desirable that further work be done in your
region since many of the drawings in Southwest Texas are of deep import
and have religious symbolism."

    In the search for evidences of Indian occupation in the Big Bend I
have made forty-six successful trips, resulting in the location of
sixty-five camp sites, shelter caves, fortifications, graves, etc.
Inscriptions of some nature have been observed at fourteen of these
locations. The usual position of the drawings found is about four feet
from the ground on the walls of caves and on the faces of cliffs. A
majority of the paintings are found on white "chalk" cliffs; yet many
drawings have been found elsewhere. As is usually the case with known
locations of former Indian habitation, there is water within a
reasonable distance of each site. A few places that seem to show maps or
directions are isolated; the others are near former camps or villages.
All of the fourteen locations mentioned are situated along the Rio
Grande in what is called the Big Bend Country of Texas. The character of
this section is mountainous with accompanying valleys, mesas, peaks,
canyons, and semi-arid plains. The many springs, caves, and rock
shelters, the temperate climate, and the abundant wild life of this area
made an ideal place for Indian habitation in limited numbers. To this
day it abounds in game.

    The portion of Texas under discussion is placed by anthropologists
in the Southwestern division, though there is evidence that the section
was occupied by tribes of both the Southwestern and the Plains areas.
For our immediate purpose it may be said that the Big Bend was an Apache
country and was occupied for hundreds of years by that branch of the
tribe known as the Mescaleros. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) It is
then to the Mescalero Apache that the drawings discussed in this paper
are accredited, though research may in time reveal that some of the rock
inscriptions antedate the Apache. Inroads were often made into the
Apache territory by the Comanches from the east of the Pecos River. As
Texas became settled by the whites these inroads on the more peaceful
Apaches became more frequent, until the Davis and Chisos Mountains
finally became the scene of the last stand of the remaining tribes on
Texas soil. It was in 1870 that the last Indian tribe of any numerical
importance was driven out of Texas.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

    The state of preservation of all pictographs depends largely upon
the material on which the drawings were made and upon their exposure to
the weather. In the pictographs of the Big Bend country the colors vary
from a dim, unintelligible smear to a tone of deep color value. Assuming
that the brightest of these paintings could not have been drawn less
than 100 years ago, it seems safe to conclude that the dim outlines
(where exposure Is the same) are of much greater age. In some places the
rock has weathered away in small flakes; in others a part of the cliff
has broken off in huge chunks. Although these are conditions which have
resulted in damage to the drawings, yet they indicate the advanced age
of many of the pictographs. In places vandals have so multilated the
specimens as to make the original of little value. It is inconceivable
to me how a person can deliberately paint over these last remaining
works of the aboriginal artist.

    As has been said, the date of the last Indian occupation of the Big
Bend was 1870. The period between 1800  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) and 1870, however, was one of turbulent
contest between the whites and the Indians. It is, therefore, my opinion
that all the drawings observed were made prior to 1800. Since there is
some evidence to show that there was a warlike tribe in the south of the
Big Bend until 1660, my belief is that most of the drawings described
were made during the fairly peaceful period between 1670 and 1780,
though there is much evidence to show that a much earlier date than 1670
might be estimated if the permanence of the pigments is admitted or the
possibility of renewal (on important drawings of religious significance)
is granted. Again, no early date could be set for the rock inscriptions.
 <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

    A better index to the probable age of the pictographs is to be found
in the internal evidence. Within the pictures themselves are several
things that are of assistance to the investigator in determining the
period of time to which the drawings belong. In all of the crude
pictures there is an entire absence of firearms, all the weapons
illustrated being stones, clubs, and spears. Guns could not have been in
common use by the Indians prior to 1800 and our date here is upheld. In
fact, if one cared to argue great antiquity, there is the distinct
outline of a man in combat with a wild beast in which the only weapon
appears to be a large rock. This drawing was found on the bottom of a
boulder which required considerable effort to turn over and clean. There
is a similar figure of a man fighting a beast with only a club (Fig. 1).
These drawings indicate weapons of a most primitive nature unless the
artist failed to record more modern weapons in his desire to picture
great personal achievement.

    At only one location have figures been found which resemble a horse
and rider (Fig. 2). The horse, however, was used by the Indian at a much
earlier period than were firearms, as these animals were more easily
stolen or traded for from the Spanish missions. In fact, history records
missionary expeditions into the Southwest as early as 1542 and 1545.
Regarding a similar project by Antonio De Espego in 1582, the record
tells of many horses and mules being lost or stolen. This exploration of
the Rio Grande country is said to have marked the beginning of the use
of the horse by the Indian. The presence of the horse would, therefore,
give a fairly accurate indication of the earliest possible date of these
particular drawings.

<span id="img_fig01-02"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![](tn/fig01-02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01-02.jpg.md)</span>

    Another result of the early missionary expeditions may have been the
introduction of the cross as a part of the drawings. Several forms of
the cross have been found. The use of this design may have been
pre-Columbian, however, as this figure had been in use for countless
years before any Christian influence could have introduced it. In such
cases the origin is found in the cardinal points of the compass, which
were of much importance to the savage. Stars and other forms in nature
may have been conventionalized into simple cross designs and have found
their way into the decoration of pottery, weaving, and bead work with
both symbolic and decorative intent. Figure 3 represents one of two
drawings observed which have a distinct likeness to records elsewhere
which experts have claimed show the influence of the early Catholic
missions. This influence could easily have been felt in the Big Bend, as
missions were established in Texas in 1717 and even before that
missionary work had been done intermittently from 1544. In fact, history
records a missionary journey down the Rio Grande from El Paso del Norte
in 1683.

<span id="img_fig03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/fig03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig03.jpg.md)</span>

    Few, if any, additional influences of white civilization have been
noticed. In the numerous drawings of the Dakota Winter Counts, Mallory
records many such figures as the United States flag, forts, log huts,
bearded men, soldiers, guns, hats, dogs, etc. As no such figures have
been found in the Big Bend, the indication is again that the drawings
are quite old.

    The drawings observed range in size from a spot that might have been
made with the end of a man's finger to a full-sized drawing of the human
figure. In general, however, the average size for the figure
representing a man is about five by nine inches, and for that
representing an animal five by eight inches. Geometrical figures often
occupy larger areas according to the complexity of the drawing.

    About eighty per cent of the drawings found have been painted in a
dull red color approaching maroon. Other colors found are black and
orange, but these are rare.

    No chemical analysis of these color pigments has been made, but it
is generally conceded by miners in the district that the Indians used
cinnabar as the base for their paints. This mineral is found in many
places in the West Texas mountains and is mined extensively today in
Brewster County. The Indians are known to have used small stone mortars
in the preparation of their paints. There is a good specimen of a small
pestle in my own collection, and Professor Pearce, of the University of
Texas, has several paint mortars in the University museum. Although no
movable mortars have been found, many small pot holes have been observed
which are suitable in size for the mixing of paints. Charcoal mixed with
some fixative material was probably used for the black pigment, and some
mineral, unknown to myself, was used for the orange and orange-yellow.
Old settlers say that the Indians treasured paint minerals very highly
and that a high rate of exchange was received for pigments traded.

    The permanence of mineral pigments, as well as the character of the
drawings, assists in determining the genuineness of the work; a wet
handkerchief will immediately detect any modern effort. Most of the
paintings are located in isolated spots, which are difficult to find
even by people familiar with the country and with directions for
locating. The country is difficult to travel over and is thinly settled,
houses often being from thirty to sixty miles apart. Moreover, a
comparative study of genuine Indian work elsewhere leaves little doubt
in my mind as to the genuineness of the Indian drawings here described.

    The only available means of interpreting these drawings has been by
reference to the illustrated works of authorities who have made a study
of such material. To this end I have examined several volumes in which
pictographs are discussed and interpretations partially made. Many forms
similar to those found in West Texas have also been found in New Mexico,
Idaho, and California, though parallel figures might be cited from the
neolithic drawings of any country on the globe. Interpretations of a
symbolic nature are, therefore, uncertain except where a series of
pictures may recount the story of a hunt or single event of interest to
the artist.

<span id="img_fig04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/fig04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig04.jpg.md)</span>

    The American Indian developed an elaborate system of color
symbolism. Little or no use of this system has been observed in the Big
Bend. This omission is probably due to a lack of variety of colors and
to the abundance of cinnabar. Elsewhere the Apache has used blue, white,
black, and yellow to indicate north, south, east, and west.

    More prominent than the use of several colors is the
conventionalized geometrical form. These forms are sometimes easily
interpreted by reference to authorities and sometimes by the likeness of
the symbol to the thing which it represents. Several such conventions
which have been recorded are of the sun, the snake, lightning, water, a
village, an enclosure, weapons, enumeration spots, etc. All such picture
writing originated in the reproduction of articles just as the artist
saw them. Certain objects, after use many times, grew somewhat
standardized and became conventionalized. Other symbolic graphs which I
have observed seem to represent men, birds, and a variety of quadrupeds.
Figure 4 illustrates one group of geometrical forms.

    Among the two hundred odd drawings and inscriptions which I have
examined, there is only one group which seems to tell a connected story.
P. E. Goddard, in his interesting little book, The Indians of the
Southwest, says that the Indians of the Southwest made expeditions north
into the buffalo country and returned with dried buffalo meat wrapped in
skins, thus providing meat for the winter. The group of pictures to
which I have just referred, in a series of symbolic and pictorial
drawings (See examples of these in Figs 5 to 10.) apparently recounts
the story of such a hunting expedition. The first drawings which
illustrate the story are a totem (the chief in charge of the hunting
party), weapons, an enumeration of dots (the warriors), and symbols
which indicate provisions. These illustrate the preparation for the
hunt. The second chapter illustrates vividly the fight between the
warriors and the buffaloes. Figure 7 shows the Indian with spear drawn
back and the buffalo with head lowered and tail erect. Next comes a long
enumeration of dots, one hundred and forty-eight, which might well
represent the number of animals killed by twelve warriors during the
hunting season. Trophies of the chase follow. These are a large pair of
horns (measured with the extended arms of a man in much the same manner
as we indicate the size of a fish caught), skins of animals, hams, and a
conventionalization of dried meat. Next comes eight or nine feet of
typical skyline which has been interpreted elsewhere in similar drawings
to indicate a distance traveled over. The last drawings of the series
are an interesting group and provide a suitable climax for the story.
The central figure of this group is evidently a woman with her arms
raised in supplication. She is attacked by a man with a huge club.
Luckily the aboriginal artist did not leave the "damsel in distress"
situation a hopeless one, for another figure (whose long hair indicates
a chief) is hastening to the rescue and he, I trust, settled the
difficulty in a manner satisfactory to all. It has been impossible to
reproduce here but a few of the figures referred to and, of course, the
relative spacing has not been preserved.

<span id="img_fig05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/fig05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig05.jpg.md)</span>

    Goddard also tells something of the myths by which the Southwestern
Indian explained the creation of the world. He says in part:

    ... With these he killed a monster elk and many other evil things.

    "These myths vary in details according to the tribe and the
individual who tells them."

<span id="img_fig06-08"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![](tn/fig06-08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig06-08.jpg.md)</span>

<span id="img_fig09-10"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![](tn/fig09-10.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig09-10.jpg.md)</span>

    Among the Big Bend pictographs there is what may be a series of
pictures illustrating this myth, though the details do not agree
entirely with Goddard's account. There are life-sized figures with arms
raised as if "supporting the sky"; there are several drawings of people
and animals; there is the sketch of a human figure with the sun near his
head; there is the "monster elk" if the size of the men near is compared
with the size of the elk; and there are several contests with animals.
It is especially probable that the rock inscriptions were inspired by
religious zeal. for much time and laborious effort were required in
their production.

<span id="img_fig11"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/fig11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig11.jpg.md)</span>

    Some of the rock carvings and paintings are evidently maps intended
to show the location of camp sites, trails, water, etc. There is in the
Big Bend country an occasional indication of the direction taken by some
passing tribe or hunting party. Ranchmen report piled and pointed stones
used for this purpose. The well known device of the cross to indicate
the cardinal points has already been mentioned.

    While I admit that such drawings as I have described will not yield
information of great value, yet I think that careful records of such
work are worth while because it represents a typical stage in the
development of primitive people toward a higher culture. The step
between barbarism and civilization is admittedly the invention of
alphabetic writing. The first step in the invention of an alphabet was
the drawing of objects and events as the artist actually saw them. Next
came symbolic figures and drawings which represented syllable sounds, a
series of which might make up a complex word. The final development was
that of a symbol representing a yet smaller sound division-the letter.
 <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) Hence, as an indication of the
Indian's progress toward a higher civilization, the study of his effort
to express his thoughts in picture-writing is of value.

<span id="img_fig12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/fig12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig12.jpg.md)</span>

    Aside from the degree of culture represented by the pictographs,
there are other values in such a study. For instance, the things
illustrated were those which held the greatest interest to their
authors. Again, since similar drawings are found in all parts of America
and Europe, experts may, through comparison, accumulate enough data to
throw light on important scientific matters not yet discovered. There is
the possibility of determining the direction of migration through
comparisons and the discovery of similar characters along a given route.
It is further hoped that additional graphic evidence of the religious
beliefs of the Southwestern Indian may grow out of further investigation
in Texas. Should all of these conclusions regarding the ethnological
value of the pictograph be false, there is still a great personal
satisfaction in the examination and record of these crude beginnings of
pictorial art.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cig08.htm#fr_0) "Mescal People" (Spanish.md),
so-called from their custom of eating the mescal plant.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cig08.htm#fr_1.md) For the sake of brevity
several footnotes referring to bibliography and history have been
omitted. Reference is here made to any good history of colonial Texas
and to the Ethnology Reports of the Smithsonian Institution.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cig08.htm#fr_2.md) The date of Nolan's
expedition into Texas. This marked the beginning of interest in the real
settlement of Texas by whites. Spanish missions prior to 1800 had little
trouble with the Indians.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cig08.htm#fr_3.md) This paper deals primarily
with paintings. Further investigations will be made of the rock
inscriptions at a later date.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cig08.htm#fr_4.md) Tayler, Isaac. The History of
the Alphabet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Cowboy Dance By J. R. Craddock](cig09.md)

</div>
