<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cig01)  [Next](cig03) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Coffee in the Gourd*, ed. J. Frank Dobie \[1923\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### REBAPTIZED IN INK

    I never have liked the title Publications; it connotes nothing but
dry-as-dustness. Yet an organization that issues volumes at more or less
regular intervals needs some such general title. As editor, I decided
years ago to retain Publications as a sub-title and to give each
year-book issued by the Texas Folk-Lore Society an individual name. Now
that the first volume under my editorship--a very modest volume that
will never set the world on fire--is being reprinted, I seize the chance
to give it a Christian name, at the same time allowing it to retain its
honorable, but entirely undistinctive, family name. There were only five
hundred copies in the original edition; I expect the twelve hundred
copies in this edition to be unexhausted when, as must be, I shall some
day cease to be editor.

    Those who have danced the old square dances will remember the call,

        Ducks in the river, going to the ford,  
        Coffee in a little rag, sugar in a gourd.

The rhyme is quoted by John Craddock in his article on "The Cowboy
Dance" in this volume. I think I have heard, as a variant, "coffee in
the gourd." Anyhow, since we are no longer six, coffee is any day better
in a gourd than sugar. I keep a gourd to drink out of, and any liquid
from it tastes better than from any other receptacle--except a horn.

    I would give a good deal if John Craddock could know that he is
responsible for the name. As long as he was able to write he kept on
contributing to the Texas Folk-Lore Society. Although he never mastered
the technique of writing, for he was stricken too young, he had the most
original imagination I have ever met. Will Thomas, another contributor
in this volume, is gone, too; genial, natural, a representative Texan,
and a "man-thinking" he was.

    While the plates for reprinting Coffee in the Gourd are being
produced through photo-lithography, the use of black India ink, of white
China ink, and of paste to insert a few reset lines has eliminated some
of the glaring errors in the original edition. I wish I had lived in
Shakespeare's time, when typographical errors were not regarded as a
sin.

J. FRANK DOBIE

Austin, Texas  
June, 1935

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Texas Folk-Lore Society Since 1916](cig03)

</div>
