<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cig06)  [Next](cig08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Coffee in the Gourd*, ed. J. Frank Dobie \[1923\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DECLINE AND DECADENCE OF FOLK METAPHOR

### BY W. H. THOMAS

    The Encyclopedia Britannica says that the literature of folklore
falls into two sharply defined classes, viz., synthetic works and
collections. Correspondingly, folklorists may be placed in two classes,
those that merely collect, and those that interpret and compare. Still a
third class might be made-those that enjoy. I feel that if such a
division is not recognized, and the pursuit of folklore made to conform
thereto, we folklorists are in danger of sinking to the level of
philatelists, numismatists, and others of that ilk. I also feel that
chief stress should be laid on the interpreting and comparing of
folklore, and not on the collecting. The latter requires no great mental
effort. Those that can do this best have to thank geographical situation
or temporal juncture. Of course we must collect and enjoy, but it is,
perhaps, not amiss for me to urge upon the members of this society, thus
early in its career, to try to see folklore in its largest significance.
To be brief, if art has always been the handmaid of religion, what Is
folklore to be the handmaid of? To me the pursuit of folklore shall
always be worth while for the light it throws on the evolution of
society and its institutions. For instance, as I was collecting these
metaphors I was very much interested in seeing bow far they chime in
with that relatively recent theory that is attracting so much attention
these days, viz., economic determinism--or the theory that art, both in
content and in form, has it roots deep down in the economic life of a
folk.

    I have used the word "metaphor" advisedly but somewhat loosely. Some
of the things I have in mind are metaphors, some similes, some
comparisons, and some merely pieces of imagery. It is simply this.
Unlettered folk seem to be fond of making comparisons to natural objects
to express their ideas and feelings. Vividness and freshness are
qualities always present. I will not venture to say what I mean by a
folk, further than that the term seems to me to include anybody that is
not a folklorist.

    The assertion that folk metaphor has declined and decayed implies
that folks have declined and decayed. This is true: and an exposition of
this fact would have been only the converse of my thesis,--and more
tangible; but then it would have been an essay in sociology and not in
folklore.

    I have made a simple classification of all the folk metaphors,
similes, and comparisons that have chanced to get embedded in my memory.
We have (1) those that have' been inherited, and (2) those that have
been created by the present generation. Of course, both kinds are
employed by the present generation. But their employment is now less
frequent and their creation seems to have almost ceased. I have further
divided the first class into (1) those that have lost absolutely their
appositeness and (2) those that are, I might say, illegal. I shall set
down here for you only a few that are typical. The inapposite class, I
am sure, will appeal to those of you who have at some time caught
yourself asking, "Well, I wonder how that could have originated?" There
is now and has always been current in my community the saying, with
reference to a man that is financially very able, "He's got more money
than Carter had oats." Yet there never has been a man in this community
by the name of Carter and the acreage devoted to oats has always been
insignificant. Hence you can see that the phrase has lost every particle
of its force. Another of this kind is "as tight as Dick's hatband." Just
who Dick was and how tight the hat band was that he wore will probably
never be known. The following similes, metaphors, and comparisons I have
classed, generally, as illegal: "as hungry as a wolf," "as strong as an
ox," as mad as a setting hen," "as cold as a cart wheel," "as limber as
a dish rag," "as happy as a lark," "as proud as a peacock," "as meek as
a lamb," "as crazy as a bat," "as drunk as a fool," "hot as blue
blazes," "quick as lightning."

    A good example of pure metaphor is: "If you don't mind, you will go
through the forest, and take a crooked stick after all," said of a young
lady who has failed to gather her rosebuds while she might have gathered
them.

    I call these illegal because they are the property of a dead
generation. For instance, how meaningless is it for a present-day person
to say, "I am as hungry as a wolf," when he has never seen a wolf except
at a circus. What sense is there in saying, "as mad as a settin' hen,"
when an incubator is on almost every farm? "As strong as an ox" was once
expressive when that animal was used for draft purposes, but one rarely
finds an ox-team to-day. Take the metaphor of the crooked stick referred
to above. I once heard a young lady use that metaphor as she sat with
her feet on a steam radiator. However, there are a few figures in this
list that, like Shakespeare, are not for an age but for all time. For
instance, "as quick as lightning." The age cannot be imagined when that
will not be apropos.

    Life has been said to be a complete correspondence to environment.
The same may be said of successful figurative language. This is why I
say that folk metaphor has decayed. It no longer reflects its
environment but that of a past age. And there seems to be nothing in our
present age that stimulates metaphor. However, the various technical
slangs of today come pretty near to corresponding to the metaphors of
folks when all communities were mostly agricultural and domestic. I
believe I can, by using a single illustration, make you realize that
folk metaphor has decayed. A man of two generations ago, when he desired
to express the intensity of the cold of a morning of low temperature,
generally said, "It's as cold as a cart wheel this morning." This same
man's grandson always says, "Gee, it's cold as hell this morning, ain't
it?"

    Right here a pertinent inquiry is, Why has folk metaphor decayed and
declined? Without expatiating, I contend that the decline is due to the
overshadowing of the country by the towns, the spread of book education,
and the worship of something we call Efficiency, physical exhaustion,
and the almost universal desire in America to become something other
than what we are. I don't believe that metaphor will ever revive as long
as so many of us are divorced from reality. A quiescent stage of social
evolution, too, is, I think, its most favorable medium.

    The task I have set myself is to collect all these folk metaphors,
similes, and comparisons that I feel sure have come into existence
within the last few years. I regret that I haven't a larger collection
of these newly coined comparisons, but I have been collecting only a few
months and this is a task that cannot be hurried. I here set down a few
that 1 know to be of recent origin. Within the past year this simile has
gained currency in my neighborhood. A negro from the day-laboring class
meets another who has a more stable means of livelihood. The latter
says, "Hello, Bill, how you gettin' 'long these days?" The reply is: "I
don't know--living like a wild cat--don't catch nothing, don't eat
nothing." I once rode up to an old negro that was "chopping cotton" with
several assistants. I asked him how many men he was working. When he
replied "five," I counted them, and then pointing to his ten-year-old
boy, I asked if he called him a man. He said, "Boss, he's a man at the
table." I was once present at the birth of a metaphor. One little negro
was busy mending a plow, while a smaller negro was pestering him. The
larger one then said to the smaller one, "If you don't stop, I'll make
you rabbit away from here." That was the first time I ever heard
"rabbit" used as a verb. But it is now more or less common. And any one
that has ever seen a Molly Cottontail get up and seek safety in flight
knows that this metaphor is almost the perfection of language. One of
the most picturesque expressions to denote loyalty I ever heard is this:
"I likes you; I'll go to the bluff and look over with you," implying
that the one would succor the other almost to self-sacrifice. The last
one I shall exhibit I know, by applying the method of the higher
criticism, to be, in origin, synchronous with the high cost of living.
Two old cronies meet, not having seen each other in several years. One
says, "Bill, how much family have you got now?" Bill replies with a
smile of good fortune, "Pshaw, fellow, there's nothing running around my
house but the fence."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indian Pictographs of the Big Bend in Texas, by Victor J.
Smith](cig08)

</div>
