<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cig02)  [Next](cig04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Coffee in the Gourd*, ed. J. Frank Dobie \[1923\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TEXAS FOLK-LORE SOCIETY SINCE 1916

    In 1916, under the able editorship of Dr. Stith Thompson, University
of Texas, then secretary of the Texas Folk-Lore Society, the Society
issued Number I of its Publications. In that volume was a history of the
Society from its organization, December 29, 1909, up to 1916. The
activities of the Society since then may be briefly sketched.

    Number I was an interesting and representative volume, as a review
of its contents, which follows, will show: Preface, George Lyman
Kittredge; History of the Folk-Lore Society of Texas, Robert Adger Law;
Texas Play-Party Songs and Games, R. E. Dudley and L. W. Payne, Jr.;
Finding List for Texas Play-Party Songs, L. W. Payne, Jr.; Religious
Beliefs of the Tejas or Hasanias Indians, Adina De Zavala; The State
Industrial School Boys' Slang, A. W. Eddins; How Sandy Got His Meat: A
Negro Tale, A. W. Eddins; Traditions of the Waco Indians, Dorothy
Scarborough; A Mexican Border Ballad, Ben D. Wood; Wild Horse Stories of
Southwest Texas, W. Prescott Webb; Folk-Lore and its Influence in
Determining Institutions, J. E. Pearce; The Hell Hounds: A Negro
Tradition, W. S. Hendrix; The Prehistoric Development of Satire, Stith
Thompson; Unexplored Treasures of Texas Folk-Lore, John A. Lomax.

    In April, 1916, the Society met at Austin; the next year it met at
San Marcos. Then came the World War, a scattering of the folk-lorists, a
dissipation of all interests in such past or receding things as
folk-lore. For almost five years the Texas Folk-Lore Society was
quiescent. However, in the spring of 1922 some of the old members got
together and decided to resurrect it. They did. The eighth annual
meeting was held in Austin, with an exceedingly interesting program,
before well attended and enthusiastic audiences.

    Financially, the Society is in good condition. After he had made the
"annual public address" in 1916, Professor Barrett Wendell of Harvard
University made the Society a gift of $100.00. Of course, during the
years of its dormancy, no dues were collected from the members, and many
have been lost track of or have themselves lost track of the Society.
However, during the past year something like seventy names have been
added to the membership. The issuing of the present volume will add many
more members, and, with an annual publication, the membership will no
doubt increase.

    The present publication is made possible only by the generosity and
interest of the Board of Regents of the University of Texas. Realizing
the educational importance of an interest in Texas folklore and the
collection and publication thereof, at their meeting last July, they
granted the Society a subsidy of $100.00 to be used in publishing
folk-lore collected. This aid in no way makes the Society a University
of Texas institution; the Society maintains its original status. The
Regents simply recognized the oneness of the ultimate aims of the
Society with the ultimate aims of the University of Texas, or with the
ultimate aims of any educational institution, for that matter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texas Legends Number For 1924](cig04)

</div>
