[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3228)  [Next](sbe3230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 168.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 4, VARGA 6-7.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. To every sacrifice [1](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:1:1) you hasten together
[2](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:1:2), you accept prayer after prayer, O quick
Maruts! Let me therefore bring you hither by my prayers from heaven and
earth, for our welfare, and for our great protection;

2\. The shakers who were born to bring food and light
[1](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:2:1), self-born and self-supported, like
springs [2](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:2:2), like thousandfold waves of water,
aye, visibly like unto excellent bulls [3](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:2:3),

3\. Those Maruts, like Soma-drops [1](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:3:1), which
squeezed from ripe stems dwell, when drunk, in the hearts of the
worshipper—see how on their shoulders there clings as if a clinging
wife; in their hands the quoit is held and the sword.

4\. Lightly they have come down from heaven of their own accord:
Immortals, stir yourselves with the whip! The mighty Maruts on dustless
paths, armed with brilliant spears, have shaken down even the strong
places.

5\. O ye Maruts, who are armed with lightning-spears, who stirs you from
within by himself, as the jaws are stirred by the tongue
[1](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:5:1)? You shake the sky
[2](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:5:2), as if on the search for food; you are
invoked by many [3](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:5:3), like the (solar) horse of
the day [4](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:5:4).

6\. Where, O Maruts, is the top, where the bottom of the mighty sky
where you came? When you throw down with the thunderbolt what is strong,
like brittle things, you fly across the terrible sea!

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

7\. As your conquest is violent, splendid, terrible, full and crushing,
so, O Maruts, is your gift delightful, like the largess of a liberal
worshipper, wide-spreading, laughing like heavenly lightning.

8\. From the tires of their chariot-wheels streams gush forth, when they
send out the voice of the clouds; the lightnings smiled upon the earth,
when the Maruts shower down fatness (fertile rain).

9\. P*ris*ni [1](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:9:1) brought forth for the great
fight the terrible train of the untiring Maruts: when fed they produced
the dark cloud [3](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:9:3), and then looked about for
invigorating food [2](sbe3229.htm#an_1:168:9:2).

10\. May this praise, O Maruts, this song of Mândârya, the son of Mâna,
the poet, ask you with food for offspring for ourselves! May we have an
invigorating autumn, with quickening rain!

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is ascribed to Agastya. Verses 1-7, *G*agatî; 8-10,
Trish*t*ubh. No verse of this hymn occurs in the SV., VS., TS., AS.

##### Verse 1.

There can be little doubt that the text of the first line is corrupt.
Ludwig admits this, but both he and Grassmann translate the verse.

<span class="smallcaps">Grassmann</span>: Durch stetes Opfer möcht ich
euch gewinnen recht, Gebet, das zu euch Göttern drengt, empfangt ihr
gern.

<span class="smallcaps">Ludwig</span>: Bei jedem opfer ist zusammen mit
euch der siegreich thätige, in jedem lied hat der fromme an euch
gedacht.

Ludwig proposes to read âdîdhiye or devayâ*d* â dîdhiye, but even then
the construction remains difficult.

Note <span id="an_1:168:1:1">1</span>. Ya*gñ*â´-ya*gñ*â´, an adverbial
expression, much the same as ya*gñ*e ya*gñ*e (I, 136, 1); it occurs once
more in VI, 48, 1.

Note <span id="an_1:168:1:2">2</span>. Tuturvá*n*i*h* does occur here
only, but is formed like *g*ugurvá*n*i, I, 142, 8, and *s*u*s*ukváni,
VIII, 23, 5. Possibly tuturva*n*i*h* might stand for the host of the
Maruts in the singular, 'you hasten together to every sacrifice.' As to
dadhidhve, used in a similar sense, see IV, 34, 3; 37, 1.

As a conjecture, though no more, I propose to read evayâ*h* u.

Éva, in the sense of going, quick, is used of the horses of the Maruts,
I, 166, 4. More frequently it has the sense of going, moving, than of
manner (mos), and as an adverb eva and evam mean in this way (K. Z. II,
235). From this is derived evayâ*h*, in the sense of quickly moving, an
epithet applied to Vish*n*u, I, 156, 1, and to the Maruts, V, 41, 16:
kathâ´ dâ*s*ema námasâ su-dâ´nûn eva-yâ´ marúta*h* a*kkh*a-ukthai*h*,
How shall we worship with praise and invocations the liberal
quick-moving Maruts? I read, with Roth, eva-yâ´*h*; otherwise we should
have to take evayâ as

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

an adverbial instrumental, like âsayâ´ from âsâ; see Grassmann, s. v.
âsayâ.

In one hymn (V, 87) Evayâ-marut, as one word, has become an invocation,
reminding us of ἤιε Φοῖβε, or Evoe Bacche, and similar forms. Possibly
ἤια may be viatica, though the vowels do not correspond regularly (see
yayi, I, 87, 2, note 1).

From eva we have also eva-yâvan (fem. evayâ´varî, VI. 48, 12), which
Benfey proposed to divide into evayâ-van, quick, again an epithet of
Vish*n*u and the Maruts. If then we read evayâ*h* u, without the accent
on the last syllable, we should have a proper invocation of the Maruts,
'You, quick Maruts, accept prayer after prayer.'

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:168:2:1">1</span>. Ísham svâ´r are joined again in
VII, 66, 9. sahá ísham svâ´*h* *k*a dhîmahi. It seems to mean food and
light, or water and light, water being considered as invigorating and
supporting. Abhi*g*âyanta governs the accusative.

Note <span id="an_1:168:2:2">2</span>. The meaning of spring was first
assigned to vavra by Grassmann.

Note <span id="an_1:168:2:3">3</span>. Though I cannot find gâ´va*h* and
ukshá*n*a*h* again, used in apposition to each other, I have little
doubt that Grassmann is right in taking both as one word, like ταῦρος
βοῦς in Greek.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:168:3:1">1</span>. The first line of this verse is
extremely difficult. <span class="smallcaps">Grassmann</span>
translates:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Den Somasäften gleichen sie, den kräftigen,  
Die eingeschlürft sich regen, nimmer wirkungslos.

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">Ludwig</span>: Die wie Soma, das gepresst aus
saftvollen stengel, aufgenommen ins innere freundlich weilen.

It may be that the Maruts are likened to Somas, because they refresh and
strengthen. So we read VIII, 48, 9:

tvám hí na*h* tanvã*h* Soma gopâ´*h* gâ´tre-gâtre ni-sasáttha.

For thou, O Soma, has sat down as a guardian in every member of our
body.

It is possible, therefore, though I shall say no more, that the poet
wished to say that the Maruts, bringing rain and

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

cooling the air, are like Somas in their refreshing and invigorating
power, when stirring the hearts of men. In X, 78, 2, the Maruts are once
more compared with Somas, su-*s*ármâ*n*a*h* ná sómâ*h* *ri*tám yaté.
Should there be a dative hidden in â´sate?

Rambhi*n*î I now take with Sâya*n*a in the sense of a wife clinging to
the shoulders of her husband, though what is meant is the spear, or some
other weapon, slung over the shoulders; see I, 167, 3.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:168:5:1">1</span>. Hánvâ-iva *g*ihváyâ gives no
sense, if we take hanvâ as an instrum. sing. Hanu is generally used in
the dual, in the Rig-veda always, meaning the two jaws or the two lips.
Thus Ait. Br. VII, 11. hanû sa*g*ihve; AV. X, 2, 7. hanvor hi *g*ihvâm
adadhâ*h*, he placed the tongue in the jaws. I should therefore prefer
to read hanû iva, which would improve the metre also, or take hanvâ for
a dual, as Sâya*n*a does.

One might also translate, 'Who amongst you, O Maruts, moves by himself,
as the jaws by the tongue,' but the simile would not be so perfect. The
meaning is the same as in the preceding verse, viz. that the Maruts are
self-born, self-determined, and that they move along without horses and
chariots. In. X, 78, 2, the Maruts are called svayu*g*, like the winds.

Note <span id="an_1:168:5:2">2</span>. I feel doubtful about
dhanva*k*yút, and feel inclined towards Sâya*n*a's explanation, who
takes dhanvan for antariksha. It would then correspond to
parvata-*k*yút, dhruva-*k*yút, &c.

Note <span id="an_1:168:5:3">3</span>. Purupraisha may also be, You who
have the command of many.

Note <span id="an_1:168:5:4">4</span>. As to ahanyâ´*h* ná éta*s*a*h*,
see V, 1, 4. *s*vetá*h* vâ*g*î´ *g*âyate ágre áhnâm.

##### Verse 6.

Vithura translated before, I, 87, 3, by broken, means also breakable or
brittle. Sâya*n*a explains it by grass, which may be true, though I see
no authority for it. Grassmann translates it by leaves. It is derived
from vyath.

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

##### Verse 7.

Sâtí and râtí are used on purpose, the former meaning the acquisition or
conquest of good things, the latter the giving away of them. The
onslaught of the Maruts is first described as violent and crushing;
their liberality in giving away what they have conquered, chiefly rain,
is represented as delightful, like the gifts of a liberal worshipper.
Then follows p*ri*thu*g*ráyî asuryẽva *g*á*ñg*atî. Here asuryâ reminds
us of the asuryâ in the preceding hymn, where it occurred as an epithet
of Rodasî, the lightning. P*ri*thu*g*ráyî, wide-spreading, seems to
apply best to the rain, that is, the râti, though it might also apply to
the lightning. However, the râti is the storm with rain and lightning,
and I therefore propose to read *g*á*ggh*atî for *g*á*ñg*atî. *G*a*ñg*
is a root which occurs here only, and *g*a*ggh* too is a root which is
unknown to most students of Sanskrit. Benfey <span
id="fr_123"></span>[a](#fn_114), to whom we owe so much, was the first
to point out that ga*ggh*, which Yâska explains by to make a noise and
applies to murmuring waters, is a popular form of *g*aksh, to laugh, a
reduplicated form of has. He shows that ksh is changed into *kkh* in
a*kkh*â for akshâ, and into *gh* and *ggh*, in Pâli and Prakrit, e. g.
*gh*â for kshâ. The original form *g*aksh, to laugh, occurs I, 33, 7.
tvám etâ´n rudatá*h* *g*ákshata*h* *k*a áyodhaya*h*, thou foughtest
them, the crying and the laughing.

That the lightning is often represented as laughing we see from the very
next verse, áva smayanta vidyúta*h*, the lightnings laughed down; and
the very fact that this idea occurs in the next verse confirms me in the
view that it was in the poet's mind in the preceding one. See also I,
23, 12. haskârâ´t vidyúta*h* pári áta*h* *g*âtâ´*h* avantu na*h*
marúta*h* m*ril*ayantu na*h*.

In the only other passage where *g*a*ñg* occurs, VIII, 43, 8, ar*k*íshâ
*g*a*ñg*anâbhávan, applied to Agni, admits of the same correction,
*g*a*ggh*anâbhávan, and of the same translation, 'laughing with
splendour.'

Benfey's objection to the spelling of *g*a*ghgh* with two

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

aspirates is just with regard to pronunciation, but this would hardly
justify our changing the style of our MSS., which, in this and in other
cases, write the two aspirates, though intending them for non-aspirate
and aspirate.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_1:168:9:1">1</span>. P*ris*ni, the mother of the
Maruts, who are often called P*ris*ni-mâtara*h*, gó-mâtara*h*, and
síndhu-mâtara*h*.

Note <span id="an_1:168:9:2">2</span>. As to svadhâ in the sense of
food, see before, I, 6, 4, note 2, and X, 157, 5.

Note <span id="an_1:168:9:3">3</span>. Abhva is more than dark clouds,
it is the dark gathering of clouds before a storm, ein Unwetter, or, if
conceived as a masculine, as in I, 39, 8, ein Ungethüm. Such words are
simply untranslatable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[284:a](sbe3229.htm#fr_123) Gött. Nachr., 1876,
No. 13, s. 324.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 170. Dialogue between Indra and his Worshipper,
Agastya](sbe3230)
