[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3204)  [Next](sbe3206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Far be it from me to say that the editio princeps of the text thus
constituted was printed without mistakes. <span
class="margnote">Aufrecht's Romanised Reprint of the Rig-veda.</span>But
most of these mistakes are mistakes which no attentive reader could fail
to detect. Cases like II, 35, 1, where *g*ó*g*ishat instead of
*g*óshishat was printed three times, so as to perplex even Professor
Roth, or II, 12, 14, where *s*asamânám occurs three times instead of
*s*a*s*amânám, are, I believe, of rare occurrence. Nor do I think that,
unless some quite unexpected discoveries are made, there ever will be a
new critical edition, or, as we call it in Germany, a new recension of
the hymns of the Rig-veda. If by collating new MSS., or by a careful
study of the Prâti*s*âkhya, or by conjectural emendations, a more
correct text could have been produced, we may be certain that a critical
scholar like Professor Aufrecht would have given us such a text. But
after carefully collating several MSS. of Professor Wilson's collection,
and after enjoying the advantage of Professor Weber's assistance in
collating the MSS. of the Royal Library at Berlin, and after a minute
study of the Prâti*s*âkhya, he frankly states that in the text of the
Rig-veda, transcribed in Roman letters, which he printed at Berlin, he
followed my edition, and that he had to correct but a small number of
misprints. For the two Ma*nd*alas which I had not yet published, I lent
him the very MSS. on which my edition is founded; and there will be
accordingly but few passages in these two concluding Ma*nd*alas, which I
have still to publish, where the text will materially differ from that
of his Romanised transcript.

No one, I should think, who is at all acquainted with the rules of
diplomatic criticism, would easily bring himself to

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

touch a text resting on such authorities as the text of the Rig-veda.
What would a Greek scholar give, if he could say of Homer that his text
was in every word, in every syllable, in every vowel, in every accent,
the same as the text used by Peisistratos in the sixth century <span
class="smallcaps">b.c.</span>! A text thus preserved in its integrity
for so many centuries, must remain for ever the authoritative text of
the Veda.

To remove, for instance, the eleven hymns 49-59 in the eighth Ma*nd*ala
from their proper place, or count them by <span
class="margnote">Vâlakhilya Hymns.</span>themselves as Vâlakhilya <span
id="fr_29"></span>[a](#fn_20.md) hymns, seems to me, though no doubt
perfectly harmless, little short of a critical sacrilege. Why Sâya*n*a
does not explain these hymns, I confess I do not know <span
id="fr_30"></span>[b](#fn_21.md); but whatever the reason was, it was not
because they did not exist at his time, or because he thought them
spurious. They are regularly counted in Kâtyâyana's Sarvânukrama, though
here the same accident has happened. One commentator,
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, the one most commonly used, does not explain them;
but another commentator, *G*agannâtha, does explain them, exactly as
they occur in the Sarvânukrama, only leaving out hymn 58. That these
hymns had something peculiar in the eyes of native scholars, is clear
enough. They may for a time have formed a separate collection, they

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

may have been considered of more modern origin <span
id="fr_31"></span>[a](#fn_22.md). I shall go even further than those who
remove these hymns from the place which they have occupied for more than
two thousand years. I admit they disturb the regularity both of the
Ma*nd*ala and the Ash*t*aka divisions, and I have pointed out myself
that they are not counted in the ancient Anukrama*n*îs ascribed to
*S*aunaka; (History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 220.) But, on the
other hand, verses taken from these hymns occur in all the other
Vedas <span id="fr_32"></span>[b](#fn_23.md); they are mentioned by name in
the Brâhma*n*as (Ait. Br. V, 15; VI, 24), the Âra*n*yakas (Ait. Âr. V,
10, p. 445), and the Sûtras (Â*s*v. *S*rauta Sûtras, VIII, 2, 3), while
they are never included in the manuscripts of Pari*s*ish*t*as or Khilas
or apocryphal hymns, nor mentioned by Kâtyâyana as mere Khilas in his
Sarvânukrama. Eight <span id="fr_33"></span>[c](#fn_24.md) of them are
mentioned in the B*ri*haddevatâ, without any allusion to their
apocryphal character:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Parâ*n*y ash*t*au tu sûktâny *ri*shî*n*âm tigmate*g*asâm,  
Aindrâ*n*y atra tu sha*d*vi*ms*a*h* pragâtho bahudaivata*h*.  
*Ri*g antyâgner a*k*ety agni*h* sûryam antyapado *g*agau.  
Praska*n*va*s* *k*a p*ri*shadhra*s* *k*a prâdâd yad vastu ki*mk*ana  
Bhûrîd iti tu sûktâbhyâm akhilam parikîrtitam.  
Aindrâ*n*y ubhayam ity atra sha*l* âgneyât parâ*n*i tu.

</div>

‘The next eight hymns belong to *Ri*shis of keen intellect <span
id="fr_34"></span>[d](#fn_25.md); they are addressed to Indra, but the 26th
Pragâtha

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (VIII, 54, 3-4,
which verses form the 26th couplet, if counting from VIII, 49, 1) is
addressed to many gods. The last verse (of these eight hymns), VIII, 56,
5, beginning with the words a*k*ety agni*h*, is addressed to Agni, and
the last foot celebrates Sûrya. Whatsoever Praska*n*va and P*ri*shadhra
gave (or, if we read p*ri*shadhrâya, whatever Praska*n*va gave to
P*ri*shadhra), all that is celebrated in the two hymns beginning with
bhûrît. After the hymn addressed to Agni (VIII, 60), there follow six
hymns addressed to Indra, beginning with ubhayam.’

But the most important point of all is this, that these hymns, which
exist both in the Pada and Sa*m*hitâ texts, are quoted by the
Prâti*s*âkhya, not only for general purposes, but for special passages
occurring in them, and nowhere else. Thus in Sûtra 154, hetáya*h* is
quoted as one of the few words which do not require the elision of a
following short a. In order to appreciate what is implied by this
special quotation, it is necessary to have a clear insight into the
mechanism of the Prâti*s*âkhya. Its chief object is to bring under
general categories the changes which the separate words of the Pada text
undergo when joined together in the Ârshî Sa*m*hitâ, and to do this with
the utmost brevity possible. Now the Sandhi rules, as observed in the
Sa*m*hitâ of the Rig-veda, are by no means so uniform and regular as
they are in later Sanskrit, and hence it is sometimes extremely
difficult to bring all the exceptional cases under more or less general
rules. In our passage the author of the Prâti*s*âkhya endeavours to
comprehend all the passages where an initial a in the Veda is not elided
after a final e or o. In ordinary Sanskrit it would be always elided, in
the Sa*m*hitâ it is sometimes elided, and sometimes not. Thus the
Prâti*s*âkhya begins in Sûtra 138 by stating that if the short a stands
at the beginning of a pâda or foot, it is always elided. Why it should
be always elided in the very place where the metre most strongly
requires that it should be pronounced, does not concern the author of
the Prâti*s*âkhya. He is a statistician, not a grammarian, and he
therefore simply adds in Sûtra 153 the only three exceptional passages
where the a, under these very circumstances,

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

happens to be not elided. He then proceeds in Sûtra 139 to state that a
is elided even in the middle of a pâda, provided it be light, followed
by y or v, and these y or v, again followed by a light vowel. Hence the
Sa*m*hitâ writes to <sup>ऽ</sup>vădan, so<sup>ऽ</sup>yăm, but not
*s*îkshanto<sup>ऽ</sup>vratam, for here the a of avratam is heavy; nor
mitramaho<sup>ऽ</sup>vadyât, for here the a following the v is heavy.

Then follows again an extension of this rule, viz. in the case of words
ending in âvo. After these, a short a, even if followed by other
consonants besides y or v, may be elided, but the other conditions must
be fulfilled, i. e. the short a must be light, and the vowel of the next
syllable must again be light. Thus the Sa*m*hitâ writes indeed
gâvo<sup>ऽ</sup>bhĭta*h*, but not gâvo<sup>ऽ</sup>gman, because here the
a is heavy, being followed by two consonants.

After this, a more general rule is given, or, more correctly, a more
comprehensive observation is made, viz. that under all circumstances
initial a is elided, if the preceding word ends in aye, aya*h*, ave, or
ava*h*. As might be expected, however, so large a class must have
numerous exceptions, and these can only be collected by quoting every
word ending in these syllables, or every passage in which the exceptions
occur. Before these exceptions are enumerated, some other more or less
general observations are made, providing for the elision of initial a.
Initial a, according to Sûtra 142, is to be elided if the preceding word
is va*h*, and if this va*h* is preceded by â, na, pra, kva, *k*itra*h*,
savitâ, eva, or ka*h*. There is, of course, no intelligible reason why,
if these words precede va*h*, the next a should be elided. It is a mere
statement of facts, and, generally speaking, these statements are
minutely accurate. There is probably no verse in the whole of the
Rig-veda where an initial a after va*h* is elided, unless these very
words precede, or unless some other observation has been made to provide
for the elision of the a. For instance, in V, 25, 1, we find va*h*
preceded by a*kkh*a, which is not among the words just mentioned, and
here the Sa*m*hitâ does not elide the a of agnim, which follows after
va*h*. After all these more or less general observations as to the
elision of

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

an initial a are thus exhausted, the author of the Prâti*s*âkhya
descends into particulars, and gives lists, first, of words the initial
a of which is always elided; secondly, of words which, if preceding,
require under all circumstances the elision of the initial a of the next
word, whatever may have been said to the contrary in the preceding
Sûtras. Afterwards, he gives a number of passages which defy all rules,
and must be given on their own merits, and as they stand in the
Sa*m*hitâ. Lastly, follow special exceptions to the more or less general
rules given before. And here, among these special exceptions, we see
that the author of the Prâti*s*âkhya finds it necessary to quote a
passage from a Vâlakhilya hymn in which hetáya*h* occurs, i. e. a word
ending in aya*h*, and where, in defiance of Sûtra 141, which required
the elision of a following initial a under all circumstances (sarvathâ),
the initial a of asya is not elided; VIII, 50, 2, Sa*m*hitâ, *s*atâ´nîkâ
hetáyo asya. It might be objected that the Prâti*s*âkhya only quotes
hetáya*h* as an exceptional word, and does not refer directly to the
verse in the Vâlakhilya hymn. But fortunately hetáya*h* occurs but twice
in the whole of the Rig-veda; and in the other passage where it occurs,
I, 190, 4, neither the rule nor the exception as to the elision of an
initial a, could apply. The author of the Prâti*s*âkhya therefore makes
no distinction between the Vâlakhilya and any other hymns of the
Rig-veda, and he would have considered his phonetic statistics equally
at fault, if it had been possible to quote one single passage from the
hymns VIII, 49 to 59, as contravening his observations, as if such
passages had been alleged from the hymns of Vasish*th*a or Vi*s*vâmitra.

It would lead me too far, were I to enter here into similar cases in
support of the fact that the Prâti*s*âkhya makes no distinction between
the Vâlakhilya and any other hymns of the Rig-veda-sa*m*hitâ <span
id="fr_35"></span>[a](#fn_26.md). But I doubt whether the bearing of this
fact has ever been fully realised. Here we see that the absence of the
elision of a short a which follows after a word ending in aya*h*, was
considered of sufficient importance

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

to be recorded in a special rule, because in most cases the Sa*m*hitâ
elides an initial a, if preceded by a word ending in aya*h*. What does
this prove? It proves, unless all our views on the chronology of Vedic
literature are wrong, that in the fifth century <span
class="smallcaps">b.c.</span> at least, or previously rather to the time
when the Prâti*s*âkhya was composed, both the Pada and the Sa*m*hitâ
texts were so firmly settled that it was impossible, for the sake of
uniformity or regularity, to omit one single short a; and it proves à
fortiori, that the hymn in which that irregular short a occurs, formed
at that time part of the Vedic canon. I confess I feel sometimes
frightened by the stringency of this argument, and I should like to see
a possibility by which we could explain the addition, not of the
Vâlakhilya hymns only, but of other much more modern sounding hymns, at
a later time than the period of the Prâti*s*âkhyas. But until that
possibility is shown, we must abide by our own conclusions; and then I
ask, who is the critic who would dare to tamper with a canon of
scripture of which every iota was settled before the time of Cyrus, and
which we possess in exactly that form in which it is described to us by
the authors of the Prâti*s*âkhyas? I say again, that I am not free from
misgivings on the subject, and my critical conscience would be far
better satisfied if we could ascribe the Prâti*s*âkhya and all it
presupposes to a much later date. But until that is done, the fact
remains that the two divergent texts, the Pada and Sa*m*hitâ, which we
now possess, existed, as we now possess them, previous to the time of
the Prâti*s*âkhya. They have not diverged nor varied since, and the
vertex to which they point, starting from the distance of the two texts
as measured by the Prâti*s*âkhya, carries us back far beyond the time of
*S*aunaka, if we wish to determine the date of the first authorised
collection of the hymns, both in their Pada and in their Sa*m*hitâ form.

Instances abound, if we compare the Pada and Sa*m*hitâ texts, where, if
uniformity between the two texts had been the object of the scholars of
the ancient Parishads, the lengthening or shortening of a vowel would at
once have removed the apparent discordance between the two traditional

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

texts. Nor should it be supposed that such minute discordances between
the two, as the length or shortness of a vowel, were always rendered
necessary by the requirements of the metre, and that for that reason the
ancient students or the later copyists of the Veda abstained from
altering the peculiar spelling of words, which seemed required by the
exigencies of the metre in the Sa*m*hitâ text, but not in the Pada text.
Though this may be true in some cases it is not so in all. There are
short vowels in the Sa*m*hitâ where, according to grammar, we expect
long vowels, and where, according to metre, there was no necessity for
shortening them. Yet in these very places all the MSS. of the Sa*m*hitâ
text give the irregular short, and all the MSS. of the Pada text the
regular long vowel, and the authors of the Prâti*s*âkhyas bear witness
that the same minute difference existed at their own time, nay, previous
to their own time. In VII, 60, 12, the Sa*m*hitâ text gives:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

iyá*m* deva puróhitir yuvábhyâ*m* ya*gñ*éshu mitrâvaru*n*âv akâri.

</div>

This primacy, O (two) gods, was made for you two, O Mitra and Varu*n*a,
at the sacrifices!

Here it is quite clear that deva is meant for a dual, and ought to have
been devâ or devau. The metre does not require a short syllable, and yet
all the Sa*m*hitâ MSS. read devâ, and all the Pada MSS. read devâ; and
what is more important, the authors of the Prâti*s*âkhya had to register
this small divergence of the two texts, which existed in their time as
it exists in our own <span id="fr_36"></span>[a](#fn_27.md).

Nor let it be supposed, that the writers of our MSS. were so careful and
so conscientious that they would, when copying MSS., regulate every
consonant or vowel according to the rules of the Prâti*s*âkhya. This is
by no means the case. The writers of Vedic MSS. are on the whole more
accurate than the writers of other MSS., but their learning does not
seem to extend to a knowledge of the minute rules of the Prâti*s*âkhya,
and they will commit

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

occasionally the very mistakes against which they are warned by the
Prâti*s*âkhya. Thus the Prâti*s*âkhya (Sûtra 799) warns the students
against a common mistake of changing vaiya*s*va into vayya*s*va, i. e.
by changing ai to a, and doubling the semivowel y. But this very mistake
occurs in S 2, and another MS. gives vaiyya*s*va. See [p.
lvi](sbe3207.htm#page_lvi.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xlvi:a](sbe3205.htm#fr_29.md) The earliest
interpretation of the name Vâlakhilya is found in the
Taittirîya-âra*n*yaka, I, 23. We are told that Pra*g*âpati created the
world, and in the process of creation the following interlude occurs:

sa tapo<sup>ऽ</sup>tapyata. sa tapas taptvâ *s*arîram adhûnuta. tasya
yan mâ*m*sam âsît tato<sup>ऽ</sup>ru*n*â*h* ketavo vâtara*s*anâ
*ri*shaya udatish*th*an. ye nakhâ*h*, te vaikhânasâ*h*. ye bâlâ*h*, te
bâlakhilyâ*h*.

He burned with emotion. Having burnt with emotion, he shook his body.
From what was his flesh, the *Ri*shis, called Aru*n*as, Ketus, and
Vâtara*s*anas, sprang forth. His nails became the Vaikhânasas, his hairs
the Bâlakhilyas.

The author of this allegory therefore took bâla or vâla in vâlakhilya,
not in the sense of Child, but identified it with bâla, hair.

The commentator remarks with regard to tapas: nâtra tapa upavâsâdirûpam,
ki*m*tu srash*t*avya*m* vastu kîd*ris*am iti paryâlo*k*anarûpam.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xlvi:b](sbe3205.htm#fr_30.md) A similar omission
was pointed out by Professor Roth. Verses 21-24 of the 53rd hymn of the
third Ma*nd*ala, which contain imprecations against Vasish*th*a, are
left out by the writer of a Pada MS., and by a copyist of Sâya*n*a's
commentary, probably because they both belonged to the family of
Vasish*th*a. See my first edition of the Rig-veda, vol. ii, p. lvi,
Notes.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xlvii:a](sbe3205.htm#fr_31.md) Sâya*n*a (RV. X,
88, 18) quotes these hymns as Vâlakhilya-sa*m*hitâ. In the Mahâbhârata
XII, 59; 110 seq. the Vâlakhilyas are called the ministers of King
Vainya, whose astrologer was Garga, and his domestic priest *S*ukra; see
Kern, B*ri*hat-sa*m*hitâ, transl. p. 11.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xlvii:b](sbe3205.htm#fr_32.md) This is a criterion
of some importance, and it might have been mentioned, for instance, by
Professor Bollensen in his interesting article on the Dvipadâ Virâ*g*
hymns ascribed to Parâ*s*ara (I, 65-70) that not a single verse of them
occurs in any of the other Vedas.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xlvii:c](sbe3205.htm#fr_33.md) Sâya*n*a in his
commentary (RV. X, 27, 15) speaks of eight, while in the Ait. Âr. V, 10,
the first six are quoted (containing fifty-six verses, comm.), as being
used together for certain sacrificial purposes.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xlvii:d](sbe3205.htm#fr_34.md) Lest Saunaka be
suspected of having applied this epithet, tigmate*g*as, to the
Vâlakhilyas in order to fill the verse (pâdapûra*n*ârtham), I may point
out that the same epithet is applied to the Vâlakhilyas in the
Maitry-upanishad 2, 3. The nom. plur. which occurs there is
tigmate*g*asâ*h*, and the commentator remarks: tigmate*g*asas
tîvrate*g*aso<sup>ऽ</sup>tyûr*g*itaprabhâvâ*h*; te*g*asâ ityeva*m*vidha
eta*kkh*âkhâsaṅketapâ*th*a*s* *kh*ândasa*h* sarvatra. See also Maitr.
Up. VI, 29.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[l:a](sbe3205.htm#fr_35.md) The Prâti*s*âkhya takes
into account both the *S*âkala and Bâshkala *s*âkhâs, as may be seen
from Sûtra 1057.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[lii:a](sbe3205.htm#fr_36.md) See Prâti*s*âkhya,
Sûtra 309 seqq., where several more instances of the same kind are
given. I should prefer to take devapurohiti as one word, but that was
not the intention of the authors of the Sa*m*hitâ and Pada texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 4](sbe3206.md)
