[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3243)  [Next](sbe3245.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

### MA*ND*ALA V, HYMN 87.

#### ASH*T*AKA IV, ADHYÂYA 4, VARGA 33-34.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Let your voice-born [1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:1:1.md) prayers go forth to
the great Vish*n*u, accompanied by the Maruts, Evayâmarut, and to the
chasing host, adorned with good rings, the strong, in their jubilant
throng, to the shouting power (of the Maruts).

2\. O Maruts, you who are born great, and proclaim it yourselves by
knowledge, Evayâmarut, that power of yours cannot be approached by
wisdom, that (power) of theirs (cannot be approached) by gift or might
[1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:2:1.md); they are like unapproachable mountains.

3\. They who are heard with their voice from the high heaven, the
brilliant and strong, Evayâmarut, in whose council no tyrant
[1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:3:1.md) reigns, the rushing chariots
[2](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:3:2.md) of these roaring Maruts come forth
[3](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:3:3.md), like fires with their own lightning.

4\. The wide-striding (Vish*n*u) [1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:4:1.md) strode
forth from the great common seat, Evayâmarut. When he has started by
himself from his own place along the ridges, O ye striving, mighty
[2](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:4:2.md) Maruts, he goes together with the heroes
(the Maruts), conferring blessings.

5\. Impetuous, like your own shout, the strong one (Vish*n*u) made
everything tremble, the terrible, the wanderer
[1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:5:1.md), the mighty, Evayâmarut; strong with him
you advanced self-luminous, with firm reins, golden coloured, well-armed
[2](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:5:2.md), speeding along.

6\. Your greatness is infinite, ye Maruts, endowed

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

with full power, may that terrible power help, Evayâmarut. In your raid
[1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:6:1.md) you are indeed to be seen as charioteers;
deliver us therefore from the enemy, like shining fires.

7\. May then these Rudras, lively like fires and with vigorous shine,
help, Evayâmarut. The seat of the earth is stretched out far and wide
[1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:7:1.md), when the hosts of these faultless Maruts
come quickly to the races.

8\. Come kindly on your path, O Maruts, listen to the call of him who
praises you, Evayâmarut. Confidants of the great Vish*n*u, may you
together, like charioteers, keep all hateful things far
[1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:8:1.md), by your wonderful skill.

9\. Come zealously [1](sbe3244.htm#an_5:87:9:1.md) to our sacrifice, ye
worshipful, hear our guileless call, Evayâmarut. Like the oldest
mountains in the sky, O wise guardians, prove yourselves for him
irresistible to the enemy.

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is evidently a later addition at the end of the fifth
Ma*nd*ala. It is addressed to the Maruts, and is ascribed to Evayâmarut
Âtreya. None of its verses occurs in SV., VS., AV., TS., TB., MS.,
except the first, which is found in SV. I, 462. Metre, Ati*g*agatî.

The name of the poet is due to the refrain Evayâ´marut which occurs in
every verse, and sometimes as an integral portion of the verse.
Evayâ´marut is a sacrificial shout, much like Εὐοῖ in Greek, Evoe in
Latin, though I do not mean to say that the two are identical. Evayâ*h*,
as I explained in note to I, 168, 1, is an epithet of Vish*n*u, as well
as of the Maruts, meaning quickly moving. Evayâmarut, therefore, may
mean the 'quick Marut.' This is strange, no doubt, because in the
Rig-veda the Maruts always occur in the plural, except in some doubtful
passages. Still Evayâmarut, the quick Marut, might be a name of
Vish*n*u. It cannot be taken as a Dvandva, Vish*n*u and the Maruts.

This hymn was translated by Benfey in his glossary to the Sâma-veda, p.
39. Benfey takes evayâ as identical with εὐοῖ, and explains it as an
adverbial instrumental, like â*s*uyâ, in the sense of stürmisch. But
this would leave evayâvan unexplained.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_5:87:1:1">1</span>. Giri gâ´*h* may mean 'produced on
the mountains,' but it may also mean 'produced in the throat or voice,'
and it is so explained elsewhere, for instance in SV. I, 462 (Bibl.
Ind., vol. i, p. 922). girau vâ*k*i nishpannâ*h*; \[also by another
commentator, h*ri*daye *g*âtâ, ya*gñ*a*g*âtâ vâ ity uktam\]. Oldenberg
suggests giri*g*e, which would be much better, considering how Vish*n*u
is called girikshit, girish*th*â, &c.; see Bergaigne, II, 47. Most of
the epithets have occurred before. I take *s*ávase as a substantive,
like *s*ardhas, not as an adjective. As to dhûnivrata, see V, 58, 2; as
to práya*g*yu, V, 55, I.

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_5:87:2:1">1</span>. Krátvâ, dânâ´, and mahnâ´ seem to
me in this place to belong together. The difficulty lies in the
transition from va*h* to eshâm, but this is not uncommon. On mahinâ´ =
mahimnâ, dânâ´, and mahnâ´, see Wenzel, Instrumentalis, p. 17; Lanman,
p. 533. Pischel, Ved. Stud. p. 101, translates, 'Ihre Macht gereicht
ihnen zu grosser Gabe.' See also VIII, 20, 14. *G*âtâ´*h* mahinâ´, born
by greatness, seems to mean born in greatness, or born great. It would
be easy to write mahínâ*h*.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_5:87:3:1">1</span>. The translation of írî is purely
conjectural.

Note <span id="an_5:87:3:2">2</span>. Syandrâ´sa*h*, as suggested by
Oldenberg, are probably meant for rathâ*h*. Syandana is a carriage in
later Sanskrit. In VIII, 20, 2, we have to supply rathai*h*; in VI, 66,
2, rathâ*h*.

Note <span id="an_5:87:3:3">3</span>. Prá, with the verb understood,
they come forth; cf. VII, 87, 1. prá ár*n*â*m*si samudríyâ nadî´nâm; X,
75, 1. Dhuni, like dhûti, has become almost a name of the Maruts, see I,
64, 5.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_5:87:4:1">1</span>. The god here meant seems to be
Vish*n*u, mentioned already in verse 1, and probably recalled by the
Evayâ in Evayâmarut.

Note <span id="an_5:87:4:2">2</span>. 'We must either take
víspardhasa*h* and vímahasa*h* with Benfey as names of the horses, or
accept them as vocatives, addressed to the Maruts. Vimahas is used as an
epithet of the Maruts, see I, 86, 1.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_5:87:5:1">1</span>. On yayí*h*, see note to I, 87, 2;
but it seems better to take it here as an adjective.

Note <span id="an_5:87:5:2">2</span>. On svâyudha, see Geldner, Ved.
Stud. I, p. 143; Oldenberg, Gött. Gel. Anzeigen, 1890, p. 424.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_5:87:6:1">1</span>. Prásiti may be, as Ludwig
translates it, fangschnur, a noose, but it can hardly mean Noth, as
Grassmann

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

suggests. I take it here in the sense of shooting forth, onslaught,
raid; cf. VII, 46, 4. Geldner, Ved. Stud. I, p. 139, takes it for a
trap. Lanman, p. 386, is right in considering the locative in au before
consonants a sure sign of the modern origin of this hymn.

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_5:87:7:1">1</span>. The idea that the earth is
stretched out or becomes large during a thunderstorm has been met with
before, V, 58, 7. We read I, 37, 8; 87, 3, that at the racings of the
Maruts the earth trembled, and that the Maruts enlarged the fences in
their races. I therefore translate, though tentatively only, that the
earth is opened far and wide, as a race-course for the faultless Maruts,
whose hosts â´, appear, á*g*meshu, on the courses, mahá*h*, quickly. If
the accent of paprathe could be changed, we might translate, 'at whose
coursings (á*g*meshu â´) the seat of the earth is quickly stretched out
far and wide,' and then take *s*árdhâ*m*si ádbhutainasâm in apposition
to rudrâ´sa*h*. Adbhutainas, in whom no fault is seen.

Bergaigne translates, 'faisant du mal mystérieusement.' See Geldner, in
K. Z. XXVIII, 199, Anm. 2; Bezzenberger's Beiträge, III, 169.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_5:87:8:1">1</span>. Cf. VI, 48, 10.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_5:87:9:1">1</span>. Su*s*ámi, generally explained as a
shortened instrumental, for su*s*amî = su*s*amyâ, used in an adverbial
sense. Su*s*ámi has a short i here, because it stands at the end of a
pâda, otherwise the i is long, see VII, 16, 2; X, 28, 12, even before a
vowel. The same applies in the Rig-veda to *s*ami; it has short i at the
end of a pâda, see II, 31, 6; VIII, 45, 27; X, 40, 1. The phrase dhiyâ´
*s*ámi, which has short i in II, 31, 6; X, 40, 1, has long i in IX, 74,
7. dhiyâ´ *s*ámî. It is shortened, however, before vowels in the middle
of a pâda, and written *s*amy; see I, 87, 5; III, 55, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 66. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3245.md)
