[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3218)  [Next](sbe3220.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 38.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 3, VARGA 15-17.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (The Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. What then now? When [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:1:1) will you take (us.md)
as a dear father takes his son by both hands, O ye gods, for whom the
sacred grass has been trimmed [2](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:1:2.md)?

2\. Where now? On what errand of yours are you going, in heaven, not on
earth [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:2:1.md)? Where are your cows sporting?

3\. Where are your newest favours [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:3:1.md), O
Maruts? Where the blessings? Where all delights?

4\. If you, sons of P*ris*ni, were mortals, and your praiser an immortal
[1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:4:1.md),—

5\. Then never [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:5:1.md) should your praiser be
unwelcome, like a deer in pasture grass [2](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:5:2.md),
nor should he go on the path of Yama [3](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:5:3.md).

6\. Let not one sin [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:6:1.md) after another,
difficult to be conquered, overcome us; may it depart
[2](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:6:2.md) together with greed.

7\. Truly they are terrible and powerful; even to the desert the
Rudriyas bring rain that is never dried up [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:7:1.md).

8\. The lightning lows like a cow, it follows as a mother follows after
her young, when the shower (of the Maruts) has been let loose
[1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:8:1.md).

9\. Even by day the Maruts create darkness with the water-bearing cloud
[1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:9:1.md), when they drench the earth.

10\. Then from the shouting of the Maruts over the whole space of the
earth [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:10:1.md), men reeled forward.

11\. Maruts on your strong-hoofed never-wearying
[3](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:11:3.md)

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

steeds [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:11:1.md) go after those bright ones (the
clouds), which are still locked up [2](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:11:2.md).

12\. May your fellies be strong, the chariots, and their horses, may
your reins [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:12:1.md) be well-fashioned.

13\. Speak forth for ever with thy voice to praise the Lord of prayer
[1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:13:1.md), Agni, who is like a friend
[2](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:13:2.md), the bright one.

14\. Fashion a hymn in thy mouth! Expand like the cloud
[1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:14:1.md)! Sing a song of praise.

15\. Worship the host of the Maruts, the terrible. . the glorious, the
musical [1](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:15:1.md). May they be magnified here among
us [2](sbe3219.htm#an_1:38:15:2.md).

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is ascribed to Ka*n*va, the son of Ghora. The metre is Gâyatrî
throughout. Several verses, however, end in a spondee instead of the
usual iambus. No attempt should be made to improve such verses by
conjecture, for they are clearly meant to end in spondees. Thus in
verses 2, 7, 8, and 9, all the three pâdas alike have their final
spondee. In verse 7, the ionicus a minore is with an evident intention
repeated thrice. No verse of the hymn occurs in SV., VS., AV.; but verse
8 = TS. III, 1, 11, 5; verse 9 = TS. II, 4, 8, 1.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:38:1:1">1</span>. Kadha-priya*h* is taken in the
Padapâ*th*a as one word, and Sâya*n*a explains it by delighted by or
delighting in praise, a nominative plural. A similar compound,
kadhapriya, occurs in I, 30, 20, and there too the vocative sing. fem.,
kadhapriye, is explained by Sâya*n*a as fond of praise. In order to
obtain this meaning, kadha has to be identified with kathâ, story, which
is simply impossible. There is another compound, adha-priyâ, nom. dual,
which occurs VIII, 8, 4, and which Sâya*n*a explains either as delighted
here below, or as a corruption of kadha-priyâ.

In Boehtlingk and Roth's Dictionary, kadha-priya and kadha-prî are both
taken as compounds of kadha, an interrogative adverb, and priya or prî,
to love or delight, and they are explained as meaning kind or loving to
whom? In the same manner adha-priya is explained as kind then and there.

It must be confessed, however, that a compound like kadha-prî, kind to
whom?, is somewhat strange, and it seems preferable to separate the
words, and to write kádha priyá and ádha priyá.

It should be observed that the compounds kadha-prî and kadha-priya occur
always in sentences where there is another interrogative pronoun. The
two interrogatives kát—kádha, what—where, and kás—kádha, who—where,
occurring in the same sentence, an idiom so common in

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek, may have
puzzled the author of the Pada text, and the compound being once
sanctioned by the authority of Sâkalya, Sâya*n*a would explain it as
best he could. But if we admit the double use of the interrogative in
Sanskrit, as in Greek, then, in our passage, priyá*h* would be an
adjective belonging to pitâ´, and we might translate: 'What then now?
When will you take (us), as a dear father takes his son by both hands, O
ye Maruts?' In the same manner we ought to translate I, 30, 20:

ká*h* te usha*h* kádha priye bhu*g*é márta*h* amartye.

Who and where was there a mortal to be loved by thee, O beloved,
immortal Dawn?

In VIII, 7, 31, where the same words are repeated as in our passage, it
is likewise better to write:

kát ha nûnám kádha priyá*h* yát índram á*g*ahâtana, ká*h* va*h*
sakhi-tvé ohate.

What then now? Where is there a friend, now that you have forsaken
Indra? Who watches for your friendship?

Why in VIII, 8, 4, adha priyâ should have been joined into one word is
more difficult to say, yet here, too, the compound might easily be
separated.

Kádha does not occur again, but would be formed in analogy with ádha. It
occurs in Zend as kadha.

Kuhn, Beiträge IV, p. 186, has shown that kûsh*th*a*h* (RV. V, 74, 1) is
a similar monster, and stands for ku sh*th*a*h*.

The words kát ha nûnám commonly introduce an interrogative sentence,
literally, What then now? cf. X, 10, 4.

Note <span id="an_1:38:1:2">2</span>. V*ri*kta-barhis is generally a
name of the priest, so called because he has to trim the sacrificial
grass. 'The sacred Ku*s*a grass (Poa cynosuroides), after having had the
roots cut off, is spread on the Vedi or altar, and upon it the libation
of Soma-juice, or oblation of clarified butter, is poured out. In other
places, a tuft of it in a similar position is supposed to form a fitting
seat for the deity or deities invoked to the sacrifice. According to Mr.
Stevenson, it is also strewn over the floor of the chamber in which the
worship is performed.'

Cf. VI, II, 5. v*riñg*é ha yát námasâ barhí*h* agnaú, áyâmi srúk
gh*ri*tá-vatî su-v*ri*ktí*h*.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

When I reverentially trim the truss for Agni, when the well-trimmed
ladle, full of butter, is stretched forth.

In our passage, unless we change the accent, it must be taken as an
epithet of the Maruts, they for whom the grass-altar has been prepared.
They are again invoked by the same name, VIII, 7, 20:

kvã nûnám su-dânava*h* mádatha v*ri*kta-barhisha*h*.

Where do ye rejoice now, you gods for whom the altar is trimmed?

Otherwise, v*ri*kta-barhisha*h* might, with a change of accent, supply
an accusative to dadhidhve: 'Will you take the worshippers in your
arms?' This, though decidedly better, is not absolutely necessary,
because to take by the hand may be used as a neuter verb.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: Maruts, who are fond of praise,
and for whom the sacred grass is trimmed, when will you take us by both
hands as a father does his son?

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Wo weilt ihr gern? was habt ihr
jetzt—gleichwie ein Vater seinen Sohn—in Händen, da das Opfer harrt?

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:38:2:1">1</span>. The idea of the first verse, that
the Maruts should not be detained by other pursuits, is carried on in
the second. The poet asks, what they have to do in the sky, instead of
coming down to the earth. The last sentence seems to mean ' where tarry
your herds?' viz. the clouds. Sâya*n*a translates: 'Where do
worshippers, like lowing cows, praise you?' Wilson: 'Where do they who
worship you cry to you, like cattle?' Benfey: 'Wo jauchzt man euch,
gleich wie Stiere? (Ihre Verehrer brüllen vor Freude über ihre
Gegenwart, wie Stiere.)' The verb ra*n*yati, however, when followed by
an accusative, means to love, to accept with pleasure. The gods accept
the offerings and the prayers:

V, 18, 1. ví*s*vâni yá*h* ámartya*h* havyâ´ márteshu rá*n*yati.

The immortal who deigns to accept all offerings among mortals.

V, 74, 3. kásya bráhmâ*n*i ra*n*yatha*h*.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Whose prayers do ye accept?

Followed by a locative ra*n*yati means to delight in. Both the gods are
said to delight in prayers (VIII, 12, 18; 33, 16), and prayers are said
to delight in the gods (VIII, 16, 2). I therefore take ra*n*yanti in the
sense of tarrying, disporting, and ná, if it is to be retained, in the
sense of not; where do they not sport? meaning that they are to be found
everywhere, except where the poet desires them to be. We thus get rid of
the simile of singing poets and lowing cows, which, though not too bold
for Vedic bards, would here come in too abruptly. It would be much
better, however, if the negative particle could be omitted altogether.
If we retain it, we must read: kvã vá*h* \| gâvá*h* \| na rá*n* yantí \|
. But the fact is that through the whole of the Rig-veda kvã has always
to be pronounced as two syllables, kuva. There is only one passage, V,
61, 2, where, before a vowel, we have to read kva: kuva vo ’*s*vâ*h*,
kvâbhî*s*ava*h*. In other passages, even before vowels, we always have
to read kuva, e. g. I, 161, 4. kuvet = kva it; I, 105, 4. kuvartam = kva
*ri*tam. In I, 35, 7, we must read either kuvedânîm sûrya*h*, making
sûrya*h* trisyllabic, or kuva idânîm, leaving a hiatus. In I, 168, 6,
kvâvaram is kuvâvaram: *S*âkalya, forgetting this, and wishing to
improve the metre, added na, thereby, in reality, destroying both the
metre and the sense. Kva occurs as dissyllabic in the Rig-veda at least
forty-one times.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:38:3:1">1</span>. The meanings of sumná, in the
first five Ma*nd*alas are well explained by Professor Aufrecht in Kuhn's
Zeitschrift, vol. iv, p. 274. As to suvitâ´ in the plural, see X, 86,
21, and VIII, 93, 29, where Indra is said to bring all suvitas. It
frequently occurs in the singular:

X, 148, 1. â´ na*h* bhara suvitám yásya *k*âkán.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:38:4:1">1</span>. One might translate: 'If you, sons
of P*ris*ni, were mortals, the immortal would be your worshipper.' But
this seems almost too deep and elaborate a compliment for a primitive
age. Langlois translates: 'Quand vous ne

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

seriez pas immortels, (faites toutefois) que votre panégyriste jouisse
d’une longue vie.' Wilson's translation is obscure: 'That you, sons of
P*ris*ni, may become mortals, and your panegyrist become immortal.'
Sâya*n*a translates: 'Though you, sons of P*ris*ni, were mortal, yet
your worshipper would be immortal.' Ludwig has, 'Wenn ihr, o kinder der
P*ris*ni, sterbliche wäret, der unsterbliche wäre euer sänger dann.
Nicht werde euch unlieb der sänger, wie ein wildes tier auf der weide,
nicht des Yama Pfad betrete er.' I think it best to connect the fourth
and fifth verses, and I feel justified in so doing by other passages
where the same or a similar idea is expressed, viz. that if the god were
the poet and the poet the god, then the poet would be more liberal to
the god than the god is to him. Whether syât should have the udâtta, I
cannot tell. Thus I translated a passage, VII, 32, 18, in my History of
Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 545: 'If I were lord of as much as thou,
I should support the sacred bard, thou scatterer of wealth, I should not
abandon him to misery. I should award wealth day by day to him who
magnifies, I should award it to whosoever it be.' Another parallel
passage is pointed out by Mr. J. Muir, (On the Interpretation of the
Veda, p. 79; see also Sanskrit Texts, V, 303.) VIII, 19, 25: 'If, Agni,
thou wert a mortal, and I were an immortal, I should not abandon thee to
malediction or to wretchedness; my worshipper should not be miserable or
distressed.' Still more to the point is another passage, VIII, 44, 23:
'If I were thou, and thou wert I, then thy wishes should be fulfilled.'
See also VIII, 14, 1, 2.

As to the metre it is clear that we ought to read mārt̄â̆sā*h* sy̆â̄tănā.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:38:5:1">1</span>. Mâ´, though it seems to stand for
ná, retains its prohibitive sense.

Note <span id="an_1:38:5:2">2</span>. Yávasa is explained by Sâya*n*a as
grass, and Wilson's Dictionary, too, gives to it the meaning of meadow
or pasture grass, whereas yava is barley. The Greek ζεά or ζειά is
likewise explained as barley or rye, fodder for horses. See I, 91, 13.
gâ´va*h* ná yávaseshu, like cows in meadows.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

Note <span id="an_1:38:5:3">3</span>. The path of Yama can only be the
path first followed by Yama, or that leads to Yama, as the ruler of the
departed.

X, 14, 8. sám ga*kkh*asva pit*rí*-bhi*h* sám yaména.

Meet with the fathers, meet with Yama (X, 14, 10; 15, 8).

X, 14, 7. yamám pa*s*yâsi váru*n*am *k*a devám.

Thou wilt see (there) Yama and the divine Varu*n*a.

X, 165, 4. tásmai yamâ´ya náma*h* astu m*ri*tyáve.

Adoration to that Yama, to Death!

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: Never may your worshipper be
indifferent to you, as a deer (is never indifferent) to pasture, so that
he may not tread the path of Yama.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Wer euch besingt, der sei euch
nicht gleichgültig, wie das Wild im Gras, nicht wandl’ er auf des Yama
Pfad.

Á*g*oshya is translated insatiable by Professor Goldstücker.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_1:38:6:1">1</span>. One of the meanings of nír*ri*ti
is sin. It is derived from the same root which yielded *ri*tá, in the
sense of right. Nír*ri*ti was conceived, it would seem, as going away
from the path of right, the German Vergehen. Nír*ri*ti was personified
as a power of evil and destruction.

VII, 104, 9. áhaye vâ tâ´n pra-dádâtu sóma*h* â´ vâ dadhâtu
ní*h*-*ri*te*h* upá-sthe.

May Soma hand them over to Ahi, or place them in the lap of Nir*ri*ti.

I, 117, 5. susupvâ´*m*sam ná ní*h*-*ri*te*h* upá-sthe.

Like one who sleeps in the lap of Nir*ri*ti.

Here Sâya*n*a explains Nir*ri*ti as earth, and he attaches the same
meaning to the word in other places which will have to be considered
hereafter. Cf. Lectures on the Science of Language, Second Series, p.
562.

Wilson treats Nir*ri*ti as a male deity, and translates the last words,
'let him perish with our evil desires.'

Note <span id="an_1:38:6:2">2</span>. Padîsh*t*á is formed as an
optative of the Âtmanepada, but with the additional s before the t,
which, in the ordinary Sanskrit, is restricted to the so-called
benedictive (Grammar, § 385; Bopp, Kritische Grammatik, ed. 1834,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> § 329, note). Pad
means originally to go. Thus RV. IX, 73, 9, átra kartám áva padâti
áprabhu*h*, may the impotent go down into the pit. In certain
constructions it gradually assumed the meaning of to perish, and native
commentators are inclined to explain it by pat, to fall. One can watch
the transition of meaning from going into perishing in such phrases as
VS. XI, 46, ma pâdy âyusha*h* purâ, literally, 'may he not go before the
time,' but really intended for 'may he not die before the time.' In the
Rig-veda padîsh*t*á is generally qualified by some words to show that it
is to be taken in malam partem. Thus in our passage, and in III, 53, 21;
VII, 104, 16; 17. In I, 79, 11, however, padîsh*t*á sá*h* is by itself
used in a maledictory sense, pereat, may he perish! In another, VI, 20,
5, pâ´di by itself conveys the idea of perishing. This may have some
weight in determining the origin of the Latin pestis (Corssen, Kritische
Beiträge, p. 396), for it shows that, even without prepositions, such as
â or vi, pad may have an ill-omened meaning. In the Aitareya-brâhma*n*a
VII, 14 (History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 471), pad, as
applied to a child's teeth, means to go, to fall out. With sam, however,
pad has always a good meaning, and this shows that originally its
meaning was neutral. Another translation, suggested by Ludwig, might be:
'Let not one dreadful Nir*ri*ti (sin) after another strike us.'

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_1:38:7:1">1</span>. The only difficult word is
avâtâ´m. Sâya*n*a explains it, 'without wind.' But it is hardly possible
to understand how the Maruts, themselves the gods of the storm, the sons
of Rudra, could be said to bring clouds without wind. Langlois, it is
true, translates without any misgivings: 'Ces dieux peuvent sur un sol
desséché faire tomber la pluie sans l’accompagner de vent.' Wilson:
'They send down rain without wind upon the desert.' Benfey saw the
incongruous character of the epithet, and explained it away by saying
that the winds bring rain, and after they have brought it, they moderate
their violence in order not to drive it away again; hence rain without
wind. Yet even

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

this explanation, though ingenious, and, as I am told, particularly
truthful in an eastern climate, is somewhat too artificial. If we
changed the accent, ávâtâm, unchecked, unconquered, would be better than
avâtâ´m, windless. But ávâta, unconquered, does not occur in the
Rig-veda, except as applied to persons. It occurs most frequently in the
phrase vanván ávâta*h*, which Sâya*n*a explains well by hi*m*san
ahi*m*sita*h*, hurting, but not hurt: (VI, 16, 20; 18, 1; IX, 89, 7.) In
IX, 96, 8, we read p*ri*t-sú vanván ávâta*h*, in battles attacking, but
not attacked, which renders the meaning of ávâta perfectly clear. In VI,
64, 5, where it is applied to Ushas, it may be translated by
unconquerable, intact.

There are several passages, however, where avâta occurs with the accent
on the last syllable, and where it is accordingly explained as a
Bahuvrîhi, meaning either windless or motionless, from vâta, wind, or
from vâta, going. (I, 62, 10). In some of these passages we can hardly
doubt that the accent ought to be changed, and that we ought to read
ávâta. Thus in VI, 64, 4, avâte is clearly a vocative applied to Ushas,
who is called ávâtâ, unconquerable, in the verse immediately following.
In I, 52, 4, the Maruts are called avâtâ*h*, which can only be ávâtâ*h*,
unconquerable; nor can we hesitate in VIII, 79, 7, to change avâtá*h*
into ávâta*h*, as an epithet applied to Soma, and preceded by
ád*ri*ptakratu*h*, of unimpaired strength, unconquerable.

But even then we find no evidence that ávâta, unconquered, could be
applied to rain or to a cloud, and I therefore propose another
explanation, though equally founded on the supposition that the accent
of avâtâm in our passage should be on the first syllable.

I take vâta as a Vedic form instead of the later vâna, the past
participle of vai, to wither. Similarly we find in the Veda *g*îta,
instead of *g*îna, the latter form being sanctioned by Pâ*n*ini. Vâ
means to get dry, to flag, to get exhausted; ávâta therefore, as applied
to a cloud, would mean not dry, not withered, as applied to rain, not
dried up, but remaining on the ground. It is important to remark that in
one passage, VI, 67, 7, Sâya*n*a, too, explains ávâta, as applied to
rivers, by a*s*ushka, not dry; and the same meaning would

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

be applicable to avâtâ´*h* in I, 62, 10. In this sense of not withered,
not dry, ávâtâm in our passage would form a perfectly appropriate
epithet of the rain, while neither windless nor unconquered would yield
an appropriate sense. In the famous passage, X, 129, 2, â´nît avâtám
svadháyâ tát ékam, that only One breathed breathless by itself, avâtám
might be taken, in accordance with its accent, as windless or
breathless, and the poet may have wished to give this antithetical point
to his verse. But ávâtam, as an adverb, would here be equally
appropriate, and we should then have to translate, 'that only One
breathed freely by itself.' Ludwig translates, 'Als treue die
blendenden, die stürmenden Rudriya auf öder fläche sogar, als brunnen
die wolke schaffen.' This presupposes the conjectural reading avatám.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_1:38:8:1">1</span>. The peculiar structure of the
metre in the seventh and eighth verses should be noted. Though we may
scan

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  ̄  ̄  ̄  ̄  ̆  ̆́  ̄  ̄  \|    ̄  ̄  ̆  ̄  ̄  ̆́  ̄  ̄  \|    ̆  ̄  ̄  ̄  ̆  ̆́  ̄  ̄  \|  
  ̄  ̄  ̆  ̄  ̄  ̆́  ̄  ̄  \|    ̄  ̄  ̆  ̄  ̄  ̆́  ̄  ̄  \|    ̆  ̄  ̄  ̄  ̆  ̆́  ̄  ̄

</div>

by throwing the accent on the short antepenultimate, yet the movement of
the metre becomes far more natural by throwing the accent on the long
penultimate, thus reading

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

  ̄  ̄́  ̄  ̄́  ̆  ̆  ̄́  ̄  \|    ̄  ̄́  ̆  ̄́  ̆  ̆  ̄́  ̄  \|    ̆  ̄́  ̄  ̄́  ̆  ̆  ̄́  ̄  
  ̄  ̄́  ̆  ̄́  ̄  ̆  ̄́  ̄  \|    ̄  ̄́  ̆  ̄́  ̄  ̆  ̄  ̄  \|    ̆  ̄́  ̄  ̄́  ̆  ̆  ̄́  ̄

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">Sâya*n*a</span>: Like a cow the lightning roars,
(the lightning) attends (on the Maruts) as the mother cow on her calf,
because their rain is let loose at the time of lightning and thunder.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: The lightning roars like a parent
cow that bellows for its calf, and hence the rain is set free by the
Maruts.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Es blitzt—wie eine Kuh brüllt
es—die Mutter folgt dem Kalb gleichsam—wenn ihr Regen losgelassen. (Der
Donner folgt dem Blitz, wie eine Kuh ihrem Kalbe.)

Vâ*s*rá as a masculine means a bull, and it is used as a name of the
Maruts in some passages, VIII, 7, 3; 7. As

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

a feminine it means a cow, particularly a cow with a calf, a milch cow.
Hence also a mother, X, 119, 4. The lowing of the lightning must be
intended for the distant thunder, and the idea that the lightning goes
near or looks for the rain is not foreign to the Vedic poets. See I, 39,
9: 'Come to us, Maruts, with your entire help, as lightnings (come to,
i. e. seek for) the rain!'

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_1:38:9:1">1</span>. That par*g*ánya here and in other
places means cloud has been well illustrated by Dr. Bailer, Orient and
Occident, vol. i, p. 221. It is interesting to watch the personifying
process which is very palpable in this word, and by which Par*g*anya
becomes at last a friend and companion of Indra. See now, 'India, what
can it teach us?' p. 183 seq.

##### Verse 10.

Note <span id="an_1:38:10:1">1</span>. Sádma, as a neuter, means
originally a seat, and is frequently used in the sense of altar: IV, 9,
3. sá*h* sádma pári nîyate hótâ; VII, 18, 22. hótâ-iva sádma pári emi
rébhan. It soon, however, assumed the more general meaning of place, as

X, 1, 1. agní*h* bhânúnâ rú*s*atâ ví*s*vâ sádmâni aprâ*h*.

Agni with brilliant light thou filledst all places.

It is lastly used with special reference to heaven and earth, the two
sádmanî, I, 185, 6; III, 55, 2. In our passage sádma pâ´rthivam is the
same as pâ´rthive sádane in VIII, 97, 5. Here the earth is mentioned
together with heaven, the sea, and the sky. Sâya*n*a takes sádma as
'dwelling,' so do Wilson and Langlois. Benfey translates 'der Erde
Sitz,' and makes it the subject of the sentence, which may be right:
'From the roaring of the Maruts the seat of the earth trembles, and all
men tremble.' Sadman, with the accent on the last syllable, is also used
as a masculine in the Rig-veda, I, 173, I; VI, 51, 12. sadmâ´nam divyám.

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_1:38:11:1">1</span>. I have translated
vî*l*u-pâ*n*íbhi*h*, as if it were vî*l*upâ*n*ibhi*h*, for this is the
right accent of a Bahuvrîhi

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

compound. Thus the first member retains its own accent in
p*ri*thú-pâ*n*i, bhû´ri-pâ*n*i v*rí*sha-pâ*n*i, &c. It is possible that
the accent may have been changed in our passage, because the compound is
used, not as an adjective, but as a kind of substantive, as the name of
a horse. Pâ*n*í, hand, means, as applied to horses, hoof:

II, 31, 2. p*ri*thivyâ´*h* sâ´nau *g*áṅghananta pâ*n*í-bhi*h*.

When they strike with their hoofs on the summit of the earth.

This meaning appears still more clearly in such compounds as
dravat-pâ*n*i:

VIII, 5, 35. hira*n*yáye*n*a ráthena dravátpâ*n*i-bhi*h* á*s*vai*h*.

On a golden chariot, on quick-hoofed horses.

The horses of the Maruts, which in our verse are called vî*l*u-pâ*n*í,
strong-hoofed, are called VIII, 7, 27. híra*n*yapâ*n*i, golden-hoofed:

á*s*vai*h* híra*n*yapâ*n*i-bhi*h* dévâsa*h* ûpa gantana.

On your golden-hoofed horses come hither, O gods.

Those who retain the accent of the MSS. ought to translate, 'Maruts,
with your strong hands go after the clouds.'

Note <span id="an_1:38:11:2">2</span>. Ródhasvatî is explained by
Sâya*n*a as river. It does not occur again in the Rig-veda. Ródhas is
enclosure or fence, the bank of a river; but it does not follow that
ródhasvat, having enclosures or banks, was applicable to rivers only.
II, 15, 8, it is said that he emptied or opened the artificial
enclosures of Bala, these being the clouds conquered by Indra. Hence I
take ródhasvatî in the sense of a cloud yet unopened, which is followed
or driven on by the Maruts.

*K*itrá, bright or many-coloured, is applied to the clouds, V, 63, 3.
*k*itrébhi*h* abhrái*h*.

Note <span id="an_1:38:11:3">3</span>. Roth and Ludwig take ákhidrayâman
for a name of horse, which seems right. The word does not occur again in
the Rig-veda.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: Maruts, with strong hands, come
along the beautifully-embanked rivers with unobstructed progress.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Mit euren starken Händen folgt
den hehren eingeschlossnen nach in unermüd’tem Gang, Maruts.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_1:38:12:1">1</span>. Abhî´*s*u, rein, does not mean
finger in the Rig-veda, though Sâya*n*a frequently explains it so,
misled by Yâska, who gives abhî*s*u among the names of finger. Wilson:
'May your fingers be well skilled (to hold the reins).'

##### Verse 13.

Note <span id="an_1:38:13:1">1</span>. Agni is frequently invoked
together with the Maruts, and is even called marút-sakhâ, the friend of
the Maruts, VIII, 92, 14. It seems better, therefore, to refer
bráhma*n*as pátim to Agni, than, with Sâya*n*a, to the host of the
Maruts (marúdga*n*am). Bráhma*n*aspáti and B*rí*haspáti are both
varieties of Agni, the priest and purohita of gods and men, and as such
he is invoked together with the Maruts in other passages, I, 40, I. Tánâ
is an adverb. meaning constantly, always, for ever. Cf. II, 2, I; VIII.
40, 7.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: Declare in our presence
(priests), with voice attuned to praise Brahma*n*aspati, Agni, and the
beautiful Mitra.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Lass schallen immerfort das Lied
zu grüssen Brahma*n*aspati, Agni, Mitra, den herrlichen.

Note <span id="an_1:38:13:2">2</span>. Mitra is never, as far as I know,
invoked together with the Maruts, and it is better to take mitrám as
friend. Besides ná cannot be left here untranslated. Ludwig translates,
'beautiful like Mitra,' that is, bright like the sun.

##### Verse 14.

Note <span id="an_1:38:14:1">1</span>. The second sentence is obscure.
Sâya*n*a translates: 'Let the choir of priests make a hymn of praise,
let them utter or expand it, like as a cloud sends forth rain.' Wilson
similarly: Utter the verse that is in your mouth, spread it out like a
cloud spreading rain.' Benfey: 'Ein Preislied schaffe in dem Mund,
ertöne dem Par*g*anya gleich.' He takes Par*g*anya for the god of
thunder, and supposes the hymn of praise to be compared to it on account
of its loudness. Tatana*h* can only be the second person singular of the
conjunctive of the reduplicated perfect, of which we

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

have also tatánat, tatánâma, tatánan, and tatánanta. Tatana*h* can be
addressed either to the host of the Maruts, or to the poet. I take it in
the latter sense, for a similar verse occurs VIII, 21, 18. It is said
there of a patron that he alone is a king, that all others about the
river Sarasvatî are only small kings, and the poet adds: 'May he spread
like a cloud with the rain,' giving hundreds and thousands
(par*g*ánya*h*-iva tatánat hí v*ri*sh*t*yâ´). Ludwig takes tan in the
sense of thundering; thunder like Par*g*anya!

##### Verse 15.

Note <span id="an_1:38:15:1">1</span>. It is difficult to find an
appropriate rendering for arkín. It means praising, celebrating,
singing, and it is in the last sense only that it is applicable to the
Maruts. Wilson translates, 'entitled to adoration;' Benfey, 'flaming.'
Boehtlingk and Roth admit the sense of flaming in one passage, but give
to arkín in this place the meaning of praising. If it simply meant,
possessed of arká, i. e. songs of praise, it would be a very lame
epithet after panasyú. But other passages, like I, 19, 4; 52, 15, show
that the conception of the Maruts as singers was most familiar to the
Vedic *Ri*shis (I, 64, 10; Kuhn, Zeitschrift, vol. i, p. 521. note); and
arká is the very name applied to their songs (I, 19, 4). In the Edda,
too, 'storm and thunder are represented as a lay, as the wondrous music
of the wild hunt. The dwarfs and Elbs sing the so-called Alb-leich which
carries off everything, trees and mountains.' See Justi in Orient and
Occident, vol. ii, p. 62; Genthe, Windgottheiten, p. 4; 11. There is no
doubt therefore that arkín here means musician, and that the arká of the
Maruts is the music of the winds.

Note <span id="an_1:38:15:2">2</span>. V*ri*ddhá, literally grown, is
used in the Veda as an honorific epithet, with the meaning of mighty,
great, or magnified:

III, 32, 7. yá*g*âma*h* ít námasâ v*ri*ddhám índram  
           b*ri*hántam *ri*shvám a*g*áram yúvânam.

We worship with praise the mighty Indra, the great, the exalted, the
immortal, the vigorous.

Here neither is v*ri*ddhá intended to express old age,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

nor yúvan young age, but both are meant as laudatory epithets. See
Darmesteter, Ormazd et Ahriman, p. 91 seq.

Asan is the so-called Le*t* of as, to be. This Le*t* is properly an
imperative, which gradually sinks down to a mere subjunctive, and is
generally called so. Of as, we find the following Le*t* forms: belonging
to the present, we have ásasi, II, 26, 2; ásati, VI, 23, 9; ásatha*h*,
VI, 63, 1; and ásatha, V, 61, 4: belonging to the imperfect, âsa*h*,
VIII, 100, 2; ásat, I, 9, 5; ásâma, I, 173, 9; ásan, I, 89, 1. Ásam, a
form quoted by Roth from Rig-veda X, 27, 4, is really â´sam.

We find, for instance, ása*h*, with an imperative or optative meaning,
in

VIII, 100, 2. ása*h* *k*a tvám dakshi*n*atá*h* sákhâ me  
              ádha v*ri*trâ´*n*i â´ gaṅghanâva bhû´ri.

And be thou my friend on my right hand, and we shall kill many enemies.

Here we see the transition of meaning from an imperative to the
conditional. In English, too, we may say, 'Do this and you shall live,'
which means nearly the same as, 'If you do this, you will live.' Thus we
may translate this passage: 'And if thou be my friend on my right side,
then we shall kill many enemies.'

X, 124, I. imám na*h* agne úpa ya*gñ*ám â´ ihi—  
           ása*h* havya-vâ´*t* utá na*h* pura*h*-gâ´*h*.

Here we have the imperative ihi and the Le*t* ása*h* used in the same
sense.

Far more frequently, however, ása*h* is used in relative sentences, such
as,

VI, 36, 5. ása*h* yáthâ na*h* *s*ávasâ *k*akâná*h*.

That thou mayest be ours, delighting in strength.

VII, 24, 1. ása*h* yáthâ na*h* avitâ´ v*ri*dhé *k*a.

That thou mayest be our helper and for our increase.

See also X, 44, 4; 85, 26; 36.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: May they be exalted by this our
worship.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: Mögen die Hohen hier bei uns
sein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 39. To the Maruts (The Storm-gods)](sbe3220.md)
