[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3260)  [Next](sbe3262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 134.

#### ASH*T*AKA II, ADHYÂYA 1, VARGA 23.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To Vâyu</span>.

1\. O Vâyu, may the quick racers bring thee towards the offerings, to
the early drink [1](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:1:1) here, to the early drink of
Soma! May Sûn*ri*tâ [2](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:1:2) (the Dawn) stand erect,
approving thy mind! Come near on thy harnessed chariot to share, O Vâyu,
to share in the sacrifice [3](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:1:3)!

2\. May the delightful drops of Soma delight thee, the drops made by us,
well-made, and heaven-directed, yes, made with milk, and
heaven-directed. When his performed aids assume strength for
achievement, cur prayers implore the assembled steeds for gifts, yes,
the prayers implore them.

3\. Vâyu yokes the two ruddy, Vâyu yokes the two red horses, Vâyu yokes
to the chariot the two swift horses to draw in the yoke, the strongest
to draw in the yoke. Awake Purandhi (the Morning)
[1](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:3:1) as a lover wakes a sleeping maid, reveal
heaven and earth, brighten the dawn, yes, for glory brighten the dawn.

4\. For thee the bright dawns spread out in the distance beautiful
garments, in their houses [1](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:4:1), in their rays,
beautiful in their new rays. To thee the juice-yielding
[2](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:4:2) cow pours out all treasures. Thou hast
brought forth the Maruts from the flanks [3](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:4:3),
yes, from the flanks of heaven.

5\. For thee the white, bright, rushing Somas, strong in raptures, have
rushed to the whirl, they

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

have rushed to the whirl of the waters. The tired hunter asks luck of
thee in the chase [1](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:5:1); thou shieldest
[2](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:5:2) by thy power from every being, yes, thou
shieldest by thy power from powerful spirits
[3](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:5:3).

6\. Thou, O Vâyu, art worthy as the first before all others to drink
these our Somas, thou art worthy to drink these poured-out Somas. Among
the people also who invoke thee and have turned to thee
[1](sbe3261.htm#an_1:23:6:1), all the cows pour out the milk, they pour
out butter and milk (for the Soma).

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

#### NOTES.

Ascribed to Paru*kkh*epa Daivodâsi, and addressed to Vâyu. Metre, 1-5
Atyash*t*i; 6 Ash*t*i. No verse occurs in the other Vedas.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:23:1:1">1</span>. Pûrvapîti may here imply that Vâyu
receives his libation first, before the other gods, see verse 6.

Note <span id="an_1:23:1:2">2</span>. Whatever the etymology of
sûn*ri*tâ may be, in our passage, which describes the morning sacrifice
and the arrival of Vâyu as the first of the gods, it can hardly mean
anything but dawn. Ûrdhvâ sthâ is an expression applied frequently to
the rise of the dawn or the morning, see III, 55, 14; 61, 3; VIII, 45,
12. In the last passage sûn*ri*tâ is simply the dawn. Ludwig translates,
'deine treflichkeit erhebe sich, günstig aufnemend die absicht.' He,
like Bergaigne, III, 295, takes sûn*ri*tâ as su-n*ri*-tâ, virtue. It
seems to me that sûn*ri*ta may be formed irregularly in analogy to
an-*ri*ta, and then mean true, good. In other places sûn*ri*tam seems to
mean hymn, like *ri*tavâka, IX, 113, 2. In places where it occurs as a
name of Ushas, one feels tempted to conjecture su-n*ri*tûs. See also
Bartholomae, in Bezzenb. Beitr. XV, 24.

Note <span id="an_1:23:1:3">3</span>. On makhásya dâváne, see note to I,
6, 8; but also note to VIII, 7, 27.

##### Verse 2.

My translation is purely tentative, and I doubt whether the text can be
correct. I have taken krâ*n*a here in the sense of made, but I am quite
aware that this meaning becomes incongruous in our very verse, when
repeated for the third time. On its other meanings, see Pischel, Ved.
Stud. p. 67. For the whole verse, compare VI, 36, 3. Grassmann
translates:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Die lust’gen Indu’s mögen, Vâyu, dich erfreuen,  
Die starken, die wir schön gebraut, die himmlischen,  
Die milchgemischten, himmlischen;  
Wenn Tränke tüchtig deinen Sinn <span id="page_447">p. 447</span>  
Uns zu gewinnen, bei dir sind,  
Dann fordere Lieder die vereinte Rosseschar,  
Die Speisen zu empfangen auf.

</div>

Ludwig: Erfreuen sollen dich die frohen tropfen, Vâyu, von uns bereitet,
die morgendlichen, mit milch bereitet, die morgendlichen, dasz der
(opfer) tüchtigkeit zukomen hilfleistungen zum gelingen, gewärt, die
insgesammt herwärts gerichteten gespanne (antworten) zur (mit)
beschenkung den liedern, ihn sprechen an die lieder.

These translations may serve to show that certain verses in the Veda are
simply hopeless, and that the translators must not be held responsible
if they cannot achieve the impossible.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:23:3:1">1</span>. Purandhi may have meant originally
doorkeeper or bar-holder (cardo), from pû*h* and dhi, being formed like
ishudhí, v*rí*shandhi, *s*evadhí, &c. Purandhrî also may have been
πυλωρός, janitor, or rather janitrix, then housewife. Grassmann
translates it by Segensfülle, Ludwig by Fülle; Bergaigne, III, 476, has
a long note on purandhi, as one of the many names of 'la femelle.'
Whatever it meant etymologically, in our passage, where she is to be
woke by the wind in the morning (cf. ushása*h* budhí, I, 137, 2), it is
again a characteristic epithet of the dawn, πολιοῦχος, πολιάς, ποαῖτις.
See also Pischel, Vedica, p. 202; Hillebrandt, Wiener Zeitschrift, III,
188; 259.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:23:4:1">1</span>. I have translated da*m*su as a
locative; could it be a nom. plur. of da*m*su, δασυ, referring to
vastrâ, the terminations being left out? see Lanman, p. 415.

Note <span id="an_1:23:4:2">2</span>. Sabardúghâ, juice-yielding. Roth
explains it as quickly yielding, identifying sabar with Greek ἄφαρ. But
Greek φ never represents Sanskrit b. Sabar, juice, milk, water, would
really seem to yield the true source of A. S. sæp, O. H. G. saf, sap,
for it is clear that neither ὀπός, nor Lat. sucus, would correspond with
A. S. sæp; see Brugmann, Grundriss, vol. i, § 328; also Bartholomae, in,
Bezzenb. Beitr. XV, 17.

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

Note <span id="an_1:23:4:3">3</span>. Vakshá*n*âbhya*h*, from the
flanks. It would be better if we could refer váksha*n*âbhya*h* to Dhenu,
the cow, the mother of the Maruts, while Dyaus is their father, see V,
52, 16. Here, however, Vâyu is conceived as their father, and dyaus
(fem.) as their mother.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:23:5:1">1</span>. I have followed Ludwig in his
explanation of tsârî, hunter, watcher, and takvavîya, chase of the
takva, whatever animal it may be.

Note <span id="an_1:23:5:2">2</span>. Oldenberg suggests prâ´si for
pâsi, which on many accounts would be excellent.

Note <span id="an_1:23:5:3">3</span>. On asuryă, see von Bradke, Dyaus
Asura, p. 39, and Bergaigne, Journal Asiatique, 1884, p. 510.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_1:23:6:1">1</span>. Vihutmat is translated by Roth as
not sacrificing. But vihutmat can hardly be separated from vihava and
vihavya, and seems to mean therefore invoking, possibly, invoking
towards different sides. Hu, to sacrifice, does not take the preposition
vi. Vavar*g*ushî is doubtful. Without some other words, it can hardly
mean 'those who have turned towards the gods,' as we read in X, 120, 3
(tvé krátum ápi v*riñg*anti ví*s*ve); nor is it likely to be the same as
v*ri*kta-barhis, 'those who have prepared the barhis.'

I have translated it in the former sense. See Geldner, Ved. Stud. p.
144, and Oldenberg, Gött. Gel. Anz. 1890, p. 414.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X, 168. To Vâta](sbe3262)
