[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3227)  [Next](sbe3229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 167.

#### ASH*T*AKA II, ADHYÂYA 4, VARGA 4-5.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. O Indra, a thousand have been thy helps accorded to us, a thousand,
O driver of the bays, have been thy most delightful viands. May
thousands of treasures richly to enjoy, may goods
[1](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:1:1) come to us a thousandfold.

2\. May the Maruts come towards us with their aids, the mighty ones, or
with their best aids from the great heaven, now that their furthest
steeds have rushed forth on the distant shore of the sea;

3\. There clings [1](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:3:1) to the Maruts one who
moves in secret, like a man's wife (the lightning
[2](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:3:2)), and who is like a spear carried behind
[3](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:3:3), well grasped, resplendent, gold-adorned;
there is also with them Vâ*k* (the voice of thunder), like unto a
courtly, eloquent woman.

4\. Far away the brilliant, untiring Maruts cling to their young maid,
as if she belonged to them all [1](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:4:1); but the
terrible ones did not drive away Rodasî (the lightning), for they wished
her to grow [2](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:4:2) their friend.

5\. When the divine Rodasî with dishevelled locks, the manly-minded,
wished to follow them, she went, like Sûryâ (the Dawn), to the chariot
of her servant, with terrible look, as with the pace of a cloud.

6\. As soon as the poet with the libations, O Maruts, had sung his song,
at the sacrifice, pouring out Soma, the youthful men (the Maruts) placed
the young maid (in their chariot) as their companion for victory, mighty
in assemblies.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

7\. I praise what is the praiseworthy true greatness of those Maruts,
that the manly-minded, proud, and strong one (Rodasî) drives with them
towards the blessed mothers.

8\. They protect [1](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:8:1) Mitra and Varu*n*a from
the unspeakable, and Aryaman also finds out the infamous. Even what is
firm and unshakable is being shaken [2](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:8:2); but
he who dispenses treasures [3](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:8:3), O Maruts, has
grown (in strength).

9\. No people indeed, whether near to us, or from afar, have ever found
the end of your strength, O Maruts! The Maruts, strong in daring
strength, have, like the sea, boldly [1](sbe3228.htm#an_1:167:9:1)
surrounded their haters.

10\. May we to-day, may we to-morrow in battle be called the most
beloved of Indra. We were so formerly, may we truly be so day by day,
and may the lord of the Maruts be with us.

11\. May this praise, O Maruts, this song of Mândârya, the son of Mâna,
the poet, ask you with food for offspring for ourselves! May we have an
invigorating autumn, with quickening rain!

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

#### NOTES.

Ascribed to Agastya, addressed to the Maruts, but the first verse to
Indra. Metre Trish*t*ubh throughout.

No verse of this hymn occurs in the Sâma-veda, nor in the other
Sa*m*hitâs.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:167:1:1">1</span>. We must keep vâ*g*a, as a general
term, distinct from a*s*va, horses, and go, cows, for the poets
themselves distinguish between gavyánta*h*, a*s*vayánta*h*, and
vâ*g*ayánta*h*; see IV, 17, 16; VI, 8, 6.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:167:3:1">1</span>. On mimyaksha, see before, I, 165,
1, note 2.

Note <span id="an_1:167:3:2">2</span>. The spear of the Maruts is meant
for the lightning, and we actually find *ri*sh*t*í-vidyuta*h*, having
the lightning for their spear, as an epithet of the Maruts, I, 168, 5;
V, 52, 13.

The rest of this verse is difficult, and has been variously rendered by
different scholars. We must remember that the lightning is represented
as the wife or the beloved of the Maruts. In that character she is
called Rodasî´, with the accent on the last syllable, and kept distinct
from ródasî, the dual, with the accent on the antepenultimate, which
means heaven and earth.

This Rodasî´ occurs:

V, 56, 8. â´ yásmin tastháu su-rá*n*âni bíbhratî sá*k*â marútsu rodasî´.

The chariot on which, carrying pleasant gifts, stands Rodasî among the
Maruts.

VI, 50, 5. mimyáksha yéshu rodasî´ nú devî´.

To whom clings the divine Rodasî.

VI, 66, 6. ádha sma eshu rodasî´ svá-*s*o*k*i*h* â´ ámavatsu tasthau ná
róka*h*.

When they (the Maruts) had joined the two Rodas, i. e. heaven and earth,
then the self-brilliant Rodasî came among the strong ones.

The name of Ródasî, heaven and earth, is so much more frequent in the
Rig-veda than that of Rodasî´, that in

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

several passages the iti which stands after duals, has been wrongly
inserted after Rodasî´ in the singular. It is so in our hymn, verse 4,
where we must read rodasî´m instead of rodasî´ íti, and again in X, 92,
11.

Besides the lightning, however, the thunder also may be said to be in
the company of the Maruts, to be their friend or their wife, and it is
this double relationship which seems to be hinted at in our hymn.

The thunder is called Vâ*k*, voice, the voice of heaven, also called by
the author of the Anukrama*n*î, Âmbh*rin*î. It was natural to identify
this ambh*rin*a with Greek ὄβριμος, terrible, particularly as it is used
of the thunder, ὄβριμον ἐβρόντησε, Hes. Th. 839, and is applied to
Athene as ὀβριομο-πάτρη. But there are difficulties pointed out by
Curtius, Grundzüge, p. 532, which have not yet been removed. This Vâ*k*
says of herself (X, 125, 12) that she stretched the bow for Rudra, the
father of the Maruts, that her birth-place is in the waters (clouds),
and that she fills heaven and earth. See also X, 114, 8.

In I, 173, 3. antá*h* dûtá*h* ná ródasî *k*arat vâ´k.

The voice (thunder) moved between heaven and earth, like a messenger.

In VIII, 100, 10 and 11, after it has been said that the thunderbolt
lies hidden in the water, the poet says: yát vâ´k vádantî
avi-*k*etanâ´ni râ´sh*t*rî devâ´nâm ni-sasâ´da mandrâ, when the voice,
the queen of the gods, the delightful, uttering incomprehensible sounds,
sat down. If, in our verse, we take Vâ*k* in the sense of thunder, but
as a feminine, it seems to me that the poet, speaking of the lightning
and thunder as the two companions of the Maruts, represents the first,
Rodasî, or the lightning, as the recognised wife.. hiding herself in the
house, while the other, the loud thunder. is represented as a more
public companion of the Maruts, distinctly called vidatheshu pa*g*râ
(verse 6), a good speaker at assemblies. This contrast, if it is really
what the poet intended, throws a curious light on the social character
of the Vedic times, as it presupposes two classes of wives, not
necessarily simultaneous, however,—a house-wife, who stays at home and
is not much seen, and a wife who appears in

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

public and takes part in the society and conversation of the sabhâ, the
assembly-room, and the vidathas, the meetings. The loud voice of the
thunder as well as the usual hiding of the lightning might well suggest
this comparison. That good manners, such as are required in public, and
ready speech, were highly esteemed in Vedic times, we learn from such
words as sabhéya and vidathyã. Sabhéya, from sabhâ, assembly, court,
comes to mean courtly, polite; vidathyã, from vidatha, assembly,
experienced, learned.

VIII, 4, 9. *k*andrá*h* yâti sabhâ´m úpa.

Thy friend, Indra, goes brilliant towards the assembly.

X, 34, 6. sabhâ´m eti kitavá*h*.

The gambler goes to the assembly.

VI, 28, 6. b*ri*hát va*h* váya*h* u*k*yate sabhâ´su.

Your great strength is spoken of in the assemblies.

Wealth is described as consisting in sabhâs, houses, IV, 2, 5; and a
friend is described as sabhâsaha, strong in the assembly, X, 71, 10.

Sabhéya is used as an epithet of vipra (II, 24, 13), and a son is
praised as sabheya, vidathya, and sadanya, i. e. as distinguished in the
assemblies.

Vidathyã, in fact, means much the same as sabheya, namely, good for,
distinguished at vidathas, meetings for social, political, or religious
purposes, IV, 21, 2; VII, 36, 8, &c.

Note <span id="an_1:167:3:3">3</span>. Úparâ ná *ri*sh*t*i*h*. I do not
see how uparâ can here mean the cloud, if it ever has that meaning. I
take ûpara as opposed to pûrva, i. e. behind, as opposed to before. In
that sense ûpara is used, X, 77, 3; X, 15, 2; 44, 7, &c. It would
therefore mean the spear on the back, or the spear drawn back before it
is hurled forward.

B. R. propose to read sa*m*-vâk, colloquium, but they give no
explanation. The reference to VS. IX, 2, is wrong.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:167:4:1">1</span>. The fourth verse carries on the
same ideas which were hinted at in the third. We must again change
rodasî´, the dual, into rodasî´m, which is sufficiently indicated by the
accent. Yavyâ I take as an instrumental of yavî, or of

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

yavyâ. It means the youthful maid, and corresponds to yuvati in verse 6.
Yavyâ would be the exact form which Curtius (Grundzüge, p. 589)
postulated as the Sanskrit prototype of Hebe <span
id="fr_121"></span>[a](#fn_112). Now, if the Maruts correspond to Mars
in Latin, and to Ares in Greek, the fact that in the Iliad Hebe bathes
and clothes Ares <span id="fr_122"></span>[b](#fn_113), may be of some
significance. Sâdhâra*n*î is used in the sense of uxor communis, and
would show a familiarity with the idea of polyandry recognised in the
epic poetry of the Mahâhhârata.

But although the Maruts cling to this maid (the Vâk, or thunder), they
do not cast off Rodasî, their lawful wife, the lightning, but wish her
to grow for their friendship, i. e. as their friend.

Ayâ´sa*h* yavyâ´ must be scanned   ̆  ̄̆  ̄  ̆  ̄  ̄. In VI 66, 5, ayâ´sa*h*
mahnâ´ must be scanned as   ̆  ̄̆  ̆  ̄  ̆  ̄  ̄ (mahimnâ?).

Note <span id="an_1:167:4:2">2</span>. V*rí*dham, as the accent shows,
is here an infinitive governed by *g*ushanta.

##### Verse 5.

See von Bradke, Dyaus Asura, p. 76.

##### Verse 6.

I translate arká by poet. The construction would become too cumbersome
if we translated, 'as soon as the hymn with the libations was there for
you, as soon as the sacrificer sang his song.'

##### Verse 7.

The meaning of the second line is obscure, unless we adopt Ludwig's
ingenious view that Rodasî is here conceived as Eileithyia, the goddess
who helps mothers in childbirth. I confess that it is a bold conjecture,
and there is nothing in Vedic literature to support it. All I can say is
that Eileithyia is in Greek, like Hebe (Yavyâ) and Ares (Marut), a child
of Hera, and that lightning as well as dawn might become a symbol of
birth. The etymology and the

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

very form of Εἰλείθυια is doubtful, and so is that of Rodasî´. It is
tempting to connect rodasî, in the sense of heaven and earth, with O. S.
radur, A. S. ródor (Grimm, Myth. p. 662), but that is impossible. Cf. I,
101, 7.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_1:167:8:1">1</span>. I do not see how pânti, the
plural, can refer to Mitra and Varu*n*a, nor how these gods could here
be introduced as acting the part of the Maruts. I therefore refer pânti
to the Maruts, who may be said to protect Mitra and Varu*n*a, day and
night, and all that belongs to them, from evil and disgrace. Aryaman is
then brought in, as being constantly connected with Mitrâ-varu*n*au, and
the finding out, the perceiving from a distance, of the infamous
enemies, who might injure Mitrâ-varu*n*au, is parenthetically ascribed
to him. See Ludwig, Anmerkungen, p. 239.

Note <span id="an_1:167:8:2">2</span>. *K*yavante cannot and need not be
taken for *k*yâvayanti, though a*k*yuta*k*ut is a common epithet of the
Maruts. It is quite true that the shaking of the unshakable mountains is
the work of the Maruts, but that is understood, even though it is not
expressed. In V, 60, 3, we read, párvata*h* *k*it máhi v*ri*ddhá*h*
bibhâya, even the very great mountain feared, i. e. the Maruts.

Note <span id="an_1:167:8:3">3</span>. Dâti in dâ´tivâra has been
derived by certain Sanskrit scholars from dâ, to give. It means, no
doubt, gift, but it is derived from dâ (do, dyati), to share, and means
first, a share, and then a gift. Dâ´tivâra is applied to the Maruts, V,
58, 2; III, 51, 9, and must therefore be applied to them in our passage
also, though the construction becomes thereby extremely difficult. It
means possessed of a treasure of goods which they distribute. The
growing, too, which is here predicated by vav*ri*dhe, leads us to think
of the Maruts, as in I, 37, 5, or of their friend Indra, I, 52, 2; 81,
I; VI, 30, 1. It is never, so far as I know, applied to the sacrificer.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_1:167:9:1">1</span>. Dh*ri*shatâ´ is used as an
adverb; see I, 71, 5; 174, 4; II, 30, 4, &c. Perhaps tmanâ may be
supplied as in I, 54, 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[277:a](sbe3228.htm#fr_121) Wir müssen ein
vorgriechisches yâvâ oder möglicherweise yâvyâ annehmen.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[277:b](sbe3228.htm#fr_122) Il. V, 905.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 168. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3229)
