[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3249)  [Next](sbe3251.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

### MA*ND*ALA VIII, HYMN 7.

#### ASH*T*AKA V, ADHYÂYA 8, VARGA 18-24.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. When the sage has poured out the threefold
[1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:1:1.md) draught to you, O Maruts, then you shine
forth in the mountains (clouds).

2\. Aye, when, O bright Maruts, growing in strength, you have seen your
way, then the mountains (clouds) have gone down
[1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:2:1.md).

3\. The sons of P*ris*ni, the bulls, have risen together with the winds,
they have drawn forth the swelling draught.

4\. The Maruts sow the mist, they shake the mountains (clouds), when
they go their way with the winds,

5\. When the mountain bent down before your march, the rivers before
your rule, before your great power (blast).

6\. We invoke you by night for our protection, you by day, you while the
sacrifice proceeds.

7\. And they rise up on their courses, the beautiful, of reddish hue
[1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:7:1.md), the bulls, above the ridge of the sky.

8\. With might they send forth a ray of light, that the sun may have a
path to walk [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:8:1.md): they have spread far and wide
with their lights.

9\. Accept, O Maruts, this my speech, this hymn of praise, O
*Ri*bhukshans [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:9:1.md), this my call.

10\. The P*ris*nis [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:10:1) (the clouds.md) yielded
three lakes (from their udders) as mead for the wielder of the
thunderbolt (Indra), the well, the water-skin, the watering-pot
[2](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:10:2.md).

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

11\. O Maruts, whenever we call you from heaven, wishing for your
favour, come hither towards us.

12\. For you are bounteous [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:12:1.md), in our house, O
Rudras, *Ri*bhukshans: you are attentive, when you enjoy (the
libations).

13\. O Maruts, bring to us from heaven enrapturing wealth, which
nourishes many, which satisfies all.

14\. When you have seen your way, brilliant Maruts, as it were from
above [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:14:1.md) the mountains, you rejoice in the
(Soma) drops which have been pressed out.

15\. Let the mortal with his prayers ask the favour of that immense,
unconquerable (host) [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:15:1.md) of them,

16\. Who like torrents [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:16:1.md) foam along heaven
and earth with their streams of rain, drawing the inexhaustible well.

17\. These sons of P*ris*ni rise up together with rattlings, with
chariots, with the winds, and with songs of praise.

18\. That (help) with which you helped Turva*s*a, Yadu, and Ka*n*va when
he carried off riches, that we pray for, greatly for our wealth.

19\. O bounteous Maruts, may these draughts, swelling like butter,
strengthen you, together with the prayers of Kâ*n*va.

20\. Where do you rejoice now, O bounteous Maruts, when an altar has
been prepared for you? What priest serves you?

21\. For you for whom we have prepared an altar, do not, as it was with
you formerly, in return for these praises, gladden the companies of our
sacrifice.

22\. These Maruts have brought together piece

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

by piece [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:22:1.md) the great waters, heaven and
earth, the sun, and the thunderbolt;

23\. And, while performing their manly work, they have trodden V*ri*tra
to pieces, and the dark mountains (clouds).

24\. They protected the strength and intelligence of the fighting Trita,
they protected Indra in his struggle with V*ri*tra.

25\. Holding lightnings in their hands, they hasten heavenward, golden
helmets [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:25:1.md) are on their head; the brilliant
Maruts have adorned themselves for beauty.

26\. When with U*s*anâ [2](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:26:2.md) you have come from
afar to Uksh*n*orandhra (ox-hollow) [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:26:1.md), he
roared from fear, like Dyu (the sky).

27\. O gods, come to us with your golden-hoofed horses, for the offering
of the sacrifice [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:27:1.md).

28\. When the red leader leads their spotted deer in their chariot, the
brilliant Maruts approach and let the waters run.

29\. The heroes went downwards to *S*arya*n*âvat, to Sushoma, to
Âr*g*îka, to Pastyâvat.

30\. When will you come hither, O Maruts, to the sage who calls you so,
with your consolations to the suppliant?

31\. What then now? Where are your friends, now that you have forsaken
Indra? Who is counted in your friendship?

32\. O Kâ*n*vas, I praise Agni, together with our Maruts, who carry the
thunderbolt in their hands, and are armed with golden daggers.

33\. Might I succeed in bringing hither the strong hunters, hither with
their splendid booty for the newest blessings.

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

34\. The hills even sink low, as if they thought themselves valleys, the
mountains even bow themselves down.

35\. The crossing (horses) bring them hither, flying through the air;
they bestow strength on the man who praises them.

36\. The old fire [1](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:36:1.md) has been born, like the
shine [2](sbe3250.htm#an_8:7:36:2.md) by the splendour of the sun, and the
Maruts have spread far and wide with their lights.

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

#### NOTES.

Ascribed to Punarvatsa Kâ*n*va. Verse 8 occurs MS. IV, 12, 5; verse 11
in TS. I, 5, 11, 4; MS. IV, 10, 4; verse 28 in AV. XIII, 1, 21. Metre,
Gâyatrî.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_8:7:1:1">1</span>. Trish*t*úbham is an adjective
belonging to ísham. The same expression occurs again, VIII, 69, 1, as a
galita, and is therefore of little help. In IX, 62, 24, the ísha*h* are
called parish*t*úbha*h*, which seems to mean something like parisrut,
i. e. standing round about. I therefore take trish*t*ubh in our passage
simply as threefold, referring probably to the morning, noon, and
evening sacrifice. The sacrifice is often called triv*ri*t, X, 52, 4;
124, 1. Some scholars ascribe to stubh in trish*t*ubh the meaning of
liturgical shouting.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_8:7:2:1">1</span>. Besides ní ahâsata, we find úd
ahâsata, I, 9, 4, and ápa ahâsata, IX, 73, 6. On *k*i, see verse 14, and
V, 55, 7. It is often impossible to say whether the Vedic Aorist should
be translated in English by the perfect or the imperfect. If we take the
verse as describing an historical fact, it would be, 'When you saw your
way, or, as soon as you had seen your way, the clouds fell.' If it is
meant as a repeated event, it would be, 'when, i. e. whenever you have
seen your way, the clouds have fallen.' The difficulty lies in English,
and though the grammars lay down rules, usage does not conform to them.
The difference in the use of tenses in English is so great that in the
revised version of the Bible, a number of passages had to be translated
differently for the English and for the American public. Thus in Rom.
ii. 12, the English edition gives, 'For as many as have sinned without
law, shall perish without law.' The American edition changes this into
'As many as sinned without the law.' Gal. iii. 22, English: 'The
scripture hath shut up;' American: 'The scripture shut up.' It was on
account of this and other changes of

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

idiom which have sprung up between English and American, that different
editions of the revised version had actually to be printed for England
and America. No wonder, therefore, that an American critic should in his
innocence have charged me with not knowing the difference between the
aorist, the imperfect, and the perfect in Vedic Sanskrit!

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_8:7:7:1">1</span>. Aru*n*apsu, perhaps
reddish-coloured, an epithet of the dawn. here applied to the Maruts.
The Maruts are sometimes called v*ri*shapsu, ahrutapsu, I, 52, 4; VIII,
20, 7.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_8:7:8:1">1</span>. The relation between the light cast
forth by the Maruts and the path of the sun is not quite clear, except
that in other places also the Maruts are connected with the morning. The
darkness preceding a thunderstorm may be identified with the darkness of
the night, preceding the sunrise. See Bergaigne, II, 379 seq.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_8:7:9:1">1</span>. The meaning of *ri*bhukshan is
doubtful. It is applied to Indra and the Maruts. See Bergaigne, II, 403;
404 note; 412.

##### Verse 10.

Note <span id="an_8:7:10:1">1</span>. The P*ris*nis in the plural fem.
are the clouds, see VIII, 6, 19. Mythologically there is but one
P*ris*ni, the mother of the Maruts. See also Bergaigne, II, 397.

Note <span id="an_8:7:10:2">2</span>. I am doubtful about the three
lakes of Madhu, here of rain, poured from their udders by the clouds.
The number three is common enough, and Ludwig has pointed out a parallel
passage from the AV. X, 10, 10-12, where we read of three pâtras, filled
with milk and Soma. Many similar passages have been collected by
Bergaigne, I, 177, but again without a definite result. The question is
whether the three words utsa, kavandha, and udrin are meant as names of
the three pâtras, in our passage, of the three lakes, or whether they
should be taken as an apposition,

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

the three lakes, namely, the well (of the sky), the skin full of water,
and udrin, the watering-pot. Udrin is elsewhere an adjective only, but I
think we must here translate, 'the well, the water-skin, the
watering-pot.'

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_8:7:12:1">1</span>. On sudânava*h* as vocative, see
Delbrück, Syntax, p. 106.

##### Verse 14.

Note <span id="an_8:7:14:1">1</span>. For adhi with genitive, one
expects ati. But Delbrück doubts whether ati can govern the genitive.
See Altind. Syntax, p. 440.

##### Verse 15.

Note <span id="an_8:7:15:1">1</span>. As ádâbhyasya can only refer to
etâ´vata*h*, I have taken etâvat in the sense of ga*n*a, followed by
eshâm. But I am not certain that the rendering is right.

##### Verse 16.

Note <span id="an_8:7:16:1">1</span>. I have ventured to translate
drapsâ*h* by torrents. Neither drops nor sparks nor banners seem to
yield an appropriate simile, but I feel very doubtful. See VIII, 96, 13;
IX, 73, 1.

##### Verse 22.

Note <span id="an_8:7:22:1">1</span>. I thought at first that by sám
parva*s*á*h* dadhu*h* was meant the mixing or confounding together of
heaven and earth; it being impossible, during a storm, to distinguish
the two. But there is clearly, as Ludwig points out, an opposition
between sám dadhu*h* and ví yayu*h*. I therefore take parva*s*á*h* in
verse 22 in the sense of piece by piece, as in AV. IV, 12, 7. sám dadhat
párushâ páru*h*, while in verse 23 it means in pieces.

##### Verse 25.

Note <span id="an_8:7:25:1">1</span>. On *s*iprâ*h*, see note to II, 34,
3.

##### Verse 26.

Note <span id="an_8:7:26:1">1</span>. Uksh*n*á*h* rándhram, 'the hollow
of the bull,' whatever that may be, is not mentioned again. If it is
meant for

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

the dark cloud which hides the rain, then the roar of the bull would be
the thunder of the cloud, stirred by the Maruts. Auksh*n*orandhra,
however, is the technical name of certain Sâmans, so that
Uksh*n*orandhra may have been, like U*s*anâ (later U*s*anas), a proper
name. See Tâ*nd*ya Br. XIII, 9, 18; 19.

Note <span id="an_8:7:26:2">2</span>. If u*s*ánâ stands for u*s*anayâ it
might mean, 'with desire,' but it seems more likely that it refers to
the *Ri*shi, who is called U*s*anâ in the Rig-veda, and U*s*anas in
later writings. See Lanman, p. 562, l. 21; Bergaigne, II, 338, n. 3;
Schmidt, K. Z. XXVI, 402, n. 1.

##### Verse 27.

Note <span id="an_8:7:27:1">1</span>. On makhásya dâváne, see note to I,
6, 8, where I accepted the old explanation, 'Come to the offering of the
priest.' But does makha mean priest? In later Sanskrit it means
sacrifice, so that makhásya dâváne has been translated, 'for the
offering of the sacrifice,' that is, 'that we may be able to offer you
sacrifice.' If makha means glad and refers to Soma, which is doubtful,
the sense would be the same. Possibly dâváne may here be derived from
do, to divide, but this would not help us much.

##### Verse 28.

The AV. reads yám tvâ p*rí*shatî ráthe prásh*t*ir váhati rohita,
*s*ubhâ´ yâsi ri*n*ánn apá*h*, which yields no help.

##### Verse 29.

This verse is very difficult. First of all, ní*k*akrayâ can hardly mean
'without a chariot' (B.-R.), but seems an adverb, meaning downwards. But
the chief difficulty lies in this, that we must decide, once for all,
whether words, such as sushoma, *s*arya*n*âvat, âr*g*îka, pastyâvat,
&c., are to be interpreted in their natural sense, as expressing
localities, well known to the poet, or in their technical sense, as
names of sacrificial vessels. That this decision is by no means easy,
may be inferred from the fact that two scholars, Roth and Ludwig, differ
completely, the former preferring the technical, the latter the
geographical meaning. We must

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

remember that in the hymns to the Maruts the poets speak occasionally of
the countries, far and near, visited by the storm-winds. We must also
bear in mind that in our very passage the poet asks the Maruts to come
to him, and not to tarry with other people. When, therefore, he says,
that they went to *S*arya*n*âvat, &c., is that likely to be meant for a
tank of Soma at his own or any other sacrifice?

*S*arya*n*âvat is derived from *s*arya, this from *s*ara. *S*ara means
reed, arrow; sarya, made of reeds, *s*aryâ, an arrow, but also reeds
tied together and used at the sacrifice for carrying Soma-oblations.
From it, *s*arya*n*a, which, according to Sâya*n*a, means lands in
Kurukshetra (RV. VIII, 6, 39), and from which *S*arya*n*âvat is derived,
as the name of a lake in that neighbourhood (not a Landstrich, B.-R.).
When this *s*arya*n*âvat occurs in the Rig-veda, the question is, does
it mean that lake, evidently a famous lake and a holy place in the early
settlements of the Vedic Âryas, or does it mean, as others suppose, a
sacrificial vessel made of reeds? It occurs in the Rig-veda seven times.

In I, 84, 14, Indra is said to have found the head of the horse, which
had been removed among the mountains (clouds) at *S*arya*n*âvat. This
seems to me the lake in which the sun sets. In the 8th Ma*nd*ala
sarya*n*âvat occurs three times. In VIII, 6, 39, Indra is invoked to
rejoice at *S*arya*n*âvat, or, according to others, in a vessel full of
Soma. In our passage the Maruts went to *S*arya*n*âvat, to Sushoma,
Âr*g*îka, and Pastyâvat, countries, it would seem, not vessels. In VIII,
64, it, after saying that the Soma had been prepared among the Pûrus, it
is added that the Soma is sweetest in *S*arya*n*âvat, on the Sushomâ,
and in Âr*g*îkîya. In IX, 65, 22, we read of Somas prepared far and
near, and at *S*arya*n*âvat, and in the next verse we read of Somas to
be found either among the Âr*g*îkas, among the Pastyâs, or among the
Five Tribes. In IX, 113, 1; 2, Indra is asked to drink Soma at
*S*arya*n*âvat, and the Soma is asked to come from Âr*g*îka. In X, 35,
2, the aid is implored of heaven and earth, of the rivers and the
mountains, and these mountains are called *s*arya*n*âvata*h*.

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Âr*g*îkîya,
besides the three passages mentioned already, occurs X, 75, 5, where it
is clearly a river as well as Sushomâ, while in IX, 65, 23, the
Âr*g*îkas, in the plural, could only be the name of a people.

Taking all this into account, it seems to me that we ought to accept the
tradition that *S*arya*n*âvat was a lake and the adjoining district in
Kurukshetra, that Âr*g*îka was the name of a river, Âr*g*îka the name of
the adjoining country, Âr*g*îkâ*h*, of the inhabitants, Âr*g*îkîyâ
another name of Âr*g*îkâ, the river, and Âr*g*îkîyam another name of the
country Âr*g*îka. Sushoma in our passage is probably the name of the
country near the Sushomâ, and Pastyâvat, though it might be an adjective
meaning filled with hamlets, is probably another geographical name; see,
however, IX, 65, 23. Ludwig takes *S*arya*n*âvat as a name of the
Eastern Sarasvatî; see Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 19; but we should
expect *S*arya*n*âvatî as the name of a river. See also Bergaigne, I,
206, who, according to his system, takes all these names as
'préparateurs célestes du Soma.'

##### Verse 31.

See I, 38, 1, note 1.

##### Verse 36.

Note <span id="an_8:7:36:1">1</span>. Sâya*n*a may be right in stating
that this verse was intended for an Âgnimâruta sacrifice, and that
therefore Agni was praised first, and afterwards the Maruts. In that
case pûrvya might mean first.

Note <span id="an_8:7:36:2">2</span>. *Kh*andas is doubtful; see,
however, I, 92, 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII, 20. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3251.md)
