[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3223)  [Next](sbe3225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 87.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 6, VARGA 13.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Endowed with exceeding vigour and power, the singers, the never
flinching, the immovable, the impetuous, the most beloved and most
manly, have decked themselves with their glittering ornaments, a few
only [1](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:1:1), like the heavens with the stars,

2\. When you have seen your way through the clefts, like birds, O
Maruts, on whatever road it be [1](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:2:1), then the
casks (clouds) on your chariots trickle everywhere, and you pour out the
honey-like fatness (the rain) for him who praises you.

3\. At their racings the earth shakes, as if broken
[1](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:3:1), when on the (heavenly) paths they harness
(their deer) for victory [2](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:3:2). They the
sportive, the roaring, with bright spears, the shakers (of the clouds)
have themselves glorified their greatness.

4\. That youthful company (of the Maruts), with their spotted horses
[1](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:4:1), moves by itself; hence
[2](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:4:2) it exercises lordship, invested with
powers. Thou indeed art true, thou searchest out sin
[3](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:4:3), thou art without blemish. Therefore the
manly host will help this prayer.

5\. We speak after the kind of our old father, our tongue goes forth at
the sight [1](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:5:1) of the Soma: when the singers
(the Maruts) had joined Indra in deed [2](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:5:2), then
only they took their holy names;—

6\. These Maruts, armed with beautiful rings, obtained splendours for
their glory [1](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:6:1), they obtained
[2](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:6:2) rays, and men to celebrate them; nay, armed
with daggers, speeding along, and fearless, they found the beloved
domain of the Maruts [3](sbe3224.htm#an_1:87:6:3).

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is ascribed to Gotama. No verse in SV., VS., AV.

Verse 2 = TS. IV, 3, 13, 7.

Verse 3 = TS. IV, 3, 13, 7.

Verse 6 = TS. II, 1, 11, 2; IV, 2, 11, 2.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:87:1:1">1</span>. Ké *k*it refers to the Maruts, who
are represented as gradually rising or just showing themselves, as yet
only few in number, like the first stars in the sky. Ké *k*it, some, is
opposed to sarve, all. The same expression occurs again, V, 52, 12,
where the Maruts are compared to a few thieves. B. and R., and those who
follow them, translate usrâ´*h* iva st*rí*-bhi*h* by 'like cows marked
with stars on their foreheads.' Such cows no doubt exist, but they can
hardly be said to become visible by these frontal stars, as the Maruts
by their ornaments. We must take usrâ´*h* here in the same sense as
dyâ´va*h*; II, 34, 2, it is said that the Maruts were perceived
dyâ´va*h* ná st*rí*-bhi*h*, like the heavens with the stars.

I, 166, 11. dûre-d*rís*a*h* yé divyâ´*h*-iva st*rí*-bhi*h*.

Who are visible far away, like the heavens (or heavenly beings) by the
stars.

And the same is said of Agni, II, 2, 5. dyaú*h* ná st*rí*bhi*h*
*k*itayat ródasî (íti) ánu. St*rí*bhi*h* occurs I, 68, 5; IV, 7, 3; VI,
49, 3; 12. It always means stars, and the meaning of rays (strahl)
rests, as yet, on etymological authority only. The evening sky would, no
doubt, be more appropriate than usrâ´*h*, which applies chiefly to the
dawn. But in the Indian mind, the two dawns, i. e. the dawn and the
gloaming, are so closely united and identified, that their names, too,
are frequently interchangeable.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:87:2:1">1</span>. I translate yayí not by a goer, a
traveller, i. e. the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

cloud (this is the explanation proposed by Sâya*n*a, and adopted by
Professor Benfey), but by path. Sâya*n*a (TS. IV, 3, 13, 7) renders
yayim by gatim. Etymologically yayí may mean either, and in some
passages I feel doubtful as to which is the more appropriate meaning.
But in parallel passages yayí is clearly replaced by yâ´ma. Thus:

VIII, 7, 2. yát—yâ´mam *s*ubhrâ*h* á*k*idhvam.

When you, bright Maruts, have seen your way.

See also VIII, 7, 4. yát yâ´mam yâ´nti vâyú-bhi*h*.

When they (the Maruts) go on their path with the winds.

VIII, 7, 14. ádhi-iva yát girî*n*â´m yâ´mam *s*ubhrâ*h* á*k*idhvam.

When you, bright Maruts, had seen your way, as it were, from above the
mountains.

The same phrase occurs, even without yâ´ma or yayí, in

V, 55, 7. ná párvatâ*h* ná nadyâ´*h* varanta va*h* yátra á*k*idhvam
maruta*h* gá*kkh*ata ít u tát.

Not mountains, not rivers, keep you back; where you have seen (your
way), there you go.

Though yayí does not occur frequently in the Rig-veda, the meaning of
path seems throughout more applicable than that of traveller.

V, 87, 5. tveshá*h* yayí*h*.

Your path, O Maruts, is blazing.

V, 73, 7. ugrá*h* vâm kakuhá*h* yayí*h*.

Fearful is your pass on high.

I, 51, 11. ugrá*h* yayim ní*h* apá*h* srótasâ asri*g*at.

The fearful Indra sent the waters forth on their way streaming.

X, 92, 5. prá—yayínâ yanti síndhava*h*.

The waters go forth on their path.

Ludwig takes kó*s*a as buckets on the chariots of the Maruts, which
seems right.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:87:3:1">1</span>. Cf. I, 37, 8, page 75. There is no
authority for Sâya*n*a's explanation of vithurâ´-iva, the earth trembles
like a widow. Vithurâ´ occurs several times in the Rig-veda, but never
in the sense of widow. Thus:

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

I, 168, 6. yát *k*yaváyatha vithurâ´-iva sám-hitam.

When you, Maruts, throw down what is compact, like brittle things.

I, 186, 2; VI, 25, 3; 46, 6; VIII, 96, 2; X, 77, 4 (vithuryáti). The
Maruts themselves are called ávithura in verse 1. Spiegel compares the
Zend aiwithura. As to á*g*ma and yâ´ma, see I, 37, 8, page
[75](sbe3218.htm#page_75).

Note <span id="an_1:87:3:2">2</span>. *S*úbh is one of those words to
which it is very difficult always to assign a definite special meaning.
Being derived from *s*ubh, to shine, the commentator has no difficulty
in explaining it by splendour, beauty; sometimes by water. But although
*s*úbh means originally splendour, and is used in that sense in many
passages, yet there are others where so vague a meaning seems very
inappropriate. In our verse Sâya*n*a proposes two translations, either,
'When the Maruts harness the clouds,' or, 'When the Maruts harness their
chariots, for the bright rain-water.' Now the idea that the Maruts
harness their chariots in order to make the clouds yield their rain, can
hardly be expressed by the simple word subhé, i. e. for brightness'
sake. As the Maruts are frequently praised for their glittering
ornaments, their splendour might be intended in this passage, as it
certainly is in others. Thus:

I, 85, 3. yát *s*ubháyante a*ñg*í-bhi*h* tanû´shu *s*ubhrâ´*h* dadhire
virúkmata*h*.

When the Maruts adorn themselves with glittering ornaments, the
brilliant ones put bright weapons on their bodies.

VII, 56, 6. subhâ´ sóbhish*th*â*h*, *s*riyâ´ sám-mi*s*lâ*h*,
ó*g*a*h*-bhi*h* ugrâ´*h*.

The most brilliant by their brilliancy, united with beauty, terrible by
terrors.

In I, 64, 4, I have translated váksha*h*-su rukmâ´n ádhi yetire *s*ubhé
by 'they fix gold (chains) on their chests for beauty.' And the same
meaning is applicable to I, 117, 5, subhé rukmám ná dar*s*atám
ní-khâtam, and other passages: IV, 51, 6; VI, 63, 6.

But in our verse and others which we shall examine, beauty and
brilliancy would be very weak renderings for

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

*s*ubhé. 'When they harnessed their chariots or their deer for the sake
of beauty,' means nothing, or, at least, very little. I take, therefore,
*s*ubhé in this and similar phrases in the sense of triumph or glory or
victory. 'When they harness their chariots for to conquer,' implies
brilliancy, glory, victory, but it conveys at the same time a tangible
meaning. Let us now see whether the same meaning is appropriate in other
passages:

I, 23, 11. *g*áyatâm-iva tanyatu*h* marútâm eti dh*ri*sh*n*uyâ´ yát
*s*úbham yâthá*n*a nara*h*.

The thundering voice of the Maruts comes fiercely, like that of
conquerors, when you go to conquer, O men!

Sâya*n*a: 'When you go to the brilliant place of sacrifice.' Wilson:
'When you accept the auspicious (offering).' Benfey: 'Wenn ihr euren
Schmuck nehmt.'

V, 57, 2. yâthana *s*úbham, you go to conquer. Cf. V, 55, 1.

Sâya*n*a: 'For the sake of water, or, in a chariot.'

V, 52, 8. *s*árdha*h* mâ´rutam út *s*a*m*sa—utá sma té *s*ubhe nára*h*
prá syandrâ´*h* yu*g*ata tmánâ.

Praise the host of the Maruts, whether they, the men, the quickly
moving, have by themselves harnessed (the chariots) for conquest.

Sâya*n*a: 'For the sake of water.' Cf. X, 105, 3.

V, 57, 3. *s*ubhé yát ugrâ*h* p*rí*shatî*h* áyugdhvam.

When you have harnessed the deer for conquest.

Sâya*n*a: 'For the sake of water.'

III, 26, 4. *s*ubhé—píshatî*h* ayukshata.

They had harnessed the deer for victory.

Sâya*n*a: 'They had harnessed in the water the deer together (with the
fires).'

V, 63, 5. rátham yu*ñg*ate marúta*h* *s*ubhé su-khám sû´ra*h*
ná—gó-ish*t*ishu.

The Maruts harness the chariot meet for conquest, like a hero in
battles.

Sâya*n*a: 'For the sake of water.'

I, 88, 2. *s*ubhé kám yânti—á*s*vai*h*.

The Maruts go on their horses towards conquest.

Sâya*n*a: 'In order to brighten the worshipper, or, for the sake of
water.'

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

I, 119, 3. sám yát mithá*h* pasp*ri*dhânâ´sa*h* ágmata *s*ubhé makhâ´*h*
ámitâ*h* *g*âyáva*h* rá*n*e.

When striving with each other they came together, for the sake of glory,
the brisk (Maruts), immeasurable (in strength), panting for victory in
the fight.

Sâya*n*a: 'For the sake of brilliant wealth.'

VII, 82, 5. marút-bhi*h* ugrá*h* súbham anyá*h* îyate.

The other, the fearful (Indra), goes with the Maruts to glory.

Sâya*n*a: 'He takes brilliant decoration.'

I, 167, 6. â´ asthâpayanta yuvatím yúvâna*h* *s*ubhé ními*s*lâm.

The Maruts, the youths, placed the maid (lightning on their chariot),
their companion for victory (*s*ubhé ními*s*lâm).

Sâya*n*a: 'For the sake of water, or, on the brilliant chariot.' Cf. I,
127, 6; 165, I.

VI, 62, 4. *s*úbham p*rí*ksham ísham û´r*g*am váhantâ.

The A*s*vins bringing glory, wealth, drink, and food.

VIII, 26, 13. *s*ubhé *k*akrâte, you bring him to glory.

*S*ubham-yâ´van is an epithet of the Maruts, I, 89, 7; V, 61, 13. Cf.
*s*ubhra-yâvânâ, VIII, 26, 19 (A*s*vinau).

*S*ubham-yâ´, of the wind, IV, 3, 6.

*S*ubham-yú, of the rays of the dawn, X, 78, 7.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:87:4:1">1</span>. Sâya*n*a: 'With spotted deer for
their horses.' See I, 37, 2, note 1, page [70](sbe3218.htm#page_70); as
Pûshan is called a*g*â*s*va, having goats for his horses, RV. V, 58, 2.

That the Maruts have not only p*ri*shatîs, but horses for their
chariots, we have seen before. In I, 88, 1, we have á*s*vapar*n*ai*h*
ráthebhi*h*.

Note <span id="an_1:87:4:2">2</span>. Ayâ´ is a word of very rare
occurrence in the Rig-veda. It is the instrum. sing. of the feminine
pronominal base a or î, and as a pronoun followed by a noun it is
frequently to be met with; V, 45, 11. ayâ´ dhiyâ´, &c. But in our verse
it is irregular in form as not entering into Sandhi with î*s*âná*h*.
This irregularity, however, which might have led us to suppose an
original ayâ´*h*, indefatigable, corresponding

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

with the following ási, is vouched for by the Pada text, in such matters
a better authority than the Sa*m*hitâ text, and certainly in this case
fully borne out by the Prâti*s*âkhya, I, 163, 10. Unless we read
ayâ´*h*, we must take ayâ´ as an adverb, in the sense of thus or hence;
cf. VI, 66, 4. In some passages where ayâ´ seems thus to be used as an
adverb, it would be better to supply a noun from the preceding verse.
Thus in II, 6, 2, ayâ´ refers to samídham in II, 6, 1. In VI, 17, 15, a
similar noun, samídhâ or girâ´, should be supplied. But there are other
passages where, unless we suppose that the verse was meant to illustrate
a ceremonial act, such as the placing of a samídh, and that ayâ´ pointed
to it, we must take it as a simple adverb, like the Greek τῷ: RV. III,
12, 2; IX, 53, 2; 106, 14. In X, 116, 9, the Pada reads áyâ*h*-iva, not
áyâ, as given by Roth; in VI, 66, 4, áyâ nú, the accent is likewise on
the first.

Note <span id="an_1:87:4:3">3</span>. *Rin*a-yâ´van is well explained by
B. and R. as going after debt, searching out sin. Sâya*n*a, though he
explains *rin*a-yâ´van by removing sin, derives it nevertheless
correctly from *rin*a and yâ, and not from yu. The same formation is
found in *s*ubham-yâ´van, &c.; and as there is *rin*a-yâ´ besides
*rin*a-yâ´van, so we find *s*ubham-yâ´ besides *s*ubham-yâ´van. Ludwig
prefers the derivation from yu.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:87:5:1">1</span>. The Soma-juice inspires the poet
with eloquence.

Note <span id="an_1:87:5:2">2</span>. *S*ámi occurs again in II, 31, 6;
III, 55, 3; VIII, 45, 27; X, 40, 1. Grassmann has shown that it may be
taken as an instrum. of *s*ámî, meaning work, but with special reference
to the toil of the battle-field or the sacrifice. It is used in the
former sense in

VIII, 45, 27. ví âna*t* turvá*n*e *s*ámi.

He (Indra) was able to overcome, lit. he reached to, or he arrived at
the overcoming or at victory by toil.

But, like other words which have the general meaning of working or
toiling, *s*ámî is used both in a general sense, and in the more special
sense of sacrifice.

X, 40, 1. vásto*h*-vasto*h* váhamânam dhiyâ´ *s*ámi.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Your chariot, O A*s*vins, driven along every morning by thought and
deed.

II, 31, 6. apâ´m nápât â*s*u-hémâ dhiyâ´ sámi.

Apâm napât (Agni) moving quickly by thought and deed.

In these two passages it might be possible, with a slight alteration of
the accent, to read dhiyâ-*s*ámi as one word. Dhiyâ-sám would mean the
sacrificer who is engaged in prayer; cf. dhiyâ-*g*úr, V, 43, 15. Thus we
read:

VI, 2, 4. yá*h* te su-dâ´nave dhiyâ´ márta*h* *s*a*s*ámate.

The mortal who toils for thee, the liberal god, with prayer.

There is no necessity, however, for such a change, and the authority of
the MSS. is against it. See also IX, 74, 7.

In III, 55, 3, *s*ámi á*kkh*a dîdye pûrvyâ´*n*i, Roth takes sámi as an
acc. plur. neut., Lanman as an instrum., Grassmann as a locative.

I glance back at the former sacrifices. See B. R. s.v. dî and *s*ámi.

In other passages the feminine sámî seems to mean work, sacrificial
work, but, as far as we can see, not simply sacrifice. Thus the *Ri*bhus
and others are said to have acquired immortality by their work or works,
*s*ámî or *s*ámîbhi*h*, I, 20, 2; 110, 4; III, 60, 3; IV, 33, 4. Cf. IV,
22, 8; 17, 18; V, 42, 10; 77, 4; VI, 52, 1; VIII, 75, 14; IX, 74, 7; X,
28, 12. In VI, 3, 2, we read:

î*g*é ya*gñ*ébhi*h* *s*a*s*amé sámîbhi*h*.

I have sacrificed with sacrifices, I have worked with pious works.

Here the verb *s*am must be taken in the sense of working, or performing
ceremonial worship, while in other places (III, 29, 16; V, 2, 7) it may
be perhaps taken in the more special sense of singing songs of praise.
The Greek κάμ-νω, to work, to labour, to tire (Sanskrit *s*âmyati), the
Greek κομιδή and κομίζω, to labour for or take care of a person, and
possibly even the Greek κῶμος a song or a festival (not a village song),
may all find their explanation in the Sanskrit root *s*am.

The idea that the Maruts did not originally enjoy divine

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

honours will occur again and again: cf. I, 6, 4; 72, 3. A similar
expression is used of the *Ri*bhus, I, 20, 8, &c. But while originally
the expression of obtaining sacred names meant no more than obtaining a
sacred or divine character, it was soon taken literally, and a number of
names were invented for the Maruts which even in the Vâ*g*asan.
Sa*m*hitâ XVII, 80-85 amount to 49, i. e. 7 × 7. Ya*gñ*íya, properly
'worthy of sacrifice,' has the meaning of divine or sacred. The Greek
ἅγιος has been compared with yâ*g*ya, sacrificio colendus, which is not
a Vedic word.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_1:87:6:1">1</span>. *S*riyáse kám seems to be the same
as the more frequent *s*riyé kám. Sriyáse only occurs twice more, V, 59,
3. The chief irregularity consists in the absence of Gu*n*a, which is
provided for by Pâ*n*ini's kasen (III, 4, 9). Similar infinitives, if
they may so be called, are bhiyáse, V, 29, 4; v*ri*dháse, V, 64, 5;
dhruváse, VII, 70, 1; tu*g*áse, IV, 23, 7; *riñg*áse, VIII, 4, 17;
v*riñg*áse, VIII, 76, 1; *rik*áse, VII, 61, 6. In VI, 39, 5, ri*k*áse
may be a dat. sing. of the masculine, to the praiser.

Note <span id="an_1:87:6:2">2</span>. Mimikshire from myaksh, to be
united with. Ra*s*mí, rays, after bhânú, splendour, may seem weak. It
might be possible to assign to ra*s*mí the meaning of reins, and take
*ri*kvabhir in the sense of sounding or tinkling. In V, 79, 8, ar*k*í is
used in juxtaposition with ra*s*mí.

Note <span id="an_1:87:6:3">3</span>. The bearing of this concluding
verse is not quite clear, unless we take it as a continuation of the
preceding verse. It was there said that the Maruts (the *rí*kvâ*n*a*h*)
obtained their holy names after having joined Indra in his work, which
means that they then and there became what they are. Having thus
obtained their true character and a place among the gods, they may be
said to have won at the same time splendour, and worshippers to sing
their praises, and to have established themselves in what became
afterwards known as their own domain, their own place among the gods who
are invoked at the sacrifice. See VII, 58, 1.

The metre requires that we should read dhâmana*h*.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span> translates: Gedeih’n zu spenden
woll’n die schöngeschmücketen mit Lichtern, Strahlen mit Lobsängern
regenen; die brüllenden, furchtlosen, stürmischen, sie sind bekannt als
Glieder des geliebten Marutstamms.

<span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>: Combining with the solar rays,
they have willingly poured down (rain) for the welfare (of mankind),
and, hymned by the priests, have been pleased partakers of the
(sacrificial food). Addressed with praises, moving swiftly, and exempt
from fear, they have become possessed of a station agreeable and
suitable to the Maruts.

<span class="smallcaps">Ludwig</span>: Zu herlichkeit haben dise sich
mit liechtglanz versehen, mit sausenden zügeln die schönberingten,
schwertbewaffnet die kraftvollen, ohne furcht besitzen sie die
freundliche Marutmacht.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 88. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3225)
