[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3207)  [Next](sbe3209.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Having said so much in vindication of the text of the Rig-veda as
published by me, and in defence of my principles of criticism which seem
to me so self-evident as hardly to deserve the name of canones critici,
I feel bound at the same time both to acknowledge some inaccuracies that
have occurred in the index at the end of each volume, and to defend some
entries in that index which have been challenged without sufficient
cause.

<span id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span>

It has been supposed that in the index at the end of my fourth volume,
the seventeenth verse of the 34th hymn in <span
class="margnote">Sâya*n*a's quotations from the
Sarvânukrama*n*î.</span>the seventh Ma*nd*ala has been wrongly assigned
to Ahi Budhnya, and that one half only of that verse should have been
reserved for that deity. I do not deny that we should be justified in
deriving that sense from the words of the Anukrama*n*ikâ, but I cannot
admit that my own interpretation is untenable. As Sâya*n*a does not
speak authoritatively on the subject, I followed the authority of
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya. This commentator of the Anukrama*n*ikâ says: atra
*k*a ab*g*âm ukthair ahim g*rin*îsha ity
ardhar*k*o<sup>ऽ</sup>b*g*anâmno <span id="fr_39"></span>[a](#fn_30.md)
devasya stuti*h*; mâ no<sup>ऽ</sup>hir budhnya ity
ardhar*k*o<sup>ऽ</sup>hirbudhnyanâmno devasya <span
id="fr_40"></span>[b](#fn_31.md). Another commentator says: ab*g*âm ukthair
ardhar*k*o<sup>ऽ</sup>hi*h*; uttaro mâ no<sup>ऽ</sup>hir ity ahir
budhnya*h*. From this we learn that both commentators looked upon the
Dvipadâs as ardhar*k*as or half-verses, and ascribed the whole of verse
16 to Ahir ab*g*â*h*, the whole of verse 17 to Ahir budhnya*h*. It will
be seen from an accurate examination of Sâya*n*a's commentary on verse
17, that in the second interpretation of the second half of verse 17, he
labours to show that in this portion, too, Ahir budhnya*h* may be
considered as the deity.

It is perfectly right to say that the words of the Anukrama*n*ikâ,
ab*g*âm ahe*h*, signify that the verse beginning with ab*g*âm, belongs
to Ahi. But there was no misprint in my index. It will be seen that
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya goes even beyond me, and calls that deity simply
Ab*g*a, leaving out Ahi altogether, as understood. I was anxious to show
the distinction between Ab*g*â Ahi*h* and Ahir Budhnya*h*, as the
deities of the two successive verses, and I did not expect that any
reader could possibly misinterpret my entry <span
id="fr_41"></span>[c](#fn_32.md).

With regard to hymns 91 and 92 of the seventh Ma*nd*ala, it is true,
that in the index I did not mention that certain verses in which two
deities are mentioned (91, 2;

<span id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 4-7; 92, 2), must
be considered as addressed not to Vâyu alone, but to Vâyu and Indra. It
will be seen from Sâya*n*a's introduction to hymn 90, that he, too,
wrongly limits the sentence of the Anukrama*n*ikâ, aindrya*s* *k*a yâ
dvivaduktâ*h*, to the fifth and following verses of hymn 90, and that he
never alludes to this proviso again in his introductory remarks to hymn
91 and 92, though, of course, he explains the verses, in which a dual
occurs, as addressed to two deities, viz. Indra and Vâyu. The same
omission, whether intentional or unintentional, occurs in
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya's commentary. The other commentary, however, assigns
the verses of the three hymns rightly. The subject has evidently been
one that excited attention in very early days, for in the
Aitareya-brâhma*n*a, V, 20, we actually find that the word vâm which
occurs in hymn 90, 1, and which might be taken as a dual, though
Sâya*n*a explains it as a singular, is changed into te <span
id="fr_42"></span>[a](#fn_33.md).

In hymn VII, 104, rakshoha*n*au might certainly be added as an epithet
of Indrâ-Somau, and Sha*d*guru*s*ishya clearly takes it in that sense.
The Anukrama*n*ikâ says: indrâsomâ pa*ñk*âdhikaindrâsoma*m*
râkshoghna*m* sâpâbhi*s*âpaprâyam.

In hymn VIII, 67, it has been supposed that the readings Samada and
Sâmada instead of Sammada and Sâmmada were due to a misprint. This is
not the case. That I was aware of the other spelling of this name, viz.
Sammada and Sâmmada, I had shown in my History of Ancient Sanskrit
Literature (2nd ed.), p. 39, where I had translated the passage of the
*S*âṅkhâyana-sûtras in which Matsya Sâmmada occurs, and had also called
attention to the Â*s*valâyana-sûtras X, 7, and the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a XIII, 3, 1, 1,

<span id="page_lxx">p. lxx</span>

where the same passage is found. I there spelt the name Sâmmada, because
the majority of the MSS. were in favour of that spelling. In the edition
of the Â*s*valâyana-sûtras, which has since been published by Râma
Nârâya*n*a Vidyâra*n*ya, the name is spelt Sâmada. My own opinion is
that Sâmmada is the right spelling, but that does not prove that
Sâya*n*a thought so; and unless I deviated from the principles which I
had adopted for a critical restoration of Sâya*n*a's text, I could not
but write Sâmada in our passage. B 1 and B 4 omit sâmada, but both give
samadâkhyasya; Ca. gives likewise samadâkhyasya, and A. semadâkhyasya.
This, I believe, was meant by the writer for sammadâkhyasya, for in the
passage from the Anukrama*n*î both A. and Ca. give sâmmado. I then
consulted the commentary of Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, and there again the same
MS. gave twice sâmmada, once sâmada, which is explained by
samadâkhyamahâmînarâ*g*aputra*h*. A better MS. of Sha*d*guru*s*ishya,
MS. Wilson 379 gives the readings sâmmado, sâmmada, and sammadâkhyasya.
The other commentary gives distinctly sâmanda. \[I have adopted sammada
in the new edition.\]

In IX, 68, Professor Aufrecht adopts what he considers the bold reading
Vatsaprî; I prefer to be timid and allow Sâya*n*a his own reading
Vatsaprĭ; see Sarvânukrama*n*î, ed. Macdonell, pp. 34, 146.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[lxviii:a](sbe3208.htm#fr_39.md) I find that Mr.
Macdonell in his edition of the Sarvânukrama*n*î reads
ardhar*k*o<sup>ऽ</sup>hinâmno. If this is right, part of my argument
would fall.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[lxviii:b](sbe3208.htm#fr_40.md) MS. Wilson 379
has, ardhar*k*o nâmano daivatasya, and in the margin <sup>ऽ</sup>hi.
Ahirbudhnya seems to have been taken as one word.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[lxviii:c](sbe3208.htm#fr_41.md) The editor of the
Bombay edition of the text of the Rig-veda assigns verse 16 to Ahi,
verse 17 to Ahirbudhnya.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[lxix:a](sbe3208.htm#fr_42.md) The interpunction of
Dr. Haug's edition (p. 128) should be after te. Sha*d*guru*s*ishya says:
ata eva brâhma*n*asûtrayo*h* praüge vâyavyatvâya pra vîrayâ *s*u*k*ayo
dadrire <span id="fr_43"></span>[b](#fn_34.md) vâm iti dviva*k*anasthâne ta
ity ekava*k*anapâ*th*a*h* k*ri*ta*h*, vâm ity ukta*m* *k*ed aindratva*m*
*k*a syâd iti. Possibly the same change should be made in Â*s*valâyana's
*S*rauta Sûtras, VIII, 11, and it has been made by Rama Nârâya*n*a
Vidyâratna. The remark of the commentator, however, dadrire ta iti
prayogapâ*th*a*h*, looks as if vâm might have been retained in the text.
The MSS. I have collated are in favour of te.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[lxix:b](sbe3208.htm#fr_43.md) Mr. Macdonell
(Sarvânukrama*n*î, p. 133) inserts ta iti after dadrire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 6](sbe3209.md)
