[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3240)  [Next](sbe3242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

### MA*ND*ALA V, HYMN 59.

#### ASH*T*AKA IV, ADHYÂYA 3, VARGA 24.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. They truly [1](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:1:1) tried to make you grant them
welfare. Do thou sing [2](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:1:2) praises to Heaven
(Dyu), I offer sacrifice (*ri*ta) to the Earth. The Maruts wash their
horses and race to the air, they soften their splendour by waving mists.

2\. The earth trembles with fear from their onset. She sways like a full
ship, that goes rolling [1](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:2:1). The heroes who
appear on their marches, visible from afar, strive together within the
great (sacrificial) assembly [2](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:2:2).

3\. Your horn is exalted for glory [1](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:3:1), as the
horns of cows; your eye is like the sun [2](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:3:2),
when the mist is scattered. Like strong racers, you are beautiful, O
heroes, you think of glory, like manly youths
[3](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:3:3).

4\. Who could reach, O Maruts, the great wise thoughts, who the great
manly deeds of you, great ones? You shake the earth like a speck of
dust, when you are carried forth for granting welfare.

5\. These kinsmen [1](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:5:1) (the Maruts) are like red
horses, like heroes eager for battle, and they have rushed forward to
fight. They are like well-grown manly youths, and the men have grown
strong, with streams of rain they dim the eye of the sun.

6\. At their outbreak there is none among them who is the eldest, or the
youngest, or the middle: they have grown by their own might, these sons
of P*ris*ni, noble by birth, the boys of Dyaus; come hither to us!

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

7\. Those who like birds flew with strength in rows
[1](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:7:1) from the ridge of the mighty heaven to its
ends, their horses shook the springs [2](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:7:2) of the
mountain (cloud) so that people on both sides
[3](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:7:3) knew it.

8\. May [1](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:8:1) Dyaus Aditi (the unbounded)
[2](sbe3241.htm#an_5:59:8:2) roar for our feast, may the dew-lighted
Dawns come striving together; these, the Maruts, O poet, (the sons) of
Rudra, have shaken the heavenly bucket (cloud), when they had been
praised.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

#### NOTES.

The same poet and deity. Metre, 1-7 *G*agatî; 8 Trish*t*ubh. None of the
verses occurs in SV., VS., AV., TB., TS., MS.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_5:59:1:1">1</span>. If we accept the text as it
stands, we have to translate, 'The spy called out to you to grant
welfare.' The spy is then either Agni (Bergaigne, II, p. 378) or the
priest. See also VIII, 61, 15; X, 35, 8. But there are many objections
to this. Pra-krand is not used in that sense, and we should expect pra
krânt suvitâya. Pra-kar, when it is construed with a dative, means
generally to prepare some one for something, to cause some one to do a
thing. Thus, I, 186, 10. pró a*s*vínau ávase k*rin*udhvam. get the
A*s*vins to protect. VI, 21, 9. prá ûtáye váru*n*am mitrám índram
marûta*h* k*ri*shva ávase na*h* adyá, make Varu*n*a, Mitra, and Indra to
protect, make the Maruts to protect us to-day. X, 64, 7. prá va*h*
vâyúm—stómai*h* k*rin*udhvam sakhyâ´ya pûshá*n*am, make Vâyu by your
praises to be your friend. I, 112, 8. prá andhám *s*ro*n*ám *k*ákshase
étaye k*ri*thá*h*, whereby you make the blind and lame to see and to
walk. The poet therefore seems to have said in our verse also, 'They (my
men or priests) made you or wished you to give them welfare.' What
spa*t* can mean in such a sentence, is difficult to say. Till we know
better, we must simply accept it as a particle of asseveration, like
ba*t*.

Note <span id="an_5:59:1:2">2</span>. Ár*k*â may also be the first
person.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_5:59:2:1">1</span>. With regard to vyâthir yatî´, cf.
I, 117, 15. samudrám avyathír *g*aganvâ´n, and VIII, 45, 19. vyáthir
*g*aganvâ´*m*sa*h*; Bergaigne, Journ. As. 1884, p. 490.

Note <span id="an_5:59:2:2">2</span>. Mahé vidáthe must be taken as a
locative sing. It occurs again X, 96, 1. We have similar forms in mahé
rá*n*e, IX, 66, 13. &c. The locative is governed by antá*h*,

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

as in II, 27, 8. vidáthe antá*h* eshâm. The etymology and the meaning of
vidatha have been often discussed, for the last time by M. Regnaud,
Revue de l’histoire des religions, 1890. Prof. Roth, as M. Regnaud
states, explains it by conseil, avis, réunion où l’on délibère,
assemblée, troupe, armée. Grassmann takes it generally for réunion,
rencontre, combat. Geldner derives it from vid, in the sense of art,
science. Ludwig derives it likewise from vid, but in the sense .of
Bekanntschaft, then Gesellschaft, and lastly as synonymous with ya*gñ*a,
sacrifice, assemblage. M. Regnaud differs from all his predecessors, and
derives vidatha from vidh, to sacrifice. He maintains that \*vidhatha
would become vidatha, like adhak from dah or dhagh, and phaliga for
parigha. I know nothing about the etymology of phaliga, but if it stands
for parigha, the second aspirate has lost its aspiration and thrown it
on the initial. In adhak, the final has lost its aspiration, and thus
allowed its appearance in the initial. But in vidatha, if it stood for
vidhatha, there would be no phonetic excuse whatever for changing dh
into d, at least in Sanskrit. It is possible that in Sanskrit such a
form as vidhatha might have been avoided, but there is no phonetic law
to prevent the formation of such a word as vidhatha, like u*k*atha,
ya*g*atha, &c. We say vidhatha in the 2 pers. plur., as we say bodhatha.
No Sanskrit grammarian could derive vidatha from vidh. If therefore
vidatha signifies sacrifice, this is not because it is derived from
vidh, to sacrifice. Vidatha may have been the name of a sacred act, as
veda is of sacred knowledge. But the fact remains that it is best
translated by assembly, particularly an assembly for sacrificial
purposes.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_5:59:3:1">1</span>. On *s*riyáse, see I, 87, 6.

Note <span id="an_5:59:3:2">2</span>. I see no necessity for changing
sûrya*h* into sûra*h*, see Bergaigne, Mélanges Renier, p. 94. He would
translate, 'they are like the eye of the sun.'

Note <span id="an_5:59:3:3">3</span>. Máryâ*h* may be bridegrooms, as in
V, 60, 4

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (varâ´*h* iva),
but there is nothing to indicate that meaning here. The difficulty is to
find a word to express *s*riyáse. It means to shine, but at the same
time to excel. Possibly it may have even a more definite meaning, such
as to shine in battle, or to triumph.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_5:59:5:1">1</span>. As to sabandhu, see VIII, 20, 21.

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_5:59:7:1">1</span>. On sré*n*î*h*, see Gaedicke, p.
164; Bergaigne, Mél. Renier, p. 94.

Note <span id="an_5:59:7:2">2</span>. The meaning of nabhanú, spring, is
doubtful.

Note <span id="an_5:59:7:3">3</span>. Ubháye refers to many on both
sides, and cannot be taken for ubhe, heaven and earth. It may mean all,
particularly when there are two sides only, as in a battle.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_5:59:8:1">1</span>. Ludwig seems to have seen the true
meaning of this verse, namely that, though Dyaus may roar for the feast,
and though the Dawns may strive to come near, the Maruts alone deserve
the sacrifice, because they opened the chest of rain.

Note <span id="an_5:59:8:2">2</span>. On Dyaus Aditi, see note to I,
166, 12, [p. 261](sbe3227.htm#page_261), where the translation has to be
corrected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 60. To Agni and the Maruts](sbe3242)
