[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3256)  [Next](sbe3258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

### MA*ND*ALA II, HYMN 33.

#### ASH*T*AKA II, ADHYÂYA 7, VARGA 16-18.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To Rudra, the Father of the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. O father of the Maruts, let thy favour come near, and do not deprive
us of the sight of the sun; may the hero (Rudra) be gracious to our
horse [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:1:1), and may we increase in offspring, O
Rudra!

2\. May I attain to a hundred winters through the most blissful
medicines which thou hast given! Put away far
[1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:2:1) from us all hatred, put away anguish, put
away sicknesses in all directions!

3\. In beauty thou art the most beautiful of all that exists, O Rudra,
the strongest of the strong, thou wielder of the thunderbolt! Carry us
happily to the other shore of our anguish, and ward off all assaults of
mischief [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:3:1).

4\. Let us not incense thee, O Rudra, by our worship, not by bad praise,
O hero, and not by divided praise! Raise up our men by thy medicines,
for I hear thou art the best of all physicians.

5\. He who is invoked [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:5:1) by invocations and
libations, may I pay off [2](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:5:2) that Rudra with my
hymns of praise. Let not him who is kind-hearted
[3](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:5:3), who readily hears our call, the tawny,
with beautiful cheeks, deliver us to this wrath!

6\. The manly hero with the Maruts has gladdened me, the suppliant, with
more vigorous health. May I without mischief find shade, as if from
sunshine [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:6:1), may I gain the favour of Rudra!

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

7\. O Rudra, where is thy softly stroking hand which cures and relieves
[1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:7:1)? Thou, the remover of all heaven-sent
mischief, wilt thou, O strong hero, bear with me?

8\. I send forth a great, great hymn of praise to the bright tawny bull.
Let me reverence [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:8:1) the fiery god
[2](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:8:2) with prostrations; we celebrate the flaring
name [3](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:8:3) of Rudra.

9\. He, the fierce god, with strong limbs, assuming many forms, the
tawny Rudra, decked himself with brilliant golden ornaments. From Rudra,
who is lord of this wide world, divine power
[1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:9:1) will never depart.

10\. Worthily thou bearest arrows and bow, worthily, O worshipful
[1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:10:1), the golden, variegated chain; worthily
thou cuttest every fiend [2](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:10:2) here to pieces,
for there is nothing indeed stronger than thou, O Rudra.

11\. Praise him, the famous, sitting in his chariot
[1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:11:1), the youthful, who is fierce and attacks
like a terrible wild beast [2](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:11:2) (the lion). And
when thou hast been praised, O Rudra, be gracious to him who magnifies
thee, and let thy armies [3](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:11:3) mow down others
than us!

12\. O Rudra, a boy indeed makes obeisance to his father who comes to
greet him [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:12:1): I praise the lord of brave men,
the giver of many gifts, and thou, when thou hast been praised, wilt
give us thy medicines.

13\. O Maruts, those pure medicines of yours, the most beneficent and
delightful, O heroes, those which Manu [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:13:1),
our father, chose, those I crave from Rudra, as health and wealth.

14\. May the weapon of Rudra avoid us [1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:14:1), may
the great anger of the flaring one pass us by.

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Unstring thy
strong bows [2](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:14:2) for the sake of our liberal
lords, O bounteous Rudra, be gracious to our kith and kin.

15\. Thus, O tawny and manly god, showing thyself
[1](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:15:1), so as neither to be angry nor to kill, be
mindful of our invocations [2](sbe3257.htm#an_2:33:15:2), and, rich in
brave sons, we shall magnify thee in the congregation.

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

#### NOTES.

Ascribed to G*ri*tsamada. Metre, Trish*t*ubh. See Muir, S. T. IV, 309;
Geldner and Kaegi, p. 90. Bergaigne, III, 153; Leop. v. Schroeder,
Indiens Literatur and Cultur, 343. Verse 1 = TB. II, 8, 6, 9; verse 2 =
TB. II, 8, 6, 8; verse 10 = TÂ. IV, 5, 7; verse 11 =TS. IV, 5, 10, 3;
AV. XVIII, 1, 40; verse 14 = VS. XVI, 50; TS. IV, 5, 10. 4; verse 15 =
TB. II, 8, 6, 9.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_2:33:1:1">1</span>. The words abhí na*h* vîrá*h*
árvati kshameta admit of different interpretation. Grassmann has: 'Der
Held sei huldreich unsren schnellen Rossen;' Muir: 'May the hero spare
our horses;' Ludwig: 'Unser held möge tüchtig zu Rosse sein.' The
passages quoted by Ludwig from the *S*at. Br. III, 7, 3, 1, and IV, 3,
4, 14, do not bear out the meaning of tüchtig sein, to be strong, they
rather mean, to suffer, to submit to, with a dative. Yet vîrá*h* by
itself may mean son or offspring (III, 4, 9; VII, 1, 21; 56, 24), and if
abhi-ksham in our passage could mean to be capable and strong, Ludwig's
translation would be justified. But if we take vîrá, hero, as intended
for Rudra, as Indra also is often called simply vîra, abhi kshameta
would lend itself to the translation of 'to be gracious,' or 'to spare,'
and I therefore translate: 'May the hero (Rudra) be gracious to our
horse.' It should be understood in the same sense in verse 7, at least I
see no reason to vary the translation as Geldner does, and also Ludwig,
while Muir is right and consistent. Our poet uses the verb abhiksham
frequently, II, 28, 3; 29, 2 (abhikshantâra*h*?). It seems confined to
the second Ma*nd*ala.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_2:33:2:1">1</span>. Vitarám, wherever it occurs, is
always joined with ví in the Rig-veda.

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_2:33:3:1">1</span>. If rápas is derived from rap, to
whisper, it would have meant originally what is whispered, that is,
slander, accusation, and then only crime. Latin crîmen also meant
originally what is heard, Leumund. Crîmen is not connected with the
Greek κρίνω. The î in crîmen has to be accounted for like the î in
lîber, from lubh (libh). The r is irregular, unless we find an analogy
in increpare.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_2:33:5:1">1</span>. Hávate, we expect hûyáte. Ludwig's
explanation has not solved the difficulty, and suháva*h* points back to
yo havate. Oldenberg suggests an anacoluthon, He who invokes—may I.

Note <span id="an_2:33:5:2">2</span>. I formerly took áva dishîya in the
sense of 'to unloose,' used originally with reference to tethered
horses. As horses are unloosed before they can do their work, so the
gods are, as it were, unloosed by prayer, or set off, so that they may
fulfil what they are asked to do; see RV. I. 25, 3. In the passage
quoted by Ludwig from the TS. I, 8, 6, 2, the same meaning seemed quite
appropriate: áva Rudrám adimahi—yáthâ na*h* *s*réyasa*h* kárat, 'We
unloosed Rudra, that he might make us happier.' Ludwig takes it to mean,
'We have bound, tied, or obliged Rudra, so that he make us happy,' but
the preposition ava is against this interpretation. Muir proposes 'to
avert' or 'to propitiate,' the latter being adopted by Geldner.

However, in an article lately published by Roth on Wergeld in the Veda
(Z. D. M. G. XLI, 672), ava-day has been recognised as an almost
technical legal term, meaning 'to pay off, to compound.' Thus, Tâ*nd*ya
Br. XVI, 1, 12, we read yâ*h* *s*ata*m* vaira*m* tad devân avadayate,
'He portions off, i. e. he satisfies, or pacifies, the gods who were
offended, by giving a hundred cows.' With ni*h*, we find TB. I, 6, 10,
1. pra*g*â´ rudrâ´n nír áva dayate; the same occurs in Maitr. S. I, 10,
20, where we also read, g*ri*heshv eva Rudram nir ava dayata esha te
Rudra bhâgas. See also Ait. Br. II, 7, 1. There is a verse quoted,
ávâmba Rudrám adimahi, in TS. I, 8, 6, 2;

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

and again in MS. I, 10, 4; Kâ*th*. IX, 7; Kap. S. VIII, 10; VS. III, 58,
and this gives us the right key to our verse, namely, 'May I pay off,
may I pacify, Rudra with my songs of praise,' dishîya being the optat.
of the aorist, adimahi the aor. ind.

Note <span id="an_2:33:5:3">3</span>. On *ri*dûdára*h*, see Benfey,
Quantitätsversch. V, 1; p. 25; Geldner, K. Z. XXVIII, 201; Ludwig,
Süsses in seinem bauche habend; Bergaigne, miséricordieux. The meaning
is doubtful.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_2:33:6:1">1</span>. Gh*rín*îva, divided into
gh*rín*i-iva, is a difficult form. Various attempts have been made to
explain it. Grassmann translates: 'Wie Schatten von der Gluth mög
unversehrt ich des Rudra Huld erreichen,' preferring to write gh*rin*er
va. Ludwig, in his notes: 'Bei hitze,' taking gh*rin*i as a locative.
Muir: 'Shade in the heat.' Geldner: 'Vor Sonnengluth den Schatten,'
taking gh*rin*î as an instrumental. Lanman (p. 379) takes the same view,
though he admits that this would be the only example of an instrumental
in the masculine, contracted to î. He translates: 'As by the heat
unharmed, to shelter bring me.' He adds: 'It may be ablative with
elision and crasis,' and this is likewise Roth's view. Weber thinks that
we may retain gh*rin*îva in the Sa*m*hitâ text, but should divide it
into gh*rin*î-iva, 'like a man suffering from heat' (Ind. Stud. XIII, p.
58). I think we must take into account a parallel passage, VI, 16, 38.
ûpa *kh*âyâ´m iva gh*rín*e*h* áganma *s*árma te vayám, see M. M.,
Preface to translation of Rig-veda, p. cxliii. Probably the apparent
irregularity of the metre led to the change of gh*rín*er iva to
gh*rín*îva, but gh*rín*er iva can be scanned   ̆  ̄  ̆; see M. M., l. c.,
p. cxlviii.

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_2:33:7:1">1</span>. *G*álâsha by itself occurs but
once more as an epithet of Rudra, VII, 35, 6, and twice in composition,
*g*álâshabhesha*g*a; see I, 43, 4. The second pâda begins with hásta*h*.

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_2:33:8:1">1</span>. Namasyá is difficult, but we can
hardly take it for namasyâmasi, masi being supplied from g*rin*îmasi.
Nor do we gain by taking namasyâ´ for an instrumental. Perhaps it is
best to take it as a 1st pers. of the imperative.

Note <span id="an_2:33:8:2">2</span>. The meaning of kalmalîkin is
unknown.

Note <span id="an_2:33:8:3">3</span>. I think it is best to translate
nâ´ma by name, though, no doubt, it implies more than the mere name.
Geldner's 'majestätisch Wesen' is right, but it is only one side of
nâma. See VIII, 20, 13, note 1.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_2:33:9:1">1</span>. On vai, see Delbrück, Syntax, p.
483. On asurya, see von Bradke, Dyaus Asura, pp. 29, 34.

##### Verse 10.

Note <span id="an_2:33:10:1">1</span>. I have changed ya*g*atám into
ya*g*ata.

Note <span id="an_2:33:10:2">2</span>. Árhan idám dayase ví*s*vam ábhvam
has been rendered in different ways. Grassmann: 'Du theilst alle diese
Macht aus.' Ludwig: 'Du besitzest all dise gewalt.' Geldner: 'Du
besitzest höchste Macht.' Muir: 'Thou possessest all this vast world.'
Dayase is used, no doubt, in the sense of cutting and distributing, but
never in the sense of possessing. In several places, however, it has
been translated by to cut and to destroy, e. g. X, 80, 2. agní*h*
v*ri*trâ´*n*i dayate purû´*n*i, 'Agni cuts up many enemies.' VI, 22, 9.
ví*s*vâ*h* a*g*urya dayase ví mâyâ´*h*, 'thou destroyest all deceits.'
See also IV, 7, 10; VI, 6, 5. As to ábhva in the sense of fiend, we had
it before in I, 39, 8. â´ yá*h* na*h* ábhva*h* î´shate, ví tám yuyota.
In other places it assumes a more neutral character, meaning monster, or
monstrous power; see B.-R. s. v. 'To distribute power' is not a Vedic
conception, nor does ábhva ever mean power in the sense of 'ungeheure
Macht, or Urkraft' (Delbrück, Chrest. p. 49).

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_2:33:11:1">1</span>. AV. XVIII, 1, 40, has gartasádam
*g*ánânâm râ´*g*ânam, and anyám asmát te. Garta-sad, literally, sitting

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

in the hole, probably the place of the chariot where the king sat,
separated from the driver. These divided chariots can be seen in the
ancient monuments of Assyria and Babylon. The king seems to stand in a
box of his own, fighting, while the charioteer holds the reins, so as
not to interfere with the king. See, however, Bergaigne, III, 122 seq.;
Z. D. M. G. XL, 681.

Note <span id="an_2:33:11:2">2</span>. The m*ri*gá bhîmá is probably
meant for the lion, cf. I, 154, 2, and Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p.
78.

Note <span id="an_2:33:11:3">3</span>. As to the senâs of Rudra, see TS.
IV, 5, 2, 1, senânî; AV. XI, 2, 31; Pâr. G*ri*hy. III, 8, 11.

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_2:33:12:1">1</span>. The sense would be better if
vándamânam could be changed to vándamâna*h*.

##### Verse 13.

Note <span id="an_2:33:13:1">1</span>. That father Manu obtained health
and wealth from Rudra was mentioned before, I, 114, 2, and it is curious
that the Vedic authority of Manu's Sm*ri*ti should be based on the
yell-known sentence, yat ki*mk*a Manur abravît tad bhesha*g*am, Taitt.
Sa*m*h. II, 2, 10, 2; cf. M. M., Hist. of Anc. Sansk. Lit. p. 89.

##### Verse 14.

Note <span id="an_2:33:14:1">1</span>. The VS. reads pári no rudrásya
hetír v*rin*aktu, pári tveshásya durmatír aghâyó*h*. V*rig*yâ*h* is the
3rd pers. sing. in s of the aor. opt.

Note <span id="an_2:33:14:2">2</span>. Rudra is called sthiradhanvan;
see also IV, 4, 5; VIII, 19, 20; X, 116, 5; 6; 120, 4; 134, 2; Maitr. S.
II, 9, 9.

##### Verse 15.

Note <span id="an_2:33:15:1">1</span>. *K*ekitâna, the vocative of the
participle.

Note <span id="an_2:33:15:2">2</span>. Muir seems to translate bodhi,
which Sâya*n*a explains by budhyasva, by 'think of us now.' The TB.
reads havana*s*rû*h*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 74. To Soma and Rudra](sbe3258)
