[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3235)  [Next](sbe3237.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

### MA*ND*ALA V, HYMN 54.

#### ASH*T*AKA IV, ADHYÂYA 3, VARGA 14-16.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. You have fashioned [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:1:1.md) this speech for the
brilliant Marut-host which shakes the mountains: celebrate then the
great manhood in honour of that host who praises the warm milk (of the
sacrifice), and sacrifices on the height of heaven
[2](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:1:2.md), whose glory is brilliant.

2\. O Maruts, your powerful men (came) forth searching for water,
invigorating, harnessing their horses, swarming around. When they aim
with the lightning, Trita shouts, and the waters murmur, running around
on their course.

3\. These Maruts are men brilliant with lightning, they shoot with
thunderbolts, they blaze with the wind, they shake the mountains, and
suddenly, when wishing to give water [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:3:1.md), they
whirl the hail; they have thundering strength, they are robust, they are
ever-powerful.

4\. When you drive forth [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:4:1.md) the nights, O
Rudras, the days, O powerful men, the sky, the mists, ye shakers, the
plains, like ships, and the strongholds, O Maruts, you suffer nowhere.

5\. That strength of yours, O Maruts, that greatness extended far as the
sun extends its daily course, when you, like your deer on their march,
went down to the (western) mountain with untouched splendour
[1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:5:1.md)

6\. Your host, O Maruts, shone forth when, O sages, you strip, like a
caterpillar, the waving tree [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:6:1.md)

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Conduct then, O
friends, our service [2](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:6:2.md) to a good end, as the
eye conducts the man in walking.

7\. That man, O Maruts, is not overpowered, he is not killed, he does
not fail, he does not shake, he does not drop, his goods do not perish,
nor his protections, if you lead him rightly, whether he be a seer or a
king.

8\. The men with their steeds, like conquerors of clans, like Aryaman
(Mitra and Varu*n*a) [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:8:1.md), the Maruts, carrying
waterskins [2](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:8:2.md), fill the well; when the strong
ones roar, they moisten the earth with the juice of sweetness
[3](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:8:3.md).

9\. When the Maruts come forth this earth bows, the heaven bows, the
paths in the sky bow, and the cloud-mountains with their quickening
rain.

10\. When you rejoice at sunrise, O Maruts, toiling together
[1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:10:1), men of Svar (sun-light.md), men of Dyu
(heaven), your horses never tire in running, and you quickly reach the
end of your journey.

11\. On your shoulders are the spears, on your feet rings, on your
chests golden chains, O Maruts, on your chariot gems; fiery lightnings
in your fists, and golden headbands tied round your heads
[1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:11:1.md).

12\. O Maruts, you shake the red apple [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:12:1.md)
from the firmament, whose splendour no enemy
[2](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:12:2.md) can touch; the hamlets bowed when the
Maruts blazed, and the pious people (the Maruts) intoned their
far-reaching shout.

13\. O wise Maruts, let us carry off [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:13:1.md) the
wealth of food which you have bestowed on us; give us
[2](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:13:2.md), O Maruts, such thousandfold wealth as
never fails [3](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:13:3.md), like the star Tishya
[4](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:13:4.md) from heaven!

14\. O Maruts, you protect our wealth of excellent men, and the seer,
clever in song; you give to

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bharata (the
warrior) [1](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:14:1.md) a strong horse
[2](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:14:2.md), you make the king to be obeyed
[3](sbe3236.htm#an_5:54:14:3.md).

15\. O you who are quickly ready to help, I implore you for wealth
whereby we may overshadow all men, like the sky. O Maruts, be pleased
with this word of mine, and let us speed by its speed over a hundred
winters!

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

#### NOTES.

The same poet, *S*yâvâ*s*va Âtreya. Metre, 1-13, 15 *G*agatî; 14
Trish*t*ubh. None of the verses of this hymn occurs in SV., VS., AV.,
TS., TB., MS.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_5:54:1:1">1</span>. Ana*g*a, explained as a 2nd pers.
plur. perf., referring to the same people who are addressed by ar*k*ata.
It may be also the first person of the imperative; see Benfey, Über die
Entstehung der mit r anlautenden Personalendungen, p. 5, note.

Note <span id="an_5:54:1:2">2</span>. Possibly the second line of this
verse may refer to ceremonial technicalities. Gharma means heat and
summer, but also the sacrificial vessel (formus) in which the milk is
heated, and the warm milk itself. Ya*g*van can only mean sacrificing,
and diva*h* p*ri*sh*th*a is the back of heaven, the highest roof of
heaven; see trip*ri*sh*th*a. Thus we read, I, 115, 3. haríta*h* …
divá*h* â´ p*ri*sh*th*ám asthu*h*. See also I, 164, 10; 166, 5; III, 2,
12; IX, 36, 6; 66, 5; 69, 5; 83, 2; 86, 27. It would seem therefore as
if the Maruts themselves were here represented as performing sacrificial
acts in the highest heaven, praising the milk, that is, the rain, which
they pour down from heaven to earth. Possibly the text is corrupt. If
ya*g*yu could have the same meaning as praya*g*yu, I should like to
conjecture, divá*h* â´ prish*th*ám yá*g*yave. In IX, 61, 12. índrâya
yá*g*yave seems to mean 'to the chasing Indra.' See also âya*g*i
(erjagend), obtaining. Might we conjecture divá â´ p*ri*kshayâ´vane?
P*ri*kshayâma occurs as a name; see also II, 34, 3.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_5:54:3:1">1</span>. Abdâ, wish to give water, is very
doubtful. Both abda and abdi, in abdimat, mean cloud. The text seems
corrupt.

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_5:54:4:1">1</span>. The meaning of vya*g* is doubtful.
It may simply mean to make visible.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_5:54:5:1">1</span>. The last words ána*s*vadâm yát ní
áyâtana girím are difficult, Sâya*n*a has an explanation ready, viz.
when you throw down the cloud or the mountain which gives no water or
which 'does not give up the horses carried off by the Pa*n*is. Grassmann
too is ready with an explanation: 'Als ihr unnahbar glänzend, Hirschen
gleich, den Berg auf eurer Fahrt durchranntet, den kein Ross erreicht.'
Ludwig: 'Als ihr nider gehn machtet den nicht vergängliches gebenden (d.
i. die waszer; oder: die rosse verweigernden?) berg.'

Giri may be the cloud, and nothing could be more appropriate than that
the Maruts should come down upon the cloud or go over it, in order to
make it give up the rain. But a*s*vadâ means 'giving horses,' and though
rain-clouds may be compared to horses, it does not follow that a*s*va by
itself could mean rain. A*s*vadâ is used of the dawn, I, 113, 18,
possibly as giving horses, that is, wealth, but possibly also, as
bringing the horses to the morning sun. These horses start with the dawn
or the sun in the morning, and they rest in the evening. The legend that
Agni hid himself in an A*s*vattha tree (Sâya*n*a, RV. I, 65, 1) may owe
its origin to a*s*vattha, i. e. horse-stable, having been a name of the
West (K. Z. I, 467); cf. tish*th*adgu, at sunset. In X, 8, 3, the Dawns
are called á*s*vabudhnâ*h*, which may mean that they had their
resting-place among the horses. The Maruts, more particularly, are said
to dwell in the A*s*vattha tree, when Indra called them to his help
against V*ri*tra; cf. *S*at. Brâhm. IV, 3, 3, 6; Pâr. G*ri*hy. II, 15,
4. Possibly therefore, though I say no more, possibly the Dawn or the
East might have been called a*s*vadâ, the West ana*s*vadâ, and in that
case it might be said that the Maruts are of unsullied splendour, when
they

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

go down to the western mountain. M. Bergaigne explains, 'La montagne qui
ne donne pas, qui retient le cheval, le cheval mythique, soleil ou
éclair.' My own impression, however, is that ana*s*vadâm is an old
mistake, though I cannot accept Ludwig's conjecture a-na*s*va-dâm. Why
not ánu svadhâ´m, or ana*s*va-yâ*h*, moving without horses? cf. V, 42,
10.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_5:54:6:1">1</span>. This is, no doubt, a bold simile,
but a very true one. In one night caterpillars will eat off the whole
foliage of a tree, and in the same way a violent storm in the autumn
will strip every leaf. Ar*n*asám as an adjective, with the accent on the
last syllable, does not occur again, but it can hardly mean anything but
waving. If it will stand for the sea, we might translate, 'When you
clear the waving sea (or air), as the caterpillar a tree.'

Note <span id="an_5:54:6:2">2</span>. Arámati seems here to mean service
or obedience, not a person who is willing to serve.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_5:54:8:1">1</span>. To translate aryamá*n*a*h* by
friends is unsatisfactory. Bergaigne takes it for Aryaman, Mitra, and
Varu*n*a, the three Aryamans, as we say the two Mitras, and points out
that these three gods do send rain, in I, 79, 3; VII, 40, 4.

Note <span id="an_5:54:8:2">2</span>. It ought to be kavandhína*h* as
much as kávandha, V, 85, 3.

Note <span id="an_5:54:8:3">3</span>. Mádhva*h* ándhasâ; Grassmann, 'mit
des Honigs Seim.'

##### Verse 10.

Note <span id="an_5:54:10:1">1</span>. Sabharas is evidently a
recognised epithet of the Maruts, see VS. XVII, 81 and 84, but its
meaning is doubtful. We have vi*s*vábharasam, IV, I, 19, as an epithet
of Agni, which does not help us much. If bharas means burden, sabharas
may mean those who work together, companions, friends.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_5:54:11:1">1</span>. See Muir, S. T. V, p. 149. On
síprâ*h* &c., see II, 34, 3, note.

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_5:54:12:1">1</span>. The red apple to be shaken from
the firmament can only be the lightning. Vi-dhû is construed with two
accusatives, as in III, 45, 4; V, 57, 3. Gaedicke, Accusativ, p. 266.

Note <span id="an_5:54:12:2">2</span>. Aryá*h* cannot be a vocative, on
account of the accent, nor a nominative on account of the context. There
remains nothing but to take it as a genitive, and connect it with
ag*ri*bhîta, though such a construction has few parallels, except
perhaps in such sentences as hávya*h* *k*arsha*n*înâ´m, VI, 22, 1, &c.
Possibly it may be intended as an epithet of the Maruts. Bergaigne
(Journ. As. 1884, p. 190), 'au profit du pauvre.' Geldner (Ved. Stud. I,
p. 148) proposes a very bold translation: 'The sacrificial nets are
being contracted, when the Maruts rush on. The priests (*ri*tâyu) roar
their (as catching-net) extended shouting.' The sense is said to be that
when the Maruts appear, all priests try to catch them by shouting. See,
however, Oldenberg in Gött. Gel. Anzeigen, 1890, p. 414.

##### Verse 13.

Note <span id="an_5:54:13:1">1</span>. For rathyã*h*, see II, 24, 1, 5.
râyá*h* syâma rathyã*h* vayasvata*h*; VI, 48, 9.

Note <span id="an_5:54:13:2">2</span>. Râranta, 2nd pers. plur. imp.
intens., but Pada has raranta. Why not rarâta?

Note <span id="an_5:54:13:3">3</span>. Yu*kkh*ati has been compared by
Kuhn (K. Z. III, 328) with δύσκει; but see Brugmann, Grundriss, I, pp.
110, 118.

Note <span id="an_5:54:13:4">4</span>. Tishya must be the name of a
star, hardly, as Sâya*n*a suggests, of the sun. It ought to be a star
which does not set. See Weber, Über alte iranische Sternnamen, p. 14.
Ludwig quotes from TS. II, 2, 10, 1 seq., an identification of Tishya
with Rudra.

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

##### Verse 14.

Note <span id="an_5:54:14:1">1</span>. Grassmann marks this verse as
late, Ludwig defends it. We must know what is meant by late before we
decide. Bharata may mean simply a warrior, or a Bharata; see Ludwig,
III, 175-176; Oldenberg, Buddha (1st edition), p. 413.

Note <span id="an_5:54:14:2">2</span>. Árvantam vâ´*g*am, a horse, his
strength. See Bergaigne, Rel. Véd. II, 405; Pischel, Ved. Stud. p. 46.

Note <span id="an_5:54:14:3">3</span>. Could *s*rush*t*imat here mean
obedient?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 55. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3237.md)
