[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3244)  [Next](sbe3246.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

### MA*ND*ALA VI, HYMN 66.

#### ASH*T*AKA V, ADHYÂYA 1, VARGA 7-8.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. This may well be a marvel, even to an intelligent man, that anything
should have taken the same name dhenu, cow:—the one is always brimming
to give milk among men, but P*ris*ni (the cloud, the mother of the
Maruts) poured out her bright udder once (only).

2\. The Maruts who shone like kindled fires, as they grew stronger twice
and thrice,—their golden, dustless (chariots
[1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:2:1).md) became full of manly courage and strength.

3\. They who [1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:3:1.md) are the sons of the bounteous
Rudra, and whom she indeed was strong enough to bear; for she, the
great, is known as the mother of the great, that very P*ris*ni conceived
the germ for the strong one (Rudra).

4\. They who do not shrink from being born in this way
[1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:4:1), and who within (the womb.md) clean themselves
from all impurity [2](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:4:2.md), when they have been
brought forth brilliant, according to their pleasure, they sprinkle
their bodies with splendour.

5\. Among them there is no one who does not strive to be brought forth
quickly; and they assume the defiant name of Maruts. They who are not
(unkind [1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:5:1).md), never tiring in strength
[2](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:5:2.md), will the generous sacrificer be able to
bring down these fierce ones?

6\. Fierce in strength, followed by daring armies, these Maruts have
brought together heaven and earth [1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:6:1.md), both
firmly established [2](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:6:2.md); then the self-shining

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rodasî stood among
the impetuous Maruts, like [3](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:6:3.md) a light.

7\. Even though your carriage, O Maruts, be without your deer
[1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:7:1.md), without horse's, and not driven by any
charioteer, without drag [2](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:7:2.md), and without
reins, yet, crossing the air [3](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:7:3.md), it passes
between heaven and earth, finishing its courses.

8\. No one can stop, no one can overcome him whom you, O Maruts, protect
in battle. He whom you protect in his kith, his cattle, his kin, and his
waters, he breaks the stronghold at the close of the day
[1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:8:1.md).

9\. Offer a beautiful song to the host of the Maruts, the singers, the
quick, the strong, who resist violence with violence; O Agni, the earth
trembles before the champions.

10\. Blazing like the flame of the sacrifices, flickering like the
tongues of the fire, shouters, like roaring fighters, the flame-born
Maruts are unassailable.

11\. I invite with my call this strong and Marut-like son of Rudra
[1](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:11:1.md), armed with flaming spears. Bright
thoughts, like wild waters from the mountain
[2](sbe3245.htm#an_6:66:11:2.md), strove to reach the host of heaven.

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

#### NOTES.

Hymn ascribed to Bharadvâ*g*a Bârhaspatya. None of its verses occurs in
SV., VS., AV. Verse 2 in MS. IV, 14, 11. Verse 9 in TS. IV, 1, 11, 3;
TB. II, 8, 5, 5; MS. IV, 10, 3. Verse 10 in MS. IV, 14, 11. Metre,
Trish*t*ubh.

##### Verse 1.

The meaning seems to be that it is strange that two things, namely, a
real cow and the cloud, i. e. P*ris*ni, the mother of the Maruts, should
both be called dhenu, cow; that the one should always yield milk to men,
while the other has her bright udder milked but once. This may mean that
dhenu, a cow, yields her milk always, that dhenu, a cloud, yields rain
but once, or, that P*ris*ni gave birth but once to the Maruts. See also
VI, 48, 22; Gaedicke, Accusativ, p. 19; Delbrück, Tempuslehre, p. 102.
Dhenu must be taken as the neuter form, and as a nominative, as is shown
by II, 37, 2. dadí*h* yá*h* nâ´ma pátyate.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_6:66:2:1">1</span>. It seems necessary to take
are*n*áva*h* hira*n*yáyâsa*h* for rathâ*h*, chariots, as in V, 87, 3.
Sâya*n*a takes the same view, and I do not see how the verse gives sense
in any other way. The first pâda might be referred to the Maruts, or to
the chariots.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_6:66:3:1">1</span>. The relative pronouns may be
supposed to carry on the subject, viz. Marûta*h*, from the preceding
verse, unless we supply eshâm mâtâ´. I am doubtful about mahó mahî´; cf.
I, 102, 1; II, 33, 8. Grassmann proposes to read mahâm, gen. plur.;
Ludwig thinks of garbha. It may also be a compound, as in mahâmaha,
mahâmahivrata, or an adverb, but the construction remains difficult
throughout. Oldenberg suggests that the second pâda may have been yân
*k*o nú p*rís*ni*h* dâ´dh*ri*vi*h* bháradhyai.

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_6:66:4:1">1</span>. A tentative rendering and no more.
I take áyâ for aya as an adverb in the sense of thus, in this way, see
I, 87, 4, note 2. Grassmann seems to take it as an instr. fem.,
dependent on *g*anúsha*h*, which is possible, but without analogy.
Lanman, p. 358, takes it for áyâ*h*, nom. plur. of aya, wanderer, and
translates, 'as long as the ones now wanderers quit not their birth.'
Grassmann: 'Die nicht verleugnen die Geburt aus jener.' But is *g*an
with instrumental ever used of a woman giving birth to a child? Ludwig:
'Die sich nicht weigern der geburt.'

Note <span id="an_6:66:4:2">2</span>. Pû with accusative occurs AV. XIX,
33, 3.

##### Verse 5.

This verse is again very obscure. It would be more honest to say that it
is untranslatable. Possibly the poet may have taken doháse in the same
sense as duhré in verse 4. The Maruts are born as by being milked from
the udder of P*ris*ni. It would then mean, 'Among whom there is no one
not striving to be born quickly.'

Note <span id="an_6:66:5:1">1</span>. Stauna is an unknown word.
Sâya*n*a explains it as stena, thieves. It probably meant something not
favourable, something that must be denied of the Maruts. This is all we
can say. It cannot be a corruption of stavânâ*h*, praised.

Note <span id="an_6:66:5:2">2</span>. Ayâ´s can hardly refer to
P*ris*ni, never tiring to suckle the Maruts. In B.-R. ayâs is explained
as sich nicht anstrengend, behende, leicht, unermüdlich. See also
Windisch, K. Z. XXVII, 170; also Johansson, Bezzenb. Beitr. XV, p. 180.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_6:66:6:1">1</span>. To join together heaven and earth
is, as Bergaigne remarks (II, p. 374, n. 1), the apparent effect of a
thunderstorm, when the clouds cover both in impenetrable darkness. We
have the same expression in VIII, 20, 4.

Note <span id="an_6:66:6:2">2</span>. On suméke, see Geldner, K. Z.
XXIV, 145; and Windisch, Festgruss an Böhtlingk, p. 114.

Note <span id="an_6:66:6:3">3</span>. The ná, placed before róka*h*, is
irregular, see Bergaigne, Mélanges Renier, p. 79. Oldenberg suggests

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

narokâ*h* = n*ri*-okâ*h*, 'she who is fond of the men,' namely, of the
Maruts. The corruption may be due to the writers of our text.

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_6:66:7:1">1</span>. Anená*h* is strange, and might be
changed into anetá*h*; it cannot be anenâ´*h*, without guilt.

Note <span id="an_6:66:7:2">2</span>. If avasa in an-avasa comes from
ava-so, it may mean the step for descending or ascending, or possibly a
drag. Bergaigne explains it by sine via tic o.

Note <span id="an_6:66:7:3">3</span>. Ra*g*a*h*-tû´*h*, according to
Ludwig, den Staub aufwirbelnd, which seems too much opposed to are*n*u,
dustless. Ra*g*as + tar means to pass through the air, and in that sense
only conquering the air. Geldner, Ved. Stud. p. 123, ignores the various
shades of meaning in tur at the end of compounds.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_6:66:8:1">1</span>. Pâ´rye dyó*h*, according to
Grassmann, 'on the decisive day,' like pâ´rye diví.

##### Verse 11.

Note <span id="an_6:66:11:1">1</span>. I have translated Rudrásya sûnúm
by the son of Rudra. It is true that a single Marut, as the son of
Rudra, is not mentioned; but on the other hand, one could hardly call
the whole company of the Maruts, the mâruta scil. ga*n*a, the son of
Rudra. In I, 64, 12, we have Rudrasya sûnu in one pâda, and mâruta
ga*n*a in the next. The *Ri*bhus also are called in the same line
*s*avasa*h* napâta*h*, and indrasya sûno, IV, 37, 4. Here sûnu
corresponds almost to the English offspring, only it is masculine.

Note <span id="an_6:66:11:2">2</span>. Giráya*h* may have been meant for
girya*h*, a possible ablative of giri; see Lanman, p. 383. Ugrâ´*h*
would then refer to â´pa*h*, unless we break the sentence into two, viz.
'my bright thoughts tend to the host of heaven,' and the fierce Maruts
strive like waters from the mountain.' If we compare, however, IX, 95,
3. apâ´m iva íd ûrmáya*h* tárturâ*n*â*h* prá manîshâ´*h* îrate sómam
á*kkh*a, we see that the whole verse forms one sentence. All would be
right if we could change giraya*h* into giribhya*h*, but is not this a
conjecture nimis facilis?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 56. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3246.md)
