[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3229)  [Next](sbe3231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 170.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 4, VARGA 8-9.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Dialogue between Indra and his Worshipper, Agastya</span>.

1\. Indra: There is no such thing to-day, nor will it be so to-morrow.
Who knows what strange thing [1](sbe3230.htm#an_1:170:1:1) this is? We
must consult the thought of another, for even what we once knew seems to
vanish.

2\. Agastya: Why dost thou wish to kill us, O Indra? the Maruts are thy
brothers; fare kindly with them, and do not strike
[1](sbe3230.htm#an_1:170:2:1) us in battle.

3\. The Maruts: O brother Agastya, why, being a friend, dost thou
despise us? We know quite well what thy mind was. Dost thou not wish to
give to us?

4\. Agastya: Let them prepare the altar, let them light the fire in
front! Here we two will spread [2](sbe3230.htm#an_1:170:4:2) for thee
the sacrifice, to be seen [1](sbe3230.htm#an_1:170:4:1) by the immortal.

5\. Agastya: Thou rulest, O lord of treasures; thou, lord of friends,
art the most generous. Indra, speak again with the Maruts, and then
consume our offerings at the right season.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

##### NOTES.

Although this hymn is not directly addressed to the Maruts, yet as it
refers to the before-mentioned rivalry between the Maruts and Indra, and
as the author is supposed to be the same, namely Agastya, I give its
translation here.

None of its verses occurs in SV., VS., TS., AV.

The Anukrama*n*ikâ ascribes verses 1, 3, 4 to Indra, 2 and 5 to Agastya;
Ludwig assigns verses 1 and 3 to the Maruts, 2, 4, and 5 to Agastya;
Grassmann gives verse 1 to Indra, 2 and 3 to the Maruts, and 4 and 5 to
Agastya.

The hymn admits of several explanations. There was a sacrifice in which
Indra and the Maruts were invoked together, and it is quite possible
that our hymn may owe its origin to this. But it is possible also that
the sacrifice may be the embodiment of the same ideas which were
originally expressed in this and similar hymns, namely, that Indra,
however powerful by himself; could not dispense with the assistance of
the storm-gods. I prefer to take the latter view, but I do not consider
the former so untenable as I did formerly. The idea that a great god
like Indra did not like to be praised together with others is an old
idea, and we find traces of it in the hymns themselves, e. g. II, 33, 4.
mâ´ dú*h*stutî, mâ´ sáhûtî.

It is quite possible, therefore, that our hymn contains the libretto of
a little ceremonial drama in which different choruses of priests are
introduced as preparing a sacrifice for the Maruts and for Indra, and as
trying to appease the great Indra, who is supposed to feel slighted.
Possibly Indra and the Maruts too may have been actually represented by
some actors, so that here, as elsewhere, the first seeds of the drama
would be found in sacrificial performances.

I propose, though this can only be hypothetical, to take the first verse
as a vehement complaint of Indra, when asked to share the sacrifice with
the Maruts. In the second

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

verse Agastya is introduced as trying to pacify Indra. The third verse
is most likely an appeal of the Maruts to remind Indra that the
sacrifice was originally intended for them. Verses 4 and 5 belong to
Agastya, who, though frightened into obedience to Indra, still implores
him to make his peace with the Maruts.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:170:1:1">1</span>. In the first verse Indra
expresses his surprise in disconnected sentences, saying that such a
thing has never happened before. I do not take ádbhuta (nie da gewesen)
in the sense of future, because that is already contained in *s*vas. The
second line expresses that Indra does not remember such a thing, and
must ask some one else, whether he remembers anything like it. We ought
to take abhisa*mk*aré*n*ya as one word, and probably in the sense of to
be approached or to be accepted. Abhisa*mk*ârin, however, means also
changeable.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:170:2:1">1</span>. Vadhî*h* is the augmentless
indicative, not subjunctive; see, however, Delbrück, Synt. Forsch. I,
pp. 21, 115.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:170:4:1">1</span>. *K*etana refers to ya*gñ*a as in
VIII, 13, 8. It means that which attracts the attention of the gods (IV,
7, 2), and might be translated by beacon.

Note <span id="an_1:170:4:2">2</span>. The dual tanavâvahai is strange.
It may refer, as Grassmann supposes, to Agastya and his wife, Lopamudrâ,
but even that is very unusual. See Oldenberg, K. Z. XXXIX, 62. Professor
Oldenberg (K. Z. XXXIX, 60 seq.) takes this and the next hymn as parts
of the same Âkhyâna hymn, and as intimately connected with the
Marutvatîya *S*âstra of the midday Savana, in the Soma sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 171. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3231)
