[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3202)  [Next](sbe3204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

### PREFACE

#### TO THE FIRST EDITION.

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> some twenty years ago I decided on
undertaking the first edition of the two texts and the commentary of the
Rig-veda, I little expected that it would fall to my lot <span
class="margnote">What a translation of the Rig-veda ought to
be.</span>to publish also what may, without presumption, be called the
first translation of the ancient sacred hymns of the Brahmans. Such is
the charm of deciphering step by step the dark and helpless utterances
of the early poets of India, and discovering from time to time behind
words that for years seemed unintelligible, the simple though strange
expressions of primitive thought and primitive faith, that it required
no small amount of self-denial to decide in favour of devoting a life to
the publishing of the materials rather than to the drawing of the
results which those materials supply to the student of ancient language
and ancient religion. Even five and twenty years ago, and without
waiting for the publication of Sâya*n*a's commentary, much might have
been achieved in the interpretation of the hymns of the Rig-veda. With
the MSS. then accessible in the principal libraries of Europe, a
tolerably correct text of the Sa*m*hitâ might have been published, and
these ancient relics of a primitive religion might have been at least
partially deciphered and translated in the same way in which ancient
inscriptions are deciphered and translated, viz. by a careful collection
of all grammatical forms, and by a complete intercomparison of all
passages in which the same words and the same phrases occur. When I
resolved to devote my leisure to a critical edition of the text and
commentary of the Rig-veda rather than to an independent study of that
text, it was chiefly from a conviction that the traditional
interpretation of the Rig-veda, as embodied in the commentary of
Sâya*n*a and other works of a similar

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

character, could not be neglected with impunity, and that sooner or
later a complete edition of these works would be recognised as a
necessity. It was better therefore to begin with the beginning, though
it seemed hard sometimes to spend forty years in the wilderness instead
of rushing straight into the promised land.

It is well known to those who have followed my literary publications
that I never entertained any exaggerated opinion as to the value of the
traditional interpretation of the Veda, handed down in the theological
schools of India, and preserved to us in the great commentary of
Sâya*n*a. More than twenty years ago, when it required more courage to
speak out than now, I expressed my opinion on that subject in no
ambiguous language, and was blamed for it by some of those who now speak
of Sâya*n*a as a mere drag in the progress of Vedic scholarship. Even a
drag, however, is sometimes more conducive to the safe advancement of
learning than a whip; and those who recollect the history of Vedic
scholarship during the last five and twenty years, know best that, with
all its faults and weaknesses, Sâya*n*a's commentary was a sine quâ non
for a scholarlike study of the Rig-veda. I do not wonder that others who
have more recently entered on that study are inclined to speak
disparagingly of the scholastic interpretations of Sâya*n*a. They hardly
know how much we all owe to his guidance in effecting our first entrance
into this fortress of Vedic language and Vedic religion, and how much
even they, without being aware of it, are indebted to that Indian
Eustathius. I do not withdraw an opinion which I expressed many years
ago, and for which I was much blamed at the time, that Sâya*n*a in many
cases teaches us how the Veda ought not to be, rather than how it ought
to be understood. But for all that, who does not know how much
assistance may be derived from a first translation, even though it is
imperfect, nay, how often the very mistakes of our predecessors help us
in finding the right track? If now we can walk without Sâya*n*a, we
ought to bear in mind that five and twenty years ago we could not have
made even our first steps, we could never, at least, have gained a firm

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

footing without his leading strings. If therefore we can now see further
than he could, let us not forget that we are standing on his shoulders.

I do not regret in the least the time which I have devoted to the
somewhat tedious work of editing the commentary of Sâya*n*a, and editing
it according to the strictest rules of critical scholarship. The Veda, I
feel convinced, will occupy scholars for centuries to come, and will
take and maintain for ever its position as the most ancient of books in
the library of mankind. Such a book, and the commentary of such a book,
should be edited once for all; and unless some unexpected discovery is
made of more ancient MSS., I do not anticipate that any future Bekker or
Dindorf will find much to glean for a new edition of Sâya*n*a, or that
the text, as restored by me from a collation of the best MSS. accessible
in Europe, will ever be materially shaken <span
id="fr_12"></span>[a](#fn_12.md). It has taken a long time, I know; but
those who find fault with me for the delay, should remember that few

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

scholars, if any, have worked for others more than I have done in
copying and editing Sanskrit texts, and that after all one cannot give
up the whole of one's life to the collation of Oriental MSS. and the
correction of proof-sheets. The two concluding volumes have long been
ready for Press, and as soon as I can find leisure, they too shall be
printed and published <span id="fr_13"></span>[a](#fn_13.md).

In now venturing to publish the first volume of my translation of the
Rig-veda, I am fully aware that the fate which awaits it will be very
different from that of my edition of the text and commentary. It is a
mere contribution towards a better understanding of the Vedic hymns, and
though I hope it may give in the main a right rendering of the sense of
the Vedic poets, I feel convinced that on many points my translation is
liable to correction, and will sooner or later be replaced by a more
satisfactory one. It is difficult to explain to those who have not
themselves worked at the Veda, how it is that, though we may understand
almost every word, yet we find it so difficult to lay hold of a whole
chain of connected thought, and to discover expressions that will not
throw a wrong shade on the original features of the ancient words of the
Veda. We have, on the one hand, to avoid giving to our translations too
modern a character, or paraphrasing instead of translating; while, on
the other, we cannot retain expressions which, if literally rendered in
English or any modern tongue, would have an air of quaintness or
absurdity totally foreign to the intention of the ancient poets. There
are, as all Vedic scholars know, whole verses which, as yet, yield no
sense whatever. There are words the meaning of

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

which we can only guess. Here, no doubt, a continued study will remove
some of our difficulties, and many a passage that is now dark, will
receive light hereafter from a happy combination. Much has already been
achieved by the efforts of European scholars, but much more remains to
be done; and our only chance of seeing any rapid progress made lies, I
believe, in communicating freely what every one has found out by
himself, and not minding if others point out to us that we have
overlooked the very passage that would at once have solved our
difficulties, that our conjectures were unnecessary, and our emendations
wrong. True and honest scholars whose conscience tells them that they
have done their best, and who care for the subject on which they are
engaged far more than for the praise of benevolent or the blame of
malignant critics, ought not to take any notice of merely frivolous
censure. There are mistakes, no doubt, of which we ought to be ashamed,
and for which the only amende honorable we can make is to openly confess
and retract them. But there are others, particularly in a subject like
Vedic interpretation, which we should forgive, as we wish to be
forgiven. This can be done without lowering the standard of true
scholarship or vitiating the healthy tone of scientific morality.
Kindness and gentleness are not incompatible with earnestness,—far from
it!—and where these elements are wanting, not only is the joy embittered
which is the inherent reward of all bonâ fide work, but selfishness,
malignity, aye, even untruthfulness, gain the upper hand, and the
healthy growth of science is stunted. While in my translation of the
Veda and in the remarks that I have to make in the course of my
commentary, I shall frequently differ from other scholars, I hope I
shall never say an unkind word of men who have done their best, and who
have done what they have done in a truly scholarlike, that is, in a
humble spirit. It would be unpleasant, even were it possible within the
limits assigned, to criticise every opinion that has been put forward on
the meaning of certain words or on the construction of certain verses of
the Veda. I prefer, as much as possible, to vindicate my own
translation, instead of

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

examining the translations of other scholars, whether Indian or
European. Sâya*n*a's translation, as rendered into English by Professor
Wilson, is before the world. Let those who take an interest in these
matters compare it with the translation here proposed. In order to give
readers who do not possess that translation, an opportunity of comparing
it with my own, I have for a few hymns printed that as well as the
translations of Langlois and Benfey <span id="fr_14"></span>[a](#fn_14.md)
on the same page with my own. Everybody will thus be enabled to judge of
the peculiar character of each of these translations. That of Sâya*n*a
represents the tradition of India; that of Langlois is the ingenious,
but thoroughly uncritical, guesswork of a man of taste; that of Benfey
is the rendering of a scholar, who has carefully worked out the history
of some words, but who assigns to other words either the traditional
meaning recorded by Sâya*n*a, or a conjectural meaning which, however,
would not always stand the test of an inter-comparison of all passages
in which these words occur. I may say, in general, that Sâya*n*a's
translation was of great use to me in the beginning, though it seldom
afforded help for the really difficult passages. Langlois’ translation
has hardly ever yielded real assistance, while I sincerely regret that
Benfey's rendering does not extend beyond the first Ma*nd*ala.

It may sound self-contradictory, if, after confessing the help which I
derived from these translations, I venture to <span class="margnote">The
first traduction raisonnée.</span>call my own the first translation of
the Rig-veda. The word translation, however, has many meanings. I mean
by translation, not a mere rendering of the hymns of the Rig-veda into
English, French, or German, but a full account of the reasons which
justify the translator in assigning such a power to such a word, and
such a meaning to such a sentence. I mean by translation a real
deciphering, a work like that which Burnouf performed in his first
attempts at a translation of the Avesta,—a traduction raisonnée, if such
an expression may be used. Without such a process,

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

without a running commentary, a mere translation of the ancient hymns of
the Brahmans will never lead to any solid results. Even if the
translator has discovered the right meaning of a word or of a whole
sentence, his mere translation does not help us much, unless he shows us
the process by which he has arrived at it, unless he places before us
the pièces justificatives of his final judgment. The Veda teems with
words that require a justification; not so much the words which occur
but once or twice, though many of these are difficult enough, but rather
the common words and particles, which occur again and again, which we
understand to a certain point, and can render in a vague way, but which
must be defined before they can be translated, and before they can
convey to us any real and tangible meaning. It was out of the question
in a translation of this character to attempt either an imitation of the
original rhythm or metre, or to introduce the totally foreign element of
rhyming. Such translations may follow by and by: at present a metrical
translation would only be an excuse for an inaccurate translation.

While engaged in collecting the evidence on which the meaning of every
word and every sentence must be founded, I have derived the most
important assistance from the Sanskrit Dictionary of Professors
Böhtlingk and Roth, which has been in course of publication during the
last sixteen years. The Vedic portion of that Dictionary may, I believe,
be taken as the almost exclusive work of Professor Roth, and as such,
for the sake of brevity, I shall treat it in my notes. It would be
ungrateful were I not to acknowledge most fully the real benefit which
this publication has conferred on every student of Sanskrit, and my only
regret is that its publication has not proceeded more rapidly, so that
even now years will elapse before we can hope to see it finished. But my
sincere admiration for the work performed by the compilers of that
Dictionary does not prevent me from differing, in many cases, from the
explanations of Vedic words given by Professor Roth. If I do not always
criticise Professor Roth's explanations when I differ from him, the
reason is obvious. A dictionary without a full

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

translation of each passage, or without a justification of the meanings
assigned to each word, is only a preliminary step to a translation. It
represents a first classification of the meanings of the same word in
different passages, but it gives us no means of judging how, according
to the opinion of the compiler, the meaning of each single word should
be made to fit the general sense of a whole sentence. I do not say this
in disparagement, for, in a dictionary, it can hardly be otherwise; I
only refer to it in order to explain the difficulty I felt whenever I
differed from Professor Roth, and was yet unable to tell how the meaning
assigned by him to certain words would be justified by the author of the
Dictionary himself. On this ground I have throughout preferred to
explain every step by which I arrived at my own renderings, rather than
to write a running criticism of Professor Roth's Dictionary. My
obligations to him I like to express thus once for all, by stating that
whenever I found that I agreed with him, I felt greatly assured as to
the soundness of my own rendering, while whenever I differed from him, I
never did so without careful consideration.

The works, however, which I have hitherto mentioned, though the most
important, are by no means the only ones that have been of use to me in
preparing my translation of the Rig-veda. The numerous articles on
certain hymns, verses, or single words occurring in the Rig-veda,
published by Vedic scholars in Europe and India during the last thirty
years, were read by me at the time of their publication, and have helped
me to overcome difficulties, the very existence of which is now
forgotten. If I go back still further, I feel that in grappling with the
first and the greatest of difficulties in the study of the Veda, I and
many others are more deeply indebted than it is possible to say, to one
whose early loss has been one of the greatest misfortunes to Sanskrit
scholarship. It was in Burnouf's lectures that we first learnt what the
Veda was, and how it should form the foundation of all our studies. Not
only did he most liberally communicate to his pupils his valuable MSS.,
and teach us how to use these tools, but the results

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

of his own experience were freely placed at our service, we were warned
against researches which he knew to be useless, we were encouraged in
undertakings which he knew to be full of promise. His minute analysis of
long passages of Sâya*n*a, his independent interpretations of the text
of the hymns, his comparisons between the words and grammatical forms,
the thoughts and legends of the Veda and Avesta, his brilliant
divination checked by an inexorable sense of truth, and his dry logical
method enlivened by sallies of humour and sparks of imaginative genius,
though not easily forgotten, and always remembered with gratitude, are
now beyond the reach of praise or blame. Were I to criticise what he or
other scholars have said and written many years ago, they might justly
complain of such criticism. It is no longer necessary to prove that
Nâbhânedisht*h*a cannot mean 'new relatives,' or that there never was a
race of Etendhras, or that the angels of the Bible are in no way
connected with the Aṅgiras of the Vedic hymns; and it would, on the
other hand, be a mere waste of time, were I to attempt to find out who
first discovered that in the Veda deva does not always mean divine, but
sometimes means brilliant. In fact, it could not be done.

In a new subject like that of the interpretation of the Veda, there are
certain things which everybody discovers who has eyes to see. Their
discovery requires so little research that it seems almost an insult to
say that they were discovered by this or that scholar. Take, for
instance, the peculiar pronunciation of certain words, rendered
necessary by the requirements of Vedic metres. I believe that my learned
friend Professor Kuhn was one of the first to call general attention to
the fact that semivowels must frequently be changed into their
corresponding vowels, and that long vowels must sometimes be pronounced
as two syllables. It is clear, however, from Rosen's notes to the first
Ash*t*aka (I, 1, 8), that he, too, was perfectly aware of this fact, and
that he recognised the prevalence of this rule, not only with regard to
semivowels (see his note to RV. I, 2, 9) and long vowels which are the
result of Sandhi, but likewise with regard to others that occur in the
body of a

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

word. 'Animadverte,' he writes, 'tres syllabas postremas vocis
adhvarâ*n*âm dipodiae iambicae munus sustinentes, penultima syllaba
praeter iambi prioris arsin, thesin quoque sequentis pedis ferente.
Satis frequentia sunt, in hac praesertim dipodiae iambicae sede, exempla
syllabae natura longae in tres moras productae. De qua re nihil quidem
memoratum invenio apud Pingalam aliosque qui de arte metrica
scripserunt: sed numeros ita, ut modo dictum est, computandos esse,
taciti agnoscere videntur, quum versus una syllaba mancus non eos
offendat.'

Now this is exactly the case. The ancient grammarians, as we shall see,
teach distinctly that where two vowels have coalesced into one according
to the rules of Sandhi, they may be pronounced as two syllables; and
though they do not teach the same with regard to semivowels and long
vowels occurring in the body of the word, yet they tacitly recognise
that rule, by frequently taking its effects for granted. Thus in Sutra
950 of the Prâti*s*âkhya, verse IX, 111, 1, is called an Atyash*t*i, and
the first pâda is said to consist of twelve syllables. In order to get
this number, the author must have read,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

ăyâ̄ rŭ*k*â̄ hărĭ*n*y̆â̄ pŭn̄â̆nă*h*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Immediately after,
verse IV, 1, 3, is called a Dh*ri*ti, and the first pâda must again have
twelve syllables. Here therefore the author takes it for granted that we
should read,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

săkhē săkhâ̄yăm ăbhy̆ â̄ văv*ri*̄tsv̆ā <span id="fr_15"></span>[a](#fn_15.md).

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No one, in fact,
with any ear for rhythm, whether *S*aunaka and Piṅgala, or Rosen and
Kuhn, could have helped observing these rules when reading the Veda. But
it is quite a different case when we come to the question as to which
words admit of such protracted pronunciation, and which do not. Here one
scholar may differ from another according to the view he takes of the
character of Vedic metres, and here one has to take careful account of
the minute and

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

ingenious observations contained in numerous articles by Professors
Kuhn, Bollensen, Grassmann, and others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxxi:a](sbe3203.htm#fr_12.md) Since the
publication of the first volume of the Rig-veda, many new MSS. have come
before me, partly copied for me, partly lent to me for a time by
scholars in India, but every one of them belonged clearly to one of the
three families which I have described in my introduction to the first
volume of the Rig-veda. In the beginning of the first Ash*t*aka, and
occasionally at the beginning of other Ash*t*akas, likewise in the
commentary on hymns which were studied by native scholars with
particular interest, various readings occur in some MSS., which seem at
first to betoken an independent source, but which are in reality mere
marginal notes, due to more or less learned students of these MSS. Thus
after verse 3 of the introduction one MS. reads: sa prâha n*ri*pati*m*,
râ*g*an, sâya*n*âryo mamânu*g*a*h*, sarva*m* vetty esha vedânâ*m*
vyâkhyât*ri*tvena, yu*g*yatâm. The same MS., after verse 4, adds:
ityukto mâdhavârye*n*a vîrabukkamahîpati*h*, anva*s*ât
sâyâ*n*â*k*ârya*m* vedârthasya prakâ*s*ane.

I had for a time some hope that MSS. written in Grantha or other
South-Indian alphabets might have preserved an independent text of
Sâya*n*a, but from some specimens of a Grantha MS. collated for me by
Mr. Eggeling, I do not think that even this hope is meant to be
realised. The MS. in question contains a few independent various
readings, such as are found in all MSS., and owe their origin clearly to
the jottings of individual students. when at the end of verse 6, I found
the independent reading, vyutpannas tâvatâ sarvâ *rik*o vyâkhyâtum
arhati, I expected that other various readings of the same character
might follow. But after a few additions in the beginning, and those
clearly taken from other parts of Sâya*n*a's commentary, nothing of real
importance could be gleaned from that MS. I may mention as more
important specimens of marginal notes that, before the first puna*h*
kîd*ris*am, on page 44, line 24 (1st ed.), this MS. reads: athavâ
ya*gn*asya devam iti sambandha*h*, ya*gñ*asya prakâ*s*akam ityartha*h*,
purohitam iti p*ri*thagvi*s*esha*n*am. And again, page 44, line 26,
<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span> before puna*h* kîd*ris*am, this
MS. adds: athavâ *ri*tvi*g*am *ri*tvigvid (vad) ya*gñ*anirvâhaka*m*
hotâra*m* devânâm âhvâtâram; tathâ ratnadhâtamam. In the same line,
after ratnânâm, we read rama*n*îyadhanânâ*m* vâ, taken from page 46,
line 2. Various readings like these, however, occur on the first sheets
only, soon after the MS. follows the usual and recognised text. \[This
opinion has been considerably modified after a complete collation of
this MS., made for me by Dr. Winternitz.\] For the later Ash*t*akas,
where all the MSS. are very deficient, and where an independent
authority would be of real use, no Grantha MS. has as yet been
discovered.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxxii:a](sbe3203.htm#fr_13.md) They have since
been printed, but the translation has in consequence been delayed.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxxiv:a](sbe3203.htm#fr_14.md) In the new edition,
Langlois’ translation has been omitted, and those of Ludwig and
Grassmann have been inserted occasionally only.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxxviii:a](sbe3203.htm#fr_15.md) See also Sûtra
937 seq. I cannot find any authority for the statement of Professor Kuhn
(Beiträge, vol. iii, p. 114) that, according to the Rik-prâti*s*âkhya,
it is the first semivowel that must be dissolved, unless he referred to
the remarks of the commentator to Sûtra 973.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 2](sbe3204.md)
