[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe3221)  [Next](sbe3223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0543968677/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Vedic Hymns, Part I (SBE32)*, by Max Müller, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

### MA*ND*ALA I, HYMN 85.

#### ASH*T*AKA I, ADHYÂYA 6, VARGA 9-10.

#### <span class="smallcaps">To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)</span>.

1\. Those who glance forth like wives and yoke-fellows
[1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:1:1), the powerful sons of Rudra on their way,
they, the Maruts, have indeed made heaven and earth to grow
[2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:1:2); they, the strong and wild, delight in the
sacrifices.

2\. When grown up [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:2:1), they attained to
greatness; the Rudras have established their seat in the sky. While
singing their song and increasing their vigour, the sons of P*ris*ni
have clothed themselves in beauty [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:2:2).

3\. When these sons of the cow (P*ris*ni) [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:3:1)
adorn themselves with glittering ornaments, the brilliant
[2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:3:2) ones put bright weapons on their bodies
[3](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:3:3). They drive away every adversary
[4](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:3:4); fatness (rain) streams along their paths;—

4\. When you [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:4:1), the powerful, who shine with
your spears, shaking even what is unshakable by strength,—when you, O
Maruts, the manly hosts [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:4:2), had yoked the
spotted deer, swift as thought, to your chariots;—

5\. When you had yoked the spotted deer before your chariots, hurling
[1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:5:1) the stone (thunderbolt) in the fight, then
the streams of the red-(horse) [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:5:2) rush forth:
like a skin [3](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:5:3) with water they water the
earth.

6\. May the swiftly-gliding, swift-winged horses carry you hither! Come
forth with your arms [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:6:1)! Sit down on the
grass-pile; a wide seat has been made for you. Rejoice, O Maruts, in the
sweet food [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:6:2).

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

7\. Strong in themselves, they grew [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:7:1) with
might; they stepped to the firmament, they made their seat wide. When
Vish*n*u [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:7:2) saved the enrapturing Soma, the
Maruts sat down like birds on their beloved altar.

8\. Like [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:8:1) heroes indeed thirsting for fight
they rush about; like combatants eager for glory they have striven in
battles. All beings are afraid of the Maruts; they are men terrible to
behold, like kings.

9\. When the clever Tvash*t*ar [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:9:1) had turned
the well-made, golden, thousand-edged thunderbolt, Indra takes it to
perform his manly deeds [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:9:2); he slew V*ri*tra,
he forced out the stream of water.

10\. By their power they pushed the well [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:10:1)
aloft, they clove asunder the rock (cloud), however strong. Blowing
forth their voice [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:10:2) the bounteous Maruts
performed, while drunk of Soma, their glorious deeds.

11\. They pushed the well (cloud) athwart this way, they poured out the
spring to the thirsty Gotama. The Maruts with beautiful splendour
approach him with help, they in their own ways satisfied the desire of
the sage.

12\. The shelters which you have for him who praises you, grant them
threefold [1](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:12:1) to the man who gives! Extend the
same to us, O Maruts! Give us, ye heroes [2](sbe3222.htm#an_1:85:12:2),
wealth with valiant offspring!

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

#### NOTES.

This hymn is ascribed to Gotama. No verse of this hymn occurs in SV.,
VS.; verse 6 = AV. XX, 13, 2; verse 7 = TS. IV, 1, 11, 3; verse 12 = TS.
I, 5, 11, 5; TB. II, 8, 5, 6.

##### Verse 1.

Note <span id="an_1:85:1:1">1</span>. The phrase *g*ánaya*h* ná
sáptaya*h* is obscure. As *g*áni has always the meaning of wife, and
sápti in the singular, dual, and plural means horse, it might be
supposed that *g*ánaya*h* could be connected with sáptaya*h*, so as to
signify mares. But although *g*áni is coupled with patnî, I, 62, 10, in
the sense of mother-wife, and though sápti is most commonly joined with
some other name for horse, yet *g*ánaya*h* sáptaya*h* never occurs, for
the simple reason that it would be too elaborate and almost absurd an
expression for va*d*avâ*h*. We find sápti joined with vâ*g*ín, I, 162,
1; with ráthya, II, 31, 7; átyam ná sáptim, III, 22, 1; sáptî hárî, III,
35, 2; á*s*vâ sáptî-iva, VI, 59, 3.

We might then suppose the thought of the poet to have been this: What
appears before us like race-horses, viz. the storms coursing through the
sky, that is really the host of the Maruts. But then *g*ánaya*h* remains
unexplained, and it is impossible to take *g*ánaya*h* ná sáptaya*h* as
two similes, like unto horses, like unto wives.

I believe, therefore, that we must here take sápti in its original
etymological sense, which would be ju-mentum, a yoked animal, a beast of
draught, or rather a follower, a horse that will follow. Sápti,
therefore, could never be a wild horse, but always a tamed horse, a
horse that will go in harness. Cf. IX, 21, 4. hitâ´*h* ná sáptaya*h*
ráthe, like horses put to the chariot; or in the singular, IX, 70, 10.
hitá*h* ná sápti*h*, like a harnessed horse. The root is sap, which in
the Veda means to follow, to attend on, to worship. But if sápti means
originally animals that will go

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

together, it may in our passage have retained the sense of yoke-fellow
(σύζυγος), and be intended as an adjective to *g*ánaya*h*, wives. There
is at least one other passage where this meaning would seem to be more
appropriate,. viz.

VIII, 20, 23. yûyám sakhâya*h* saptaya*h*.

You (Maruts), friends and followers! or you, friends and comrades!

Here it is hardly possible to assign to sápti the sense of horse, for
the Maruts, though likened to horses, are never thus barely invoked as
saptaya*h*!

If then we translate, 'Those who glance forth like wives and
yoke-fellows,' i. e. like wives of the same husband, the question still
recurs how the simile holds good, and how the Maruts rushing forth
together in all their beauty can be compared to wives. In answer to this
we have to bear in mind that the idea of many wives belonging to one
husband (sapatnî) is familiar to the Vedic poet, and that their
impetuously rushing into the arms of their husbands, and appearing
before them in all their beauty, are frequent images in their poetry. In
such phrases as pátim ná *g*ánaya*h* and *g*ánaya*h* ná gárbham, the
*g*anis, the wives or mothers, are represented as running together after
their husbands or children. This impetuous approach the poet may have
wished to allude to in our passage also, but though it might have been
understood at once by his hearers, it is almost impossible to convey
this implied idea in any other language.

Wilson translates: 'The Maruts, who are going forth, decorate themselves
like females: they are gliders (through the air), the sons of Rudra, and
the doers of good works, by which they promote the welfare of earth and
heaven. Heroes, who grind (the solid rocks), they delight in
sacrifices.'

Ludwig translates: 'Die ganz besonders sich schmücken wie frauen, die
renner, zu ihrem zuge,' &c. This is possible, yet the simile sounds
somewhat forced.

Note <span id="an_1:85:1:2">2</span>. The meaning of this phrase, which
occurs very frequently, was originally that the storms by driving away
the dark clouds, made the earth and the sky to appear

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

larger and wider. It afterwards takes a more general sense of
increasing, strengthening, blessing.

##### Verse 2.

Note <span id="an_1:85:2:1">1</span>. Ukshitá is here a participle of
vaksh or uksh, to grow, to wax; not of uksh, to sprinkle, to anoint, to
inaugurate, as explained by Sâya*n*a. Thus it is said of the Maruts, V,
55, 3. sâkám *g*âtâ´*h*—sâkám ukshitâ´*h*, born together, and grown up
together.

Note <span id="an_1:85:2:2">2</span>. The same expression occurs VIII,
28, 5. saptó (iti) ádhi *s*ríya*h* dhire. See also I, 116, 17; IX, 68,
1.

##### Verse 3.

Note <span id="an_1:85:3:1">1</span>. Gó-mât*ri*, like gó-*g*âta, a name
of the Maruts, who are also called p*rís*ni-mâtara*h*, sindhu-mâtara*h*.

Note <span id="an_1:85:3:2">2</span>. *S*ubhrá is applied to the Maruts,
I, i9, 5. Otherwise, no doubt, it might refer, as Ludwig remarks, to
virúkmata*h*, always supposing that virúkmat is a feminine. Whether
tanûshu *s*ubhrâh can stand for tanûshu *s*ubhrâsu is more doubtful.

Note <span id="an_1:85:3:3">3</span>. Virúkmata*h* must be an accusative
plural. It occurs I, 127, 3, as an epithet of ó*g*as; VI, 49, 5, as an
epithet of the chariot of the A*s*vins. In our place, however, it must
be taken as a substantive, signifying something which the Maruts wear,
probably armour or weapons. This follows chiefly from X, 138, 4.
*s*átrûn a*srin*ât virúkmatâ, Indra tore his enemies with the bright
weapon. In VIII, 20, 11, where rukmá occurs as a masculine plural, vi
bhrâ*g*ante rukmâ´sa*h* ádhi bâhúshu, their bright things shine on their
arms, it seems likewise to be meant for weapons; according to Sâya*n*a,
for chains. In V, 55, 3; X, 78, 3, the Maruts are called vi-rokí*n*a*h*,
bright like the rays of the sun or the tongues of fire.

Note <span id="an_1:85:3:4">4</span>. Observe the short syllable in the
tenth syllable of this Pâda; Benfey, Vedica, p. 124; Lanman,
Noun-Inflection, pp. 378, 543.

##### Verse 4.

Note <span id="an_1:85:4:1">1</span>. The sudden transition from the
third to the second person is not unusual in the Vedic hymns, the fact

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

being that where we in a relative sentence should use the same person as
that of the principal verb, the Vedic poets frequently use the third.

Note <span id="an_1:85:4:2">2</span>. V*rí*sha-vrâta is untranslatable
for reasons stated p. 138 seq.; it means consisting of companies of
v*rí*shans, in whatever sense that word be taken. Wilson in his
translation mistakes á*k*yutâ for á*k*yutâ*h*, and vrâta for vrata. He
translates the former by 'incapable of being overthrown,' the latter by
'entrusted with the duty of sending rain,' both against the authority of
Sâya*n*a. V*rí*shavrăta occurs twice in the Rig-veda as an epithet of
Soma only, IX, 62, 11; 64, 1.

##### Verse 5.

Note <span id="an_1:85:5:1">1</span>. If we take ádri for cloud, then
ra*m*h might have the meaning of stirring up.

V, 32, 2. tvám útsân *ri*tú-bhi*h* badbadhânâ´n ára*m*ha*h*.

Thou madest the springs to run that had been shut up by the seasons.

VIII, 19, 6. tásya ít árvanta*h* ra*m*hayante â*s*áva*h*. His horses
only run quick.

But ádri often means stone, in the sense of weapon, or bolt (cf.
adriva*h*, voc., wielder of the thunderbolt), and ra*m*hayati would then
have the meaning of hurling. This is the meaning adopted by Benfey and
Ludwig.

Note <span id="an_1:85:5:2">2</span>. The red may be the dark red cloud,
but arushá has almost become a proper name, and its original meaning of
redness is forgotten. Nay, it is possible that arushá, as applied to the
same power of darkness which is best known by the names of V*ri*tra,
Dasyu, &c., may never have had the sense of redness, but been formed
straight from ar, to hurt, from which arvan, arus, &c. (see [p.
65](sbe3218.htm#page_65) seq.). It would then mean simply the hurter,
the enemy. It is possible also to take arushá in the sense of the red
horse, the leader between the two Haris, when we ought to remember that
the Maruts pour forth the streams of the stallion, RV. V, 83, 6. prá
pinvata v*rí*sh*n*a*h* á*s*vasya dhâ´râ*h*, and that they lead about the
horse to make it rain, RV. I, 64, 6. átyam ná mihé ví nayanti vâ*g*ínam.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Note <span id="an_1:85:5:3">3</span>. Sâya*n*a explains: 'They moisten
the whole earth like a hide,' a hide representing a small surface which
is watered without great effort. Wilson: 'They moisten the earth, like a
hide, with water.' Langlois: 'Alors les gouttes d’eau, perçant comme la
peau de ce (nuage) bienfaisant viennent inonder la terre.' Benfey: 'Dann
stû´rzen reichlich aus der rothen (Gewitterwolke) Tropfen, mit Fluth wie
eine Haut die Erde netzend. (Dass die Erde so durchnässt wird, wie
durchregnetes Leder.)' If the poet had intended to compare the earth,
before it is moistened by rain, to a hide, he might have had in his mind
the dryness of a tanned skin, or, as Professor Benfey says, of leather.
If, on the contrary, the simile refers to the streams of water, then
*k*árma-iva, like a skin, might either be taken in the technical
acceptation of the skin through which, at the preparation of the Soma,
the streams (dhârâ*h*) of that beverage are squeezed and distilled, or
we may take the word in the more general sense of water-skin. In that
case the comparison, though not very pointedly expressed, as it would
have been by later Sanskrit poets, would still be complete. The streams
of the red-(horse), i. e. of the cloud, rush forth, and they, whether
the streams liberated by the Maruts, or the Maruts themselves, moisten
the earth with water, like a skin, i. e. like a skin in which water is
kept and from which it is poured out. The cloud itself being called a
skin by Vedic poets (I, 129, 3) makes the comparison still more natural.

One other explanation might suggest itself, if the singular of kárma
should be considered objectionable on account of the plural of the verb.
Vedic poets speak of the skin of the earth. Thus:

X, 68, 4. bhû´myâ*h* udnâ´-iva vi tvá*k*am bibheda.

He (B*ri*haspati) having driven the cows from the cave, cut the skin of
the earth, as it were, with water, i. e. saturated it with rain.

The construction, however, if we took *k*árma in the sense of surface,
would be very irregular, and we should have to translate: They moisten
the earth with water like a skin, i. e. skin-deep.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

We ought to scan kārmḗvōdắbhī*h* vĭ́ ūndā́ntĭ bhû̄́mā for *k*ārmēvă
ŭdăbhī*h* vyūndāntĭ bhû̄mā would give an unusual cæsura.

##### Verse 6.

Note <span id="an_1:85:6:1">1</span>. AV. XX, 13, 2. With your arms,
i. e. according to Sâya*n*a, with armfuls of gifts. Though this
expression does not occur again so baldly, we read I, 166, 10, of the
Maruts, that there are many gifts in their strong arms, bhûrî*n*i
bhadrâ´ náryeshu bâhúshu; nor does bâhú, as used in the plural, as far
as I am able to judge, ever convey any meaning but that of arms. The
idea that the Maruts are carried along by their arms as by wings, does
not rest on Vedic authority, otherwise we might join raghupátvâna*h*
with bâhúbhi*h*, come forth swiftly flying on your arms! As it is, and
with the accent on the antepenultimate, we must refer raghupátvâna*h* to
sáptaya*h*, horses.

Note <span id="an_1:85:6:2">2</span>. The sweet food is Soma.

##### Verse 7.

Note <span id="an_1:85:7:1">1</span>. The initial 'a' of avardhanta must
be elided, or 'té a' be pronounced as two *s*hort syllables equal to one
long.

Note <span id="an_1:85:7:2">2</span>. Taitt. S. IV, I, 11, 3. Vish*n*u,
whose character in the hymns of the Veda is very different from that
assumed by him in later periods of Hindu religion, must here be taken as
the friend and companion of Indra. Like the Maruts, he assisted Indra in
his battle against V*ri*tra and the conquest of the clouds. When Indra
was forsaken by all the gods, Vish*n*u came to his help.

IV, 18, 11. utá mâtâ´ mahishám ánu avenat amî´ (iti) tvâ *g*ahati putra
devâ´*h*,

átha abravît v*ri*trám índra*h* hanishyán sákhe vish*n*o (íti) vi-tarám
ví kramasva.

The mother also called after the bull, these gods forsake thee, O son;
then, when going to kill V*ri*tra, Indra said, Friend, Vish*n*u, step
forward!

This stepping of Vish*n*u is emblematic of the rising, the culminating,
and setting of the sun; and in VIII, 12, 27,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vish*n*u is said
to perform it through the power of Indra. In VI, 20, 2, Indra is said to
have killed V*ri*tra, assisted by Vish*n*u (vísh*n*unâ sa*k*âná*h*).
Vish*n*u is therefore invoked together with Indra, VI, 69, 8; VII, 99;
with the Maruts, V, 87; VII, 36, 9. In VII, 93, 8, Indra, Vish*n*u, and
the Maruts are called upon together. Nay, mâ´ruta, belonging ta the
Maruts, becomes actually an epithet of Vish*n*u, V, 46, 2. mâ´ruta utá
vish*n*o (iti); and in I, 156, 4. mâ´rutasya vedhása*h* has been pointed
out by Roth as an appellation of Vish*n*u. The mention of Vish*n*u in
our hymn is therefore by no means exceptional, but the whole purport of
this verse is nevertheless very doubtful, chiefly owing to the fact that
several of the words occurring in it lend themselves to different
interpretations.

The translations of Wilson, Benfey, and others have not rendered the
sense which the poet intends to describe at all clear. Wilson says: 'May
they for whom Vish*n*u defends (the sacrifice), that bestows all desires
and confers delight, come (quickly) like birds, and sit down upon the
pleasant and sacred grass.' Benfey: 'Wenn Vish*n*u schützt den
rauschtriefenden tropfenden (Soma), sitzen wie Vögel sie auf der
geliebten Streu.' Langlois: 'Quand Vich*n*ou vient prendre sa part de
nos enivrantes libations, eux, comme des oiseaux, arrivent aussi sur le
cousa qui leur est cher.' Ludwig: 'Als Vish*n*u half dem zum rauschtrank
eilenden stiere, setzten sie sich wie vögel aufs liebe barhis.'

Whence all these varieties? First, because â´vat may mean, he defended
or protected, but likewise, it is supposed, he descried, became aware.
Secondly, because v*rí*shan is one of the most vague and hence most
difficult words in the Veda, and may mean Indra, Soma, or the cloud:
(see the note on V*rí*shan, p. 138.) Thirdly, because the adjective
belonging to v*rí*shan, which generally helps us to determine which
v*rí*shan is meant, is here itself of doubtful import, and certainly
applicable to Indra as well as to Soma and the A*s*vins, possibly even
to the cloud. Mada-*k*yút is readily explained by the commentators as
bringing down pride, a meaning which the word might well have in modern
Sanskrit, but which it clearly has not in

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

the Veda. Even where the thunderbolt of Indra is called mada*k*yút, and
where the meaning of 'bringing down pride' would seem most appropriate,
we ought to translate 'wildly rushing down.'

VIII, 96, 5. â´ yát vá*g*ram bâhvó*h* indra dhátse mada*k*yútam áhaye
hántavai û*m* (iti).

When thou tookest the wildly rushing thunderbolt in thy arms in order to
slay Ahi.

When applied to the gods, the meaning of mada*k*yút is by no means
certain. It might mean rushing about fiercely, reeling with delight,
this delight being produced by the Soma, but it may also mean sending
down delight, i. e. rain or Soma. The root *k*yu is particularly
applicable to the sending down of rain; cf. Taitt. Sa*m*h. II, 4, 9, 2;
10, 3; III, 3, 4, 1; and Indra and his horses, to whom this epithet is
chiefly applied, are frequently asked to send down rain. However,
mada*k*yút is also applied to real horses (I, 126, 4) where givers of
rain would be an inappropriate epithet. I should therefore translate
mada*k*yút, when applied to Indra, to his horses, to the A*s*vins, or to
horses in general by furiously or wildly moving about, as if 'made or
madena *k*yavate,' he moves in a state of delight, or in a state of
intoxication, such as was not incompatible with the character of the
ancient gods. Here again the difficulty of rendering Vedic thought in
English, or any other modern language, becomes apparent, for we have no
poetical word to express a high state of mental excitement produced by
drinking the intoxicating juice of the Soma or other plants, which has
not something opprobrious mixed up with it, while in ancient times that
state of excitement was celebrated as a blessing of the gods, as not
unworthy of the gods themselves, nay, as a state in which both the
warrior and the poet would perform their highest achievements. The
German R a u sc h is the nearest approach to the Sanskrit mada.

VIII, I, 21. ví*s*veshâm tarutâ´ram mada-*k*yútam máde hí sma dádâti
na*h*.

Indra, the conqueror of all, who rushes about in rapture, for in rapture
he bestows gifts upon us. Cf. I, 51, 2.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

The horses of Indra are called mada*k*yút, I, 81, 3; VIII, 33, 18; 34,
9. Ordinary horses, I, 126, 4.

It is more surprising to see this epithet applied to the A*s*vins, who
are generally represented as moving about with exemplary steadiness.
However we read:

VIII, 22, 16. mána*h*-*g*avasâ v*ri*sha*n*â mada-*k*yutâ.

Ye two A*s*vins, quick as thought, powerful, wildly moving; or, as
Sâya*n*a proposes, liberal givers, humblers of your enemies. See also
VIII, 35, 19.

Most frequently mada*k*yút is applied to Soma, X, 30, 9; IX, 32, 1; 53,
4; 79, 2; 108, 11; where particularly the last passage deserves
attention, in which Soma is called mada*k*yútam sahásra-dhâram
v*ri*shabhám.

Lastly, even the wealth itself which the Maruts are asked to send down
from heaven, most likely rain, is called, VIII, 7, 13, rayím
mada-*k*yútam puru-kshúm vi*s*vadhâyasam.

In all these passages we must translate mada-*k*yút by bringing delight,
showering down delight.

We have thus arrived at the conclusion that v*rí*sha*n*am mada-*k*yútam,
as used in our passage I, 85, 7, might be meant either for Indra or for
Soma. If the A*s*vins can be called v*rí*sha*n*au mada-*k*yútâ, the same
expression would be even more applicable to Indra. On the other hand, if
Soma is called v*ri*shabhá*h* mada-kyút, the same Soma may legitimately
be called v*rí*shâ inada-*k*yút. In deciding whether Indra or Soma be
meant, we must now have recourse to other hymns, in which the relations
of the Maruts with Vish*n*u, Soma, and Indra are alluded to.

If Indra were intended, and if the first words meant 'When Vish*n*u
perceived the approach of Indra,' we should expect, not that the Maruts
sat down on the sacrificial pile, but that they rushed to the battle.
The idea that the Maruts come to the sacrifice, like birds, is common
enough:

VIII, 20, 10. v*ri*shana*s*véna maruta*h* v*rí*sha-psunâ ráthena
v*rí*sha-nâbhinâ, â´ *s*yenâ´sa*h* ná pakshí*n*a*h* v*rí*thâ nara*h*
havyâ´ na*h* vîtáye gata.

Come ye Maruts together, to eat our offerings, on your

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

strong-horsed, strong-shaped, strong-naved chariot, like winged hawks!

But when the Maruts thus come to a sacrifice it is to participate in it,
and particularly in the Soma that is offered by the sacrificer. This
Soma, it is said in other hymns, was prepared by Vish*n*u for Indra (II,
22, 1), and Vish*n*u is said to have brought the Soma for Indra (X, 113,
2). If we keep these and similar passages in mind. and consider that in
the preceding verse the Maruts have been invited to sit down on the
sacrificial pile and to rejoice in the sweet food, we shall see that the
same train of thought is carried on in our verse, the only new idea
being that the saving or, possibly, the descrying of the Soma is
ascribed to Vish*n*u. See, however, Bergaigne, Journ. Asiat. 1884, p
472.

##### Verse 8.

Note <span id="an_1:85:8:1">1</span>. On na and iva together, see
Bollensen, Orient and Occident, II, 470.

##### Verse 9.

Note <span id="an_1:85:9:1">1</span>. Tvásh*t*ar, the workman of the
gods, frequently. also the fashioner and creator.

Note <span id="an_1:85:9:2">2</span>. Nári, the loc. sing. of n*ri*,
but, if so, with a wrong accent, occurs only in this phrase as used
here, and as repeated in VIII, 96, 19. nári ápâ*m*si kártâ sá*h*
v*ri*trahâ´. Its meaning is not clear. It can hardly mean 'on man,'
without some more definite application. If n*ri* could be used as a name
of V*ri*tra or any other enemy, it would mean, to do his deeds against
the man, on the enemy. N*ri*, however, is ordinarily an honorific term,
chiefly applied to Indra, IV, 25, 4. náre náryâya n*rí*-tamâya
n*rin*â´m, and hence its application to V*ri*tra would be objectionable.
Sâya*n*a explains it in the sense of battle. I believe that nári stands
for náryâ, the acc. plur. neut. of nárya, manly, and the frequent
epithet of ápas, and I have translated accordingly. Indra is called
nárya-apas, VIII, 93, 1. See also Kuhn's Zeitschrift, vol. xxv, p. 601.

##### Verse 10.

Note <span id="an_1:85:10:1">1</span>. Avatá, a well, here meant for
cloud, like útsa, I, 64, 6.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Note <span id="an_1:85:10:2">2</span>. Dhámanta*h* vâ*n*ám is translated
by Sâya*n*a as playing on the lyre, by Benfey as blowing the flute. Such
a rendering, particularly the latter, would be very appropriate, but
there is no authority for vâ*n*á meaning either lyre or flute in the
Veda. Vâ*n*á occurs five times only. In one passage, VIII, 20, 8.
góbhi*h* vâ*n*á*h* a*g*yate, it means arrow; the arrow is sent forth
from the bow-strings. The same meaning seems applicable to IX, 50, I.
vâ*n*ásya *k*odaya pavím. In another passage, IX, 97, 8. prá vadanti
vâ*n*ám, they send forth their voice, is applied to the Maruts, as in
our passage; in IV, 24, 9, the sense is doubtful, but here too vâ*n*á
clearly does not mean a musical instrument. See III, 30, 10. Spiegel
compares the Huzvaresh and Armenian vâng (Pers. bânig), voice. M. Senart
(Journal Asiatique, 1874, p. 281) is in favour of taking vâ*n*a for
flute.

##### Verse 12.

Note <span id="an_1:85:12:1">1</span>. In the Taitt. S. I, 5, 11, we
have *s*a*s*amânâya, and in the Taitt. Br. II, 8, 5, 6, *s*am*s*amânâya,
but Sâya*n*a explains *s*a*s*amânâya, *s*a*ms*ana*m* kurvate. He
explains tridhâtûni by a*s*anam, pânam, khâdanam.

V*rí*shan.

Note <span id="an_1:85:12:2">2</span>. In v*rí*shan we have one of those
words which it is almost impossible to translate accurately. It occurs
over and over again in the Vedic hymns, and if we once know the various
ideas which it either expresses or implies, we have little difficulty in
understanding its import in a vague and general way, though we look in
vain for corresponding terms in any modern language. In the Veda, and in
ancient languages generally, one and the same word is frequently made to
do service for many. Words retain their general meaning,—though at the
same time they are evidently used with a definite purpose. This is not
only a peculiar phase of language, but a peculiar phase of thought, and
as to us this phase has become strange and unreal, it is very difficult
to transport ourselves back into it, still more to translate the
pregnant terms of the Vedic poets into the definite languages which we
have to use. Let us imagine a state of

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

thought and speech in which virtus still meant manliness, though it
might also be applied to the virtue of a woman; or let us try to speak
and think a language which expressed the bright and the divine, the
brilliant and the beautiful, the straight and the right, the bull and
the hero, the shepherd and the king by the same terms, and we shall see
how difficult it would be to translate such terms without losing either
the key-note that was still sounding, or the harmonics which were set
vibrating by it in the minds of the poets and their listeners.

1\. V*rí*shan, male.

V*rí*shan, being derived from a root v*ri*sh, spargere, meant no doubt
originally the male, whether applied to animals or men. In this sense
v*rí*shan occurs frequently in the Veda, either as determining the sex
of the animal which is mentioned, or as standing by itself and meaning
the male. In either case, however, it implies the idea of strength and
eminence, which we lose whether we translate it by man or male.

Thus á*s*va is horse, but VII, 69, 1, we read:

â´ vâm rátha*h*—v*rí*sha-bhi*h* yâtu á*s*vai*h*.

May your chariot come near with powerful horses, i. e. with stallions.

The Háris, the horses of Indra, are frequently called v*rí*sha*n*â

I, 177, 1. yuktvâ´ hárî (iti) v*rí*sha*n*â.

Having yoked the bay stallions.

V*ri*shabá, though itself originally meaning the male animal, had become
fixed as the name of the bull, and in this process it had lost so much
of its etymological import that the Vedic poet did not hesitate to
define v*ri*shabhá itself by the addition of v*rí*shan. Thus we find:

VIII, 93, 7. sá*h* v*rí*shâ v*ri*shabhá*h* bhuvat.

May he (Indra) be a strong bull.

I, 54, 2. v*rí*shâ v*ri*sha-tvâ´ v*ri*shabhá*h*.

Indra by his strength a strong bull; but, literally, Indra by his
manliness a male bull.

Even v*ri*shabhá loses again its definite meaning; and as

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

bull in bull-calf means simply male, or in bull-trout, large, so
v*ri*shabhá is added to átya, horse, to convey the meaning of large or
powerful:

I, 177, 2. yé te v*rí*sha*n*a*h* v*ri*shabhâ´sa*h* indra—átyâ*h*. Thy
strong and powerful horses; literally, thy male bull-horses.

When v*rí*shan and v*ri*shabhá are used as adjectives, for instance with
*s*úshma, strength, they hardly differ in meaning:

VI, 19, 8. â´ na*h* bhara v*rí*sha*n*am *s*úshmam indra.

Bring us thy manly strength, O Indra.

And in the next verse:

VI, 19, 9. â´ te *s*úshma*h* v*ri*shabhá*h* etu.

May thy manly strength come near.

Vá*m*saga, too, which is clearly the name for bull, is defined by
v*rí*shan, I, 7, 8:

v*rí*shâ yûthâ´-iva vá*m*saga*h*.

As the strong bull scares the herds.

The same applies to varâ´ha, which, though by itself meaning boar, is
determined again by v*rí*shan:

X, 67, 7. v*rí*sha-bhi*h* varâ´hai*h*.

With strong boars.

In III, 2, 11, we read:

v*rí*shâ—nâ´nadat ná si*m*há*h*.

Like a roaring lion.

If used by itself, v*rí*shan, at least in the Rig-veda, can hardly be
said to be the name of any special animal, though in later Sanskrit it
may mean bull or horse. Thus if we read, X, 43, 8, v*rí*shâ ná
kruddhá*h*, we can only translate like an angry male, though, no doubt,
like a wild bull, would seem more appropriate.

I, 186, 5. yéna nápâtam apâ´m *g*unâ´ma mana*h*-*g*úva*h*
v*rí*sha*n*a*h* yám váhanti.

That we may excite the son of the water (Agni), whom the males, quick as
thought, carry along.

Here the males are no doubt the horses or stallions of Agni. But, though
this follows from the context, it would be wrong to say that v*rí*shan
by itself means horse.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

If used by itself, v*rí*shan most frequently means man, and chiefly in
his sexual character. Thus:

I, 140, 6. v*rí*shâ-iva pátnî*h* abhí eti róruvat.

Agni comes roaring like a husband to his wives.

I, 179, i. ápi û*m* (íti) nú pátnî*h* v*rí*sha*n*a*h* *g*agamyu*h*.

Will the husbands now come to their wives?

II, 16, 8. sak*rí*t sú te sumatí-bhi*h*—sám pátnîbhi*h* ná
v*rí*sha*n*a*h* nasîmahi.

May we for once cling firmly to thy blessings, as husbands cling to
their wives.

V, 47, 6. upa-prakshé v*rí*sha*n*a*h* módamânâ*h* divá*h* pathâ´
vadhvã*h* yanti á*kkh*a.

The exulting men come for the embrace on the path of heaven towards
their wives.

In one or two passages v*rí*shan would seem to have a still more
definite meaning, particularly in the formula sû´ra*h* d*rís*îke
v*rí*sha*n*a*h* *k*a paû*m*sye, which occurs IV, 41, 6; X, 92, 7. See
also I, 179, 1.

In all the passages which we have hitherto examined v*rí*shan clearly
retained its etymological meaning, though even then it was not always
possible to translate it by mal e.

The same meaning has been retained in other languages in which this word
can be traced. Thus, in Zend, arshan (the later gushan) is used to
express the sex of animals in such expressions as a*s*pahé arshnô, gen.
a male horse; varâzahe arshnô, gen. a male boar; géus arshnô, gen. a
male ox; but likewise in the sense of man or hero, as arsha hu*s*rava,
the hero Hu*s*rava. In Greek we find ἄρσην and ἄῤῥην used in the same
way to distinguish the sex of animals, as ἄρσενες ἵπποι, βοῦν ἄρσενα. In
Latin the same word may be recognised in the proper name Varro, and in
vâro and bâro.

We now come to another class of passages in which v*rí*shan is clearly
intended to express more than merely the masculine gender. In some of
them the etymological meaning of spargere, to pour forth, seems to come
out again, and it is well known that Indian commentators are very fond
of explaining v*rí*shan by giver of rain, giver of

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

good gifts, bounteous. The first of these meanings may indeed be
admitted in certain passages, but in others it is more than doubtful.

II\. V*rí*shan, fertilising.

I, 181, 8. v*rí*shâ vâm meghá*h* may be translated, your raining cloud.

I, 129, 3. dasmá*h* hí sma v*rí*sha*n*am pinvasi tvá*k*am.

Thou art strong, thou fillest the rainy skin, i. e. the cloud.

See also IV, 22, 6; and possibly V, 83, 6.

It may be that, when applied to Soma too, v*rí*shan retained something
of its etymological meaning, that it meant gushing forth, poured out,
though in many places it is impossible to render v*rí*shan, as applied
to Soma, by anything but strong. All we can admit is that v*rí*shan, if
translated by strong, means also strengthening and invigorating, an idea
not entirely absent even in our expression, a strong drink.

III\. V*rí*shan, strong.

I, 80, 2. sá*h* tvâ amadat v*rí*shâ máda*h*, sóma*h*—sutá*h*.

This strong draught inspirited thee, the poured out Soma-juice.

I, 91, 2. tvám v*rí*shâ v*ri*sha-tvébhi*h*.

Thou, Soma, art strong by strength.

I, 175, 1. v*rí*shâ te v*rí*sh*n*e índu*h* vâ*g*î´ sahasra-sâ´tama*h*.

For thee, the strong one, there is strong drink, powerful, omnipotent.

In the ninth Ma*nd*ala, specially dedicated to the praises of Soma, the
inspiriting beverage of gods and men, the repetition of v*rí*shan, as
applied to the juice and to the god who drinks it, is constant. Indo
v*rí*shâ or v*rí*shâ indo are incessant invocations, and become at last
perfectly meaningless.

IV\. V*rí*shan, epitheton ornans.

There can be no doubt, in fact, that already in the hymns of the Veda,
v*rí*shan had dwindled away to a mere epitheton ornans, and that in
order to understand it correctly, we must, as much as possible, forget
its etymological

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

colouring, and render it by hero or strong. Indra, Agni, the A*s*vins,
Vish*n*u, the *Ri*bhus (IV, 35, 6), all are v*rí*shan, which means no
longer male, but manly, strong.

In the following passages v*rí*shan is thus applied to Indra:

I, 54, 2. yá*h* dh*ri*sh*n*únâ *s*ávasâ ródasî (íti) ubhé (íti) v*rí*shâ
v*ri*sha-tvâ´ v*ri*shabhá*h* ni-*riñg*áte.

(Praise Indra) who by his daring strength conquers both heaven and
earth, a bull, strong in strength.

I, 100, 1. sá*h* yá*h* v*rí*shâ v*rí*sh*n*yebhi*h* sám-okâ*h* mahá*h*
divá*h* p*ri*thivyâ´*h* *k*a sam-râ´*t* satîná-satvâ hávya*h* bháreshu
marûtvân na*h* bhavatu índra*h* ûtî´.

He who is strong, wedded to strength, who is the king of the great sky
and the earth, of mighty might, to be invoked in battles,—may Indra with
the Maruts come to our help!

I, 16, 1. â´ tvâ vahantu háraya*h* v*rí*sha*n*am sóma-pîtaye, Indra tvâ
sû´ra-*k*akshasa*h*.

May the bays bring thee hither, the strong one, to the Soma-draught, may
the sunny-eyed horses (bring) thee, O Indra!

IV, 16, 20. evá ít índrâya v*ri*shabhâ´ya v*rí*sh*n*e bráhma akarma
bh*rí*gava*h* ná rátham.

Thus we have made a hymn for Indra, the strong bull, as the Bh*ri*gus
make a chariot.

X, 153, 2. tvám v*ri*shan v*rí*shâ ít asi.

Thou, O hero, art indeed a hero; and not, Thou, O male, art indeed a
male; still less, Thou, O bull, art indeed a bull.

I, 101, 1. avasyáva*h* v*rí*sha*n*am vá*g*ra-dakshi*n*am marútvantam
sakhyâ´ya havâmahe.

Longing for help we call as our friend the hero who wields the
thunderbolt, who is accompanied by the Maruts.

VIII, 6, 14. ní *s*úsh*n*e indra dhar*n*asím vá*g*ram *g*aghantha
dásyavi, v*rí*shâ hí ugra *srin*vishé.

Thou, O Indra, hast struck the strong thunderbolt against *S*ush*n*a,
the fiend; for, terrible one, thou art called hero!

VIII, 6, 40. vav*ri*dhâná*h* ûpa dyávi v*rí*shâ va*g*rî´ aroravît,
v*ri*tra-hâ´ soma-pâ´tama*h*.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

Growing up by day, the hero with the thunderbolt has roared, the
V*ri*tra-killer, the great Soma-drinker.

V, 35, 4. v*rí*shâ hí ási râ´dhase *g*a*gñ*ishé v*rí*sh*n*i te
*s*áva*h*.

Thou (Indra) art a hero, thou wast born to be bounteous; in thee, the
hero, there is might.

V. Várshish*th*a, strongest, best, oldest.

It is curious to watch the last stage of the meaning of v*rí*shan in the
comparative and superlative várshîyas and várshish*th*a. In the Veda,
várshish*th*a still means excellent, but in later Sanskrit it is
considered as the superlative of v*ri*ddha, old, so that we see
v*rí*shan, from meaning originally manly, vigorous, young, assuming in
the end the meaning of old. (M. M., Sanskrit Grammar, § 252.)

Yet even thus, when v*rí*shan means simply strong or hero, its sexual
sense is not always forgotten, and it breaks out, for instance, in such
passages as,

I, 32, 7. v*rí*sh*n*a*h* vádhri*h* prati-mâ´nam búbhûshan purutrâ´
v*ri*trá*h* a*s*ayat ví-asta*h*.

V*ri*tra, the eunuch, trying to be like unto a man (like unto Indra),
was lying, broken to many pieces.

The next passages show v*rí*shan as applied to Agni:

III, 27, 15. v*rí*sha*n*am tvâ vayám v*ri*shan v*rí*sha*n*a*h* sám
idhîmahi.

O, strong one, let us the strong ones kindle thee, the strong!

V, I, 12. ávo*k*âma kaváye médhyâya vá*k*a*h* vandâ´ru v*ri*shabhâ´ya
v*rí*sh*n*e.

We have spoken an adoring speech for the worshipful poet, for the strong
bull (Agni).

Vish*n*u is called v*rí*shan, I, 154, 3:

prá vísh*n*ave *s*ûshám etu mánma giri-kshíte uru-gâyâ´ya v*rí*sh*n*e.

May this hymn go forth to Vish*n*u, he who dwells in the
mountain"(cloud), who strides wide, the hero!

Rudra is called v*rí*shan:

II, 34, 2. rudrá*h* yát va*h* maruta*h* rukma-vakshasa*h* v*rí*shâ
á*g*ani p*rís*nya*h* *s*ukré û´dhani.

When Rudra, the strong man, begat you, O Maruts with

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

bright ornaments on your chests, in the bright lap of P*ris*ni.

That the Maruts, the sons of Rudra, are called v*rí*shan, we have seen
before, and shall see frequently again (I, 165, 1; II, 33, 13; VII, 56,
20; 21; 58, 6). The whole company of the Maruts is called v*rí*shâ
ga*n*á*h*, the strong or manly host, i. e. the host of the Maruts,
without any further qualification.

VI\. V*rí*shan, name of various deities.

Here lies, indeed, the chief difficulty which is raised by the common
use of v*rí*shan in the Veda, that when it occurs by itself, it often
remains doubtful who is meant by it, Indra, or Soma, or the Maruts, or
some other deity. We shall examine a few of these passages, and first
some where v*rí*shan refers to Indra:

IV, 30, 10. ápa ushâ´*h* ánasa*h* sarat sám-pish*t*ât áha bibhyúshî, ní
yát sîm si*s*náthat v*rí*shâ.

Ushas went away from her broken chariot, fearing lest the hero should do
her violence.

Here v*rí*shan is clearly meant for Indra, who, as we learn from the
preceding verse, was trying to conquer Ushas, as Apollo did Daphne; and
it should be observed that the word itself, by which Indra is here
designated, is particularly appropriate to the circumstances.

I, 103, 6. bhû´ri-karma*n*e v*ri*shabhâ´ya v*rí*sh*n*e satyá-*s*ushmâya
sunavâma sómam, yá*h* â-d*rí*tya paripanthî´-iva *s*û´ra*h*
áya*g*vana*h* vi-bhá*g*an éti véda*h*.

Let us pour out the Soma for the strong bull, the performer of many
exploits, whose strength is true, the hero who, watching like a footpad,
comes to us dividing the wealth of the infidel.

Here it is clear again from the context that Indra only can be meant.

But in other passages this is more doubtful:

III, 61, 7. *ri*tásya budhné ushásâm isha*n*yán v*rí*shâ mahî´ (íti)
ródasî (íti) â´ vive*s*a.

The hero in the depth of the heaven, yearning for the dawns, has entered
the great sky and the earth.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

The hero who yearns for the dawns, is generally Indra; here, however,
considering that Agni is mentioned in the preceding verse, it is more
likely that this god, as the light of the morning, may have been meant
by the poet. That Agni, too, may be called v*rí*shan, without any other
epithet to show that he is meant rather than any other god, is clear
from such passages as,

VI, 3, 7. v*rí*shâ rukshá*h* óshadhîshu nûnot.

He the wild hero shouted among the plants.

In VII, 60, 9, v*ri*sha*n*au, the dual, is meant for Mitra and Varu*n*a;
in the next verse, v*ri*sha*n*a*h*, the plural, must mean the same gods
and their companions.

That Soma is called simply v*rí*shan, not only in the ninth Ma*nd*ala,
but elsewhere, too, we see from such passages as,

III, 43, 7. índra píba v*rí*sha-dhûtasya v*rí*sh*n*a*h* (â´ yám te
*s*yená*h* u*s*até *g*abhâ´ra), yásya máde *k*yaváyasi prá,
k*ri*sh*t*î´*h* yásya máde ápa gotrâ´ vavártha.

Indra drink of the male (the strong Soma), bruised by the males (the
heavy stones), inspirited by whom thou makest the people fall down,
inspirited by whom thou hast opened the stables.

Here Sâya*n*a, too, sees rightly that 'the male bruised by the males' is
the Soma-plant, which, in order to yield the intoxicating juice, has to
be bruised by stones, which stones are again likened to two males. But
unless the words, enclosed in brackets, had stood in the text, words
which clearly point to Soma, I doubt whether Sâya*n*a would have so
readily admitted the definite meaning of v*rí*shan as Soma.

I, 109, 3. mâ´ *kh*edma ra*s*mî´n íti nâ´dhamânâ*h* pit*rîn*â´m
*s*aktî´*h* anu-yá*kkh*amânâ*h*, indrâgní-bhyâm kám v*rí*sha*n*a*h*
madanti tâ´ hí ádrî (íti) dhishá*n*âyâ*h* upá-sthe.

We pray, let us not break the cords (which, by means of the sacrifices
offered by each generation of our forefathers, unite us with the gods);
we strive after the powers of our fathers. The Somas rejoice for Indra
and Agni; for the two stones are in the lap of the vessel.

First, as to the construction, the fact that participles are thus used
as finite verbs, and particularly when the subject changes in the next
sentence, is proved by other passages,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

such as II, 11, 4. The sense is that the new generation does not break
the sacrificial succession, but offers Soma, like their fathers. The
Soma-plants are ready, and, when pressed by two stones, their juice
flows into the Soma-vessel. There may be a double entendre in
dhishá*n*âyâ*h* upá-sthe, which Sanskrit scholars will easily perceive.

When v*rí*shan is thus used by itself, we must be chiefly guided by the
adjectives or other indications before we determine on the most
plausible translation. Thus we read:

I, 55, 4. sáh ít váne namasyú-bhi*h* va*k*asyate *k*â´ru *g*áneshu
pra-bruvâ*n*á*h* indriyám, v*rí*shâ *kh*ándu*h* bhavati haryatá*h*
v*rí*shâ kshéme*n*a dhénâm maghá-vâ yát ínvati.

In the first verse the subject may be Indra or Soma: 'He alone is
praised by worshippers in the forest (or in the wooden vessel), he who
shows forth among men his fair power.' But who is meant to be the
subject of the next verse? Even Sâya*n*a is doubtful. He translates
first: 'The bounteous excites the man who wishes to sacrifice; when the
sacrificer, the rich, by the protection of Indra, stirs up his voice.'
But he allows an optional translation for the last sentences: when the
powerful male, Indra, by his enduring mind reaches the praise offered by
the sacrificer.'

According to these suggestions, <span class="smallcaps">Wilson</span>
translated: He (Indra) is the granter of their wishes (to those who
solicit him); he is the encourager of those who desire to worship (him),
when the wealthy offerer of oblations, enjoying his protection, recites
his praise.

<span class="smallcaps">Benfey</span>: The bull becomes friendly, the
bull becomes desirable, when the sacrificer kindly advances praise.

<span class="smallcaps">Langlois</span>: When the noble Maghavan
receives the homage of our hymns, his heart is flattered, and he
responds to the wishes of his servant by his gifts.

As far as I know, the adjective *kh*ándu does not occur again, and can
therefore give us no hint. But haryatá, which is applied to v*rí*shan in
our verse, is the standing epithet of Soma. It means delicious, and
occurs very frequently in the ninth Ma*nd*ala. It is likewise applied.
to Agni, Pûshan, the Haris, the thunderbolt, but wherever

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

it occurs our first thought is of Soma. Thus, without quoting from the
Soma-Ma*nd*ala, we read, X, 96, 1, haryatám mádam, the delicious
draught, i. e. Soma.

X, 96, 9. pîtvâ´ mádasya haryatásya ándhasa*h*, means having drunk of
the draught of the delicious Soma.

VIII, 72, 18. padám haryatásya ni-dhânyâ´m, means the place where the
delicious Soma resides.

III, 44, 1. haryatá*h* sóma*h*.

Delicious Soma.

II, 21, 1. bhara índrâya sómam ya*g*atâ´ya haryatám.

Bring delicious Soma for the holy Indra.

I, 130, 2. mádâya haryatâ´ya te tuví*h*-tamaya dhâ´yase.

That thou mayest drink the delicious and most powerful draught, i. e.
the Soma.

If, then, we know that v*rí*shan by itself is used in the sense of Soma,
haryatá v*rí*shan can hardly be anything else. Va*k*asyate also is
peculiar to *S*oma in the sense of murmuring, or as it were talking,
.and never occurs as a passive. I therefore should prefer to assign the
whole verse to Soma, and translate: He indeed, when in the wooden
vessel, talks with his worshippers, proclaiming his fair power among
men; the strong Soma is pleasing, the strong Soma is delicious, when the
sacrificer safely brings the cow, i. e. the milk to be mixed with the
Soma.

That Indra was thirsting for Soma had been said in the second verse, and
he is again called the Soma-drinker in the seventh verse. A verse
dedicated to Soma therefore seems to come in quite naturally, though the
Anukrama*n*î does not sanction it.

That the Maruts are called v*rí*shan, without further explanations, will
appear from the following passages:

I, 85, 12. rayím na*h* dhatta v*ri*sha*n*a*h* su-vî´ram.

Give us wealth, ye heroes, consisting of good offspring.

VIII, 96, 14. íshyâmi va*h* v*ri*sha*n*a*h* yúdhyata â*g*aú.

I wish for you, heroes (Maruts), fight in the race!

In all the passages which we have hitherto examined, v*rí*shan was
always applied to living beings, whether animals, men, or gods. But as,
in Greek, ἄρσην means at last simply strong, and is applied, for
instance, to the

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

crash of the sea, κτύπος ἄρσην πόντου, so in the Veda v*rí*shan is
applied to the roaring of the storms and similar objects.

V, 87, 5. svaná*h* v*rí*shâ.

Your powerful sound (O Maruts).

X, 47, 1. *g*ag*ri*bhmá te dákshi*n*am indra hástam vasuyáva*h*
vasu-pate vásûnâm, vidmá hí tvâ gó-patim *s*ûra gónâm asmábhyam *k*itrám
v*rí*sha*n*am rayím dâ*h*.

We have taken thy right hand, O Indra, wishing for treasures, treasurer
of treasures, for we know thee, O hero, to be the lord of cattle; give
us bright and strong wealth.

Should *k*itrá here refer to treasures, and v*rí*shan to cattle?

X, 89, 9. ní amítreshu vadhám indra túmram v*rí*shan v*rí*sha*n*am
arushám *s*i*s*îhi.

Whet, O hero, the heavy strong red weapon against the enemies.

The long â in v*rí*sha*n*am is certainly startling, but it occurs once
more, IX, 34, 3, where there can be no doubt that it is the accusative
of v*rí*shan. Professor Roth takes v*rí*shan here in the sense of bull
(s. v. tumra), but he does not translate the whole passage.

III, 29, 9. k*rin*óta dhûmám v*rí*sha*n*am sakhâya*h*.

Make a mighty smoke, O friends!

Strength itself is called v*rí*shan, if I am right in translating the
phrase v*rí*sha*n*am *s*úshmam by manly strength. It occurs,

IV, 24, 7. tásmin dadhat v*rí*sha*n*am *s*úshmam índra*h*.

Indra may give to him manly strength.

VI, 19, 8. â´ na*h* bhara v*rí*sha*n*am *s*úshmam indra.

Bring to us, O Indra, manly strength.

VII, 24, 4. asmé (íti) dádhat v*rí*sha*n*am súshmam indra.

Giving to us, O Indra, manly strength.

See also VI, 19, 9, *s*úshma*h* v*ri*shabhá*h*, used in the same sense.

VII\. V*rí*shan, general and empty term of praise.

This constant play on the word v*rí*shan, which we have observed in the
passages hitherto examined, and which give by no means a full idea of
the real frequency of its

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

occurrence in the Veda, has evidently had its influence on the Vedic
*Ri*shis, who occasionally seem to delight in the most silly and
unmeaning repetitions of this word, and its compounds and derivatives.
Here no language can supply any adequate translation; for though we may
translate words which express thoughts, it is useless to attempt to
render mere idle play with words. I shall give a few instances:

I, 177, 3. â´ tish*th*a rátham v*rí*sha*n*am v*rí*shâ te sutá*h* sóma*h*
pári-siktâ mádhûni, yuktvâ´ v*rí*sha-bhyâm v*ri*shabha kshitînâ´m
hári-bhyâm yâhi pra-vátâ úpa madrík.

Mount the strong car, the strong Soma is poured out for thee, sweets are
sprinkled round; come down towards us, thou bull of men, with the strong
bays, having yoked them.

But this is nothing yet compared to other passages, when the poet cannot
get enough of v*rí*shan and v*ri*shabhá.

II, 16, 6. v*rí*shâ te vá*g*ra*h* utá te v*rí*shâ rátha*h* v*rí*sha*n*â
hárî (íti) v*ri*shabhâ´*n*i â´yudhâ, v*rí*sh*n*a*h* mádasya v*ri*shabha
tvám î*s*ishe indra sómasya v*ri*shabhásya t*ri*p*n*uhi.

Thy thunderbolt is strong, and thy car is strong, strong are the bays,
the weapons are powerful, thou, bull, art lord of the strong draught,
Indra rejoice in the powerful Soma!

V, 36, 5. v*rí*shâ tvâ v*rí*sha*n*am vardhatu dyaú*h* v*rí*shâ
v*rí*sha-bhyâm vahase hári-bhyâm, sá*h* na*h* v*rí*shâ v*rí*sharatha*h*
su-*s*ipra v*rí*sha-krato (iti) v*rí*shâ va*g*rin bháre dhâ*h*.

May the strong sky increase thee, the strong; a strong one thou art,
carried by two strong bays; do thou who art strong, with a strong car, O
thou of strong might, strong holder of the thunderbolt, keep us in
battle!

V, 40, 2-3. v*rí*shâ grâ´vâ v*rí*shâ máda*h* v*rí*shâ sóma*h* ayám
sutá*h*, v*rí*shan indra v*rí*sha-bhi*h* v*ri*trahan-tama, v*rí*shâ tvâ
v*rí*sha*n*am huve.

The stone is strong, the draught is strong, this Soma that has been
poured out is strong, O thou strong Indra, who killest V*ri*tra with the
strong ones (the Maruts), I, the strong, call thee, the strong.

VIII, 13, 31-33. v*rí*shâ ayám indra te rátha*h* utó (íti) te

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

v*rí*sha*n*â hárî (íti), v*rí*shâ tvám *s*ata-krato (íti) v*rí*shâ
háva*h*. v*rí*shâ grâ´vâ v*rí*shâ máda*h* v*rí*shâ sóma*h* ayám sutá*h*,
v*rí*shâ ya*gñ*á*h* yám ínvasi v*rí*shâ háva*h*. v*rí*shâ tvâ
v*rí*sha*n*am huve vá*g*rin *k*itrâ´bhi*h* ûtí-bhi*h*, vavántha hí
práti-stutim v*rí*shâ háva*h*.

This thy car is strong, O Indra, and thy bays are strong; thou art
strong, O omnipotent, our call is strong. The stone is strong, the
draught is strong, the Soma is strong, which is here poured out; the
sacrifice which thou orderest is strong, our call is strong. I, the
strong, call thee, the strong, thou holder of the thunderbolt, with
manifold blessings; for thou hast desired our praise; our call is
strong.

There are other passages of the same kind, but they are too tedious to
be here repeated. The commentator, throughout, gives to each v*rí*shan
its full meaning either of showering down or bounteous, or male or-bull;
but a word which can thus be used at random has clearly lost its
definite power, and cannot call forth any definite ideas in the mind of
the listener. It cannot be denied that here and there the original
meaning of v*rí*shan would be appropriate even where the poet is only
pouring out a stream of majestic sound, but we are not called upon to
impart sense to what are verba et praeterquam nihil. When we read, I,
122, 3, vâ´ta*h* apâ´m v*ri*sha*n*-vân, we are justified, no doubt, in
translating, 'the wind who pours forth water;' and X, 93, 5, apâ´m
v*ri*sha*n*-vasû (íti) sû´ryâmâ´sâ, means 'Sun and Moon, givers of
water.' But even in some passages where v*rí*shan is followed by the
word v*ri*sh, it is curious to observe that v*ri*sh is not necessarily
used in the sense of raining or pouring forth, but rather in the sense
of drinking.

VI, 68, 11. índrâvaru*n*â mádhumat-tamasya v*rí*sh*n*a*h* sómasya
v*ri*sha*n*â <span id="fr_104"></span>[a](#fn_95) â´ v*ri*shethâm.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

Indra and Varu*n*a, you strong ones, may you drink of the sweetest
strong Soma.

That â-v*ri*sh means to drink or to eat, was known to Sâya*n*a and to
the author of the *S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, who paraphrases â
v*ri*shâyadhvam by a*s*nîta, eat.

The same phrase occurs I, 108, 3.

I, 104, 9. uru-vyá*k*â*h* *g*a*th*áre â´ v*ri*shasva.

Thou of vast extent, drink (the Soma) in thy stomach.

The same phrase occurs X, 96, 13.

VIII, 61, 3. â´ v*ri*shasva—sutásya indra ándhasa*h*.

Drink, Indra, of the Soma that is poured out.

In conclusion, a few passages may be pointed out in which v*rí*shan
seems to be the proper name of a pious worshipper:

I, 36, 10. yám tvâ devâ´sa*h* mánave dadhú*h* ihá yá*g*ish*th*am
havya-vâhana, yám kâ*n*va*h* médhya-atithi*h* dhanasp*rí*tam yám
v*rí*shâ yám upa-stutá*h*.

Thee, O Agni, whom the gods placed here for man, the most worthy of
worship, O carrier of oblations, thee whom Ka*n*va, thee whom
Medhyâtithi placed, as the giver of wealth, thee whom V*ri*shan placed
and Upastuta.

Here the commentator takes V*ri*shan as Indra, but this would break the
symmetry of the sentence. That Upastutá*h* is here to be taken as a
proper name, as Upastuta, the son of V*ri*sh*t*ihavya, is clear from
verse 17:

agní*h* pra âvat mitrâ´ utá médhya-atithim agní*h* sâtâ´ upastutám.

Agni protected also the two friends, Medhyâtithi and Upastuta, in
battle.

The fact is that whenever upastutá has the accent on the last syllable,
it is intended as a proper name, while, if used as a participle, in the
sense of praised, it has the accent on the first.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

VIII, 5, 25. yáthâ *k*it ká*n*vam â´vatam priyá-medham upa-stutám.

As you have protected Ka*n*va, Priyamedha, Upastutá. Cf. I, 112, 15.

VIII, 103, 8. prá má*m*hish*th*âya gâyata—úpa-stutâsa*h* agnáye (accent
of the vocative).

Sing, O Upastutás, to the worthiest, to Agni!

X, 115, 9. íti tvâ agne v*ri*sh*t*i-hávyasya putrâ´*h* upastutâ´sa*h*
*rí*shaya*h* avo*k*an.

By these names, O Agni, did the sons of V*ri*sh*t*ihavya, the Upastutás,
the *Ri*shis, speak to you.

V*ri*shan occurs once more as a proper name in VI, 16, 14 and 15:

tám û*m* (íti) tvâ dadhyáṅ *rí*shi*h* putrá*h* îdhe átharva*n*a*h*,
v*ri*tra-hánam puram-darám.  
tám û*m* (íti) tvâ pâthyá*h* v*rí*shâ sám îdhe dasyuhántamam,
dhanam-*g*ayám rá*n*e-ra*n*e.

Thee, O Agni, did Dadhya*k* kindle, the *Ri*shi, the son of Atharvan,
thee the killer of V*ri*tra, the destroyer of towns;  
Thee, O Agni, did V*ri*shan Pâthya kindle, thee the best killer of
enemies, the conqueror of wealth in every battle.

Here the context can leave no doubt that Dadhya*k* and V*ri*shan were
both intended as proper names. Yet as early as the composition of the
*S*atapatha-brâhma*n*a, this was entirely misunderstood. Dadhya*k*, the
son of Atharvan, is explained as speech, V*ri*shan Pâthya as mind
(*S*at. Br. VI, 3, 3, 4). On this Mahidhara, in his remarks on Vâ*g*.
Sa*m*h. XI, 34, improves still further. For though he allows his
personality to Dadhya*k*, the son of Atharvan, he says that Pâthya comes
from pathin, path, and means he who moves on the right path; or it comes
from pâthas, which means sky, and is here used in the sense of the sky
of the heart. He then takes v*ri*shan as mind, and translates the mind
of the heart. Such is a small chapter in the history of the rise and
fall of the Indian mind!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[151:a](sbe3222.htm#fr_104) The dual
v*rí*sha*n*au occurs only when the next word begins with a vowel. Before
an initial a, â, i, the au is always changed into âv in the Sa*m*hitâ
(I, 108, 7-12; 116, 21; 117, 19; 153, 2; 157, 5; 158, 1; 180, 7; VII,
61, 5). Before u the preceding au becomes â in the Sa*m*hitâ, but the
Pada gives au, in order to show that no Sandhi can take place between
the two vowels (VII, 60, 9; <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> X, 66, 7).
Before consonants the dual always ends in â, both in the Sa*m*hitâ and
Pada. But there are a few passages where the final â occurs before
initial vowels, and where the two vowels are allowed to form one
syllable. In four passages this happens before an initial â (I, 108, 3;
VI, 68, 11; I, 177, 1; II, 16, 5). Once, and once only, it happens
before u, in VIII, 22, 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 86. To the Maruts (the Storm-gods)](sbe3223)
