[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Images](imglist)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ntna09)  [Next](ntna11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII

### BELIEFS IN REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF CHILDREN

Belief in reincarnation and spirit children entering women prevalent
over great part of Australia.--Distribution of this belief.--Arunta
belief.--Port Essington tribe.--Mungarai tribe.--Traditions of
ancestors.--Spirit children in trees, etc.--They only enter the eight
lubras.--Yungman tribe.--Nullakun tribe.--Sexes changing at successive
reincarnations.--Waduman and Mudburra tribes.--Tradition of Idakulgwan,
Imumdadul, and Ibangalma.--Distribution by them of spirit
children.--Kakadu beliefs. -Yalmura and Iwaiyu.--Spirit entering animal
or plant in form of a small frog.--That animal or plant becomes its
totem. Spirit child entering the mother.--Account given by Ungara, a
Kakadu native.--The old Yalmuru disappears and the Iwaiyu becomes the
new Yalmuru.

ONE of the most striking features of the native tribes in Central and
Northern Australia, whose customs were investigated by the late Mr.
Gillen and myself, is their universal belief that children enter women
in the form of minute spirits, the representatives of formerly existing
men and women, who are thus reincarnated. This belief in reincarnation,
and in procreation not being actually the result of sexual intercourse,
has now been shown to be prevalent over the whole of the Central and
Northern part of the continent--that is, over an area four and a half
times the size of Great Britain-amongst many Queensland tribes and in a
large part of West Australia. {p. 264} It is now too late to secure
reliable information, in regard to matters such as this, from any part
of Australia where the natives have been at all closely in contact with
whites, but, though the belief was first described in connection with
the Arunta tribe, it has now been shown to be widely prevalent over the
continent, and I have little doubt but that at one time it was
universally held amongst Australian tribes. From my own personal
experience I know that it is, or was, held by the Urabunna tribe
inhabiting the country on the West and North-west of Lake Eyre; by the
Arunta that extends to the north of the Urabunna up to and beyond the
Macdonnell Ranges; by the Kaitish and Unmatjera tribes whose territory
extends beyond Barrow Creek; by the Warramunga tribe inhabiting country
northwards to and beyond Tennant's Creek; by the large Worgai tribe out
to the east of the latter, towards the Queensland border; by the
Tjingilli tribe, whose country centres in Powell Creek; by the Umbaia,
Nganji, Binbinga, Mara, Anula, Mungarai, Nullakun, and other tribes
extending eastwards from the telegraph line to the Gulf of Carpentaria
and occupying the vast area drained by the Roper, Macarthur, Limmen,
Wickham, and other rivers; by the Djauan and Yungman tribes, north of
the Tjingilli; by the Waduman, Mudburra and other tribes along the
Victoria and Daly rivers running westwards; by the Kakadu, Iwaidja, and
allied tribes inhabiting the northern littoral, and by the natives on
Bathurst and Melville Islands.

The traditions in regard to their ancestors in all these tribes are very
explicit. Amongst the Arunta, for example, there were certain great men
and women, leaders of the various groups in the far past times, called
Alcheringa, who had definite names. They carried

{p. 265}

with them numbers of spirit children who were deposited in certain
places and it is these who now enter women and are born in the form of
human beings, as well, of course, as the spirits of the great leaders
themselves. My late colleague, Mr. Gillen, was supposed to be the
reincarnation of one of them named Urangara. The Arunta believe that
when any individual dies his spirit part goes back to his old camping
place in the Alcheringa, inhabiting some special rock or tree which is
spoken of as its Nanja. Here it remains until it chooses to enter a
woman and undergoes reincarnation. All these spirits are called
Iruntarinia. Previously to the first reincarnation, however) a second
spirit, which is the double of the Iruntarinia, emerges from the Nanja,
and is called an Arumburinga. When the former is reincarnated the latter
inhabits the Nanja but it may, if it chooses, visit its human
representative unseen, as a general rule, by the latter, though there
are certain gifted beings, such, especially, as very able medicine men,
who can actually see and converse with the Arumburingas. Sometimes, when
a man is out in the bush, he will suddenly experience a curious
sensation and find that he is on the point of treading on a snake, which
shows him clearly that his Arumburinga has warned him of the danger. The
Arumburinga is, as it were, everlasting, while the Iruntarinia sometimes
inhabits its Nanja and sometimes undergoes reincarnation. It is not
supposed to be born again until such time as the bones of its last human
body have crumbled away. It may, of course, exist, but amongst the
Warramunga and many other tribes, though we studied them carefully we
did not come across any belief equivalent to that of the Arumburinga in
the Arunta, though they have just the same belief in reincarnation.

{p. 266}

In the far north of the continent, the Larakia and Worgait natives in
the vicinity of Darwin have been for so long in contact with white men
that it would be useless to seek information from them on points such as
these, and I did not have the opportunity of coming in contact with less
civilised members of these tribes.

The Port Essington natives believe that, at first, there were no real
human beings, but only alligators, sharks, turtles, cockatoos, etc., and
that the present men and women are descendants of these. They also
believe that the spirit child goes inside the women at a spot which is
frequented by such children and that natives who die are born again at a
later period.

In the Mungarai tribe, in which I had more opportunity of inquiry, the
beliefs are very definite. The far past time--the equivalent of the
Alcheringa in the Arunta tribe--is called *Kurnallan*. During this time
the old ancestors walked about. Each one had his original home, called
*Burnamandu*. As in the case of the snake Uruanda,<sup>\[1\]</sup> they
made the country with all its natural features as they walked along.
Wherever they stopped they performed ceremonies, and, when doing so,
shook themselves,<sup>\[2\]</sup> with the result that spirit children,
called *Mall-mall*, who, of course, belonged to the totem (namaragua) of
the ancestor, emanated from their bodies. These spirit children now go
into the right lubras, and are born as natives. Close to what is now
McMinn's

\[1. An account of his wanderings is given in the chapter dealing with
Traditions of Ancestors.

2\. This shaking of the body is a very characteristic feature in the
totemic ceremonies of many tribes. It was very much in evidence amongst
the Warramunga, who decorate themselves profusely with down when
performing the sacred ceremonies during which they are supposed to
simulate the old ancestors. When they thus shake themselves, little bits
of down tumble off just as the spirits used, originally, to emanate from
him when he shook himself.\]

{p. 267}

bar, on the Roper River, there is a large gum tree full of spirit
children, all of them belonging to one of the totems associated with the
Nakomara sub-class, and always, so my native informant told me, on the
look-out for the right lubra. Again, at Crescent Lagoon, the old
ancestor Namaran, the thunder man, deposited numbers of spirit children,
and, if a Ngaritjbellan woman dips her toes in the water, one at once
passes into her up her leg, or, if she stoops and drinks, goes down into
her through her mouth. The spirit of a dead person, called *Anora*, goes
back to his old home (*Burnamandu*), and sooner or later is born again,
and in this tribe the sexes are supposed to alternate at each successive
incarnation.

In the Yungman tribe there is precisely the same belief in regard to the
origin of children as in the Mungarai. For example, a *Nanung*, or
sugar-bag (honeycomb) man arose at Opobinga, near the old Elsey Station.
Here he is reported to have stayed without wandering about. He had
numbers of spirit children, who now inhabit the trees and stones near
his old camp, and out of these they come and enter the right lubras. He
had, also, many bull-roarers, which the Yungman people call
*Purdagiair*. In the Yungman, as in the Mungarai tribe, the sexes are
supposed to alternate at each successive reincarnation.

In the Nullakun tribe the old times, during which the ancestors walked
about the country, are called *Musmus*, and each of them has his place
of origin, called *Kundungini*. Like one of them, a rainbow man, called
Kulakulungini, each of them is supposed to have had numbers of spirit
children who emanated from them when they shook their bodies during the
performance of corrobborees. It is these who are now constantly entering
lubras, and being born. After death the spirit

{p. 268}

of the dead person, called *Maritji*, goes back to its old home,
Kundungini, where it remains until it is born again. At each successive
reincarnation the sex changes.

The beliefs of the Mara tribe are fundamentally identical with those of
the Mungarai and Nullakun tribes. The old times are called *Djidjan*;
each ancestor had his ancestral home, called *Wailba*, and, as he
wandered over the country, he made the natural features and left spirit
children behind him, who are continually entering the right women. After
death the spirit, which is called *Padinia*, goes back again to its
*Wailba* until such time as it undergoes reincarnation. At each
successive reincarnation, also, the sex changes.

In the Waduman and Mudburra tribes, inhabiting the country between the
Daly and Victoria Rivers, they have the same idea of spirit children,
whom they call *Ngaidjan*, existing in the form of little frogs. The
Waduman believe that, in the far past times that they call *Jabulunga*,
there were two old men named Idakulgwan and Imumdadul. They were
brothers, and came from the north-east. As they travelled along they met
an old woman named Ibangalma, or Tjoral, who came from the salt water
country. She had no black-fellow, and her totem (*Gwaian*) was
Eramerlgo, or sugar-bag. As they came along, the two men made country,
creeks, yams, kangaroos, snakes, sugar-bags and many other things that
the natives now feed on. They also carried with them plenty of
*Ngaidjan*, or spirit children, and gave some of them to the old woman
Ibangalma, telling her to take them away to other parts of the country
and leave them there. They said, *Ya moinja laia lungin, Ngaidjan
anoadja tjumba angebir*, which means, You go away to another country,
where you stop leave *Ngaidjan* behind. She did so, and the natives say
that, when leaving them behind,

{p. 269}

she gave them their totems. They grew up and were the first
black-fellows, men and women. When they died their spirits became
*Ngaidjan*, entered lubras, and were born again. Each *Ngaidjan* knows
which is the right lubra to enter, and will not go into a wrong one.
Each *Ngaidjan*, also, has one special place, called Poaridju, the
equivalent of the Nanja of the Arunta, which is its normal stopping
place, though, of course, if it chooses to do so, it can move freely
about the country. Before going into a lubra each *Ngaidjan* enters, and
stays for a time, in its mother's totemic animal or plant. If the mother
be Eramerlgo, or sugar-bag, then it goes into this, if a yam then into a
yam, and so on. Sometimes a woman, when digging for yams, hits one with
her stick, and may hear the baby *Ngaidjan* crying out, or, if she hits
a goanna, she may hear the child speaking inside it.

Ibangalma finally went to a place now called Hayward Creek, and, later
on, the two brothers Idakulgwan and Imumdadul came up and stopped there.
Tradition relates that Idakulgwan married Ibangalma, and that they had a
great many children. First of all they had a boy named Giblongwa, then
another named Widba, and a third called Ijubulma. Each of these three
has been reincarnated and is now alive. The two old people lived a long
time as, respectively, Maluka and Muluru. Their *Ngaidjan* have
undergone reincarnation, but are not, at present, represented in the
tribe. The two old men Idakulgwan and Imumdadul remained at Hayward
Creek, where they are now represented by two stones, whilst another, at
the head of the Flora Creek, represents Ibangalma. It appears as if a
generation, at least, is allowed to elapse between any two successive
reincarnations. One of our informants, for example, called Alwairi, was
the reincarnation of a brother of his *baba*,

{p. 270}

that is, his father's father. Alwairi's young daughter, named
Maidjangba, is the reincarnation of a woman of the same name who was her
mother's mother.

In the Arunta and other Central tribes it is only, relatively, a few
members of the tribe who actually bear the names of old ancestors, but
in these more northern coastal tribes there is a constant succession of
the names, and every individual, without exception, is the reincarnation
of some special ancestor.

I was much interested in finding amongst the Kakadu and allied tribes
not only a very firm and most definitely expressed belief in the
reincarnation of ancestors and in the absence of any necessary relation
between sexual connection and procreation, but also a curious parallel
to the Arunta idea of Iruntarinia and Arumburinga.

As described in connection with the legend associated with Imberombera,
the Kakadu believe that the whole country was originally peopled with
individuals and spirit children who are now continually undergoing
reincarnation. What we may call the original spirit, the equivalent of
the Iruntarinia amongst the Arunta, is called Yalmuru. If we take the
case of any one individual the belief is as follows. When a man, and the
same, precisely, is true of women and children, dies, the Yalmuru, that
is the spirit part, after the final burial and mourning ceremonies are
complete, keeps watch over the *benogra*, or bones. After a time the
Yalmuru, as it were, divides into two, so that we have the original
Yalmuru and a second spirit called Iwaiyu. The two are distinct and have
somewhat the same relationship to one another as a man and his shadow,
which, in the native mind, are very intimately associated. For a long
time they remain together but, when the Yalmuru desires to undergo
reincarnation, the two leave the *benogra* or bones, which are always
some distance

{p. 271}

out in the scrub--often miles away from a camp. They go forth together,
the Iwaiyu in the lead, the Yalmuru behind. Out in the bush they find
the natives, who of course cannot see them, hunting for food. The
Yalmuru takes the Iwaiyu and puts it, in the form of a small frog called
Purnamunemo, which lives under the sheathes of the leaves of the
screw-pine or Pandanus, into some food such as fish or "sugar-bag" that
the man is searching for. If, for example, it be fish, the Yalmuru goes
into the water and drives them into the man's *chipoiyu* or fishing net,
if it be *mormo* or "sugar-bag," he guides him to the tree in which the
bees have made their hive. In either case, as soon as the man has
secured the fish or *mormo*, out jumps the frog, unseen of course by the
men. it is caught by the Yalmuru and, together, the two spirits return
to their camping place. The food in which the Iwaiyu was placed will be
the child's totem. The latter is thus always selected by the Yalmuru and
may change from one reincarnation to another. As we have seen, when
dealing with the totems, it often does. Sometimes, when an animal, such
as a crocodile or fish, contains for a time the Iwaiyu and the animal is
speared, then the *Bialila*, or child to which the Iwaiyu subsequently
gives rise, bears the mark of the spear wound.

The natives return to their camp with the food that they have secured,
quite unconscious of the fact that the Yalmuru and Iwaiyu have been out
in the bush. At night time the two latter come back again to the camp
and watch the men and women. The Iwaiyu is again in the form of a little
frog. When all are asleep, the two come up to the camp and enter the
mia-mia where the man and his wife are sleeping. The Iwaiyu goes up and
smells the man; if he be not a "right" father he says, *ngari koyada*,
which means, not this one. He tries

{p. 272}

another one, finds him right and says, *ngari papa*, this one is my
father. Then he goes and smells the latter's lubra. The Iwaiyu gets into
her hair, then feels her breasts and says, *korngo ngari koiyu*, these
are my mother's breasts; *ngai koiyu*, this is my mother. Then he comes
down and goes into the woman. The Yalmuru returns to the old camp. Every
now and then he comes and looks at the woman. but does not speak. When
it is evident that the woman is going to have a child, the Yalmuru comes
up to the camp at night time and tells the father that the child is
there and what its name is and also its totem. He tells the father that
he must not give it any other name except the one that he mentions,
because that is the child within his wife.

Ungara, a Kakadu native, told us exactly what happened in his own case.
When his father's brother died his *benogra*, or bones, were left for
some time in a tree, not very far from the camp at which he died, but,
later on, they were carried more than twenty miles away and placed in a
Banyan tree overhanging a water pool. Ungara, who had his wife Obaiya
and one child with him, was once camped near this place. He threw his
*chipoiyu*, or net, into the water and left it there for some little
time. Then he gathered long grass stalks and went into the water to
drive the fish into the net. He did not know that the Yalmuru had
already done this, and that the Iwaiyu was in one of the fishes. The net
was so heavy that he called out to Obaiya to come and help him lift it
out on to the bank. While they were doing this the Iwaiyu jumped out and
was caught by the Yalmuru and then they both went back to the bones.
Ungara and his wife Obaiya took the fish out and carried them to their
camp in dilly bags. There were a good many other natives camped about.
That night, while they were sleeping,

{p. 273}

the Yalmuru and Iwaiyu came into the camp and, after examining the man
and woman, as previously described, the Iwaiyu went into Obaiya. While
telling us this Ungara mimicked exactly the actions of the Iwaiyu going
first to the father then to the mother. Later on the Yalmuru carne one
night and whispered as follows in Ungara's ear; *chipoiyu nanjil yapo
araji*, the fish went inside your net; *jibul widjeru*, it was full up;
*mukara bialilla ngeinyimma*, your child was there; *brau Monmuna
murakamora narama*, give it the name Monmuna murakamora; *jereipunga
kunbaritja*, its totem is kunbaritja (a small fish); *balera koregora
onje narama koyada*, by and by do not look out another name; *Monmuna
murakamora ngeinyimma ingordua bialilla araji*, Monmuna murakamora is
the child inside your lubra.

When the child is young the Yalmuru watches over it. If it strays away
from camp and gets lost in the bush, the Yalmuru guides it back and,
later on, when the child has grown into a man, the Yalmuru still helps
it, in fact a good deal depends on the Yalmuru because, if it be not
vigilant, some other hostile one may work evil magic against the
individual associated with the Yalmuru's Iwaiyu. Finally, when the
individual grows really old, the Yalmuru comes some night and whispers
in his ear, *Iwaiyu ngeinyimma bialilla unkoregora, ngainma ngeimba,
parda mornda, ngainma boro mornda moiyu, ngeinyimma jereipunga
koregora*; which means, Iwaiyu, you look after a child, my backbone and
thighs are no good, my eyes are no good and sore, you look after the
Jereipunga (totem). In other words the Yalmuru is supposed to tell the
Iwaiyu, that is, the spirit within the man, that he, the former, is worn
out and that the Iwaiyu must take on the part of providing for a new
child being born, and must also look after its totem. As the

{p. 274}

natives say, *baranga Yalmuru wariji ge*, the old Yalmuru is done for
completely; *Iwaiyu nigeri Yalmuru*, the Iwaiyu is the new Yalmuru. It
is really rather like a very crude forerunner of the theory of the
continuity of the germ plasm. The old Yalmuru splits, as it were, into
two, one half, the Iwaiyu, persists, the other finally disappears. In
its turn the former becomes transformed into a Yalmuru which again
splits; one half remains, and the other perishes, but there is an actual
spiritual continuity from generation to generation.

It will be seen from the above how very definite the ideas of the Kakadu
tribe are in regard both to the fact that the child enters the woman in
spirit form without any reference whatever to sexual intercourse, and
also to the fact that the child within the woman is the actual
representative of one special individual amongst the old ancestors.

{p. 275}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Traditions Concerning Imberombera, The Great
Ancestor, And Also Other Ancestors Of The Kakadu Nation](ntna11)
