[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa17)  [Next](smoa19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

*The first Mongolian city. Mention of Yucatan*.

I tell no tale of flight across the waste and waters. Of death struck
beasts who fell a prey to creeping things that love the night. Of
famine-threatened creatures pining sore for homes of plenty left, alas!
too far to turn again to home for help they needed.

Of how at last the river, long and serpent-wise that spews its clear,
sweet waters in the sea, that giveth life to banks all decked with green
which feeds the multitudes, was made from straggling brook by hands of
men who rent the toughened sod and formed a channel broad and deep.

Upon its banks their tents were pitched. The city, populous at first,
was built in mind, then took it shape from hands of skilful workers.

Streets which cross and wind were but the fancy of the crafty one who
held the keys which locked the nation's useless horde, for many years
but useless—useless, as they sought no more their ancient home where
gold in grains were held for merchandise.

He argued: “Streets that broadly lie invite the hordes which soon will
gather from afar for spoil when known becomes our hiding place. But
serpent winding way will show each face to him who peereth from his
window low or high. Condensed be our city. All who dwell therein be
known. No spy who seeketh word of Kling—our monarch, Kling, the great,
or I, who bartered fame adown the centuries long for greed of gold, now
worthless, lives to cast an eye to gods.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

“He dieth at a stroke who seeketh our land nor liveth to plead to ear.”

The temples founded none might hope for life who deviated from the
teachings of the priests. The leeches' skill was tempered to conditions
of the land, and teachers taught as seemed good to him who lauded Kling,
yet ruled him heart and soul!

They passed—those plotters. In their place strange creatures sprung, the
growth of mind impressed with greed and fear and solitude of steppes;
yet round the base of that vast temple builded first they clung, athirst
for learning.

Thus each mind was shaped according to a law formed from stern need and
inclination of a brain that grasped all law and made it fit caprice.

A nation vast there sprung where but a group of wanderers first had cast
their tents, yet still a people like and like as kin. For following
certain details warps the will, and trendeth to one point a thousand
wills bent to the stronger mood of him who seeks the law as whip to lash
to purpose every soul within his reach.

Akin; yet not akin, they grew with certain bonds unbroken. Mark of Time
rests on the central point where wisely built the One who keeps stern
council.

Shape the mind to one example it may grow unchanged and pass its
unchanged moods to them that follow. All seek a symbol of some higher
mind and bow submissive to a stronger will, and shape their moods to fit
the mood of one who wills submission. They grew apace, possessed wise
minds and drank the crafty poise of him, their teacher, in the dawn of
race; for crafty he and thus adown the line ran guile.

And later, when the land did teem with people who forgot the source of
their great nation, seemingly,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

war was proclaimed aloud and tribe met tribe and slaughter fouled the
land.

In history the race held the place of hybrid. Atlantian sires, but other
races mixed their puny blood through mothers—slaves, the weaklings of
the world in that new age. Still, training brought to bear on sons made
men of strength surpassed by none in early age, and well were grown the
hordes that peopled steppes.

The cities lesser growth in man form knew; for air and water, food which
builds the brain and bulk, were there but poison for the child to thrive
on. Mind indeed was fed, but body strength seemed lost to growth of
mind. The law which worketh out its will that one may thrive but at the
others’ loss.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Atlantis, thou art lost, thy people of pure blood but represented in my
land by those who pour o’er tomes and sigh for glories passed. In that
land the hybrid creeps to leash and nothing knows, perchance, of that
great island's loss where, in the dim past age, his sires far out in
line had dwelt.

Ah, yellow slant of eye, the hordes we see, but glorious in their youth
in that past day, when swarthy-browed the plunderers bold first set
their feet on sands that teem with men who shrink from new conditions;
bravery of soul of order that will suffer, yet not draw the sword on
foe.

Atlantis knew but bravery in war. The sons of Yucatan have grown a
peaceful tribe. Atlantis spake for peace in early age. With both, the
mind was all supreme and speech and craft held sway above the sword. The
drop which lingereth yet of kinship giveth proof—the gift of barter—of
concealment—

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

truth to vows if they perchance are made according to conditions naught
shall break.

In tomes ye read of one who sought that land in that dim age so far
agone it seems but as a vision firmly set in midst of actual life. This
one made mention of a fruitful isle that sunk, and struck with terror—so
tradition planteth in his breast—the ruler willed the stranger die by
stealth lest he create a thirst for knowledge strong of other lands.

"We live and die," spake he—the ruler—"in bonds of country. Cursed be
the bones that lie in alien soil. Unrest shall seize the soul which
feels its husk a part of any land save of its birth. Ah, people of this
earth! thy ways and moods shall change to fit the planes on which ye
trend; yet ever are there gleams of that far spot amid the higher scenes
ye yet shall know. A memory of the Earth home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. An Atlantian tradition.](smoa19)
