[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa03)  [Next](smoa05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### CHAPTER II

*The government of Atlantis. Educational methods. Peopling and customs*.

The government was modeled from that of sons of Mars; at first a
war-like monarchy whose head descended from the house of one lone
shepherd, who rose from skin-clad people to a man of might in brain
power; discerning in the sons of his loved land a war-like tribe to
overthrow and bind unto them forces from the lands afar through
centuries of toil. A course mapped out from sire to son from which none
deviated.

And thus the government was shaped, and held for years, by one deft
brain that builded as did the host of mortals on the planet ye call
"Mars," and thus I swear.

How, ask ye, was the knowledge of those men to him conveyed? By that
thought power all own, but not all rightly use. Yet he who was descended
from the shepherd learned, through close communion with the laws of
Nature, that all "space" was full of thought and listening, at an hour
which held for him most leisure, he heard a voice from out the silence
speaking to the sense which all men own. Secrets vast were told,
unwittingly, for they who told deemed not that "space" hath ears, and
thus he learned the lessen of a ruling mind, of power to wield the baton
of the law, to quell sedition; justice to present and Peace to hold.

He builded from foundations pure and strong. Twelve trusted friends a
council formed with him—the leader born and taught by soul to so direct

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

and so to serve with will that all the others listened to his word.

And one grown old in wisdom of a kind that then prevailed—the making of
much wealth in swords and vessels for the water gates—had charge of all
the stores; and even he—crowned king—could of no substance give save
he—the head—consulted with the twelve and spake the word of promise.
King in name yet was his office tempered with the wisdom of his peers in
age.

And thus the kingdom grew nor wasted gains in ill-spent revel or
ambitious wars, but courted arts and planted, rearing high grand
monuments *that crumble ’neath the sea!*

Wives were chosen not from alien lands for each wise ruler; but with
beauty born, a daughter of the twelve who sat and judged, admonished
and, perchance, reproved him who was lord of all. Nay, but one wife each
knew, though when she passed to higher ether—soul instead of
clay—another came to bless with tenderest love.

As centuries passed there reigned one monarch—him ye call Osiris—for
such I swear was ancestor to that god-king of my land whom ye are taught
to doubt as myth or mock, but who did live indeed and reign.

In this king's day the number of the statemen grew and many thronged the
hall where justice held her sway, and kingdoms far learned well the
power of him who sat upon Atlantis’ throne.

The years of the duration of the Atlantian government from the time of
the formation are not numbered on the tablets, but we gather much from
history of other lands and the signs denoting culture following crudest
ignorance. Thus we speak: "Seven thousand years Atlantis throve in
government." Yea, fully. More mayhap but it is scarcely true that

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

one million years passed by without a change as has been asserted.

Seven thousand years are all I grasp, and still another may a different
version give, for even in the histories writ so plain that men today
read fully all there written, they differ strongly.

Ever so it was.

We march by epoch.

First the Shepherd King, then followed others of his line for full one
thousand years. The stream was lost in other branches then, yet were
they fit to govern. Men of that great council who had striven hard to
bring to shame the line that mocked the Higher, and asserted that their
reign began in gods who handed down to children god-fathered, born of
maids, all the mighty line.

A break in line of reign there ne’er had been for centuries, for one,
extolled by all, stepped forward and did claim the kingdom's lead and
others willingly permitted.

Such kings as this were Ormandorth and Sestrom, Ohydid and old
Polcythine with twenty sons who turned to lands afar and wonders wrought
in this, thy land, ten thousand years agone, before the plague of fire
from the sky <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3.md)—a settling of the star
directly over the land, and pebbles hot were cast from a volcanic mould.

The cities were destroyed where rivers now do flow, or forests spring.
The rocky strata of a hundred hills bear witness what I speak is truth.
And perished thus the line of Polcythine through wandering sons who
ne’er returned.

And so the line was taken, when three thousand years of government flew
by, by king a rover bold, a son of him who wore the cross of promise;
one who

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

stemmed the flood of bitter opposition to a war which nearly wrecked the
navy—in that day a feeble line of galleys, later great and striking awe
to every heart where sailed the wondrous fleet in southern sea.

That cruel king died ere Osiris reigned; his father, stern and subtle of
that line so cruel to his kind and kindred. The taint of cruel blood ran
all adown the line like foulest taint of dread disease, to lift its head
on some uncertain day, or like to serpent hid it lay beneath the smiling
calm—beneath the kindly deed and kingly courtesy.

Broad subjects were discussed amidst the making of Atlantis’ laws, as
the Creation—all the laws of growth enlarged upon—expelling of the water
from the clouds and Spring and Harvest time were brought to mind.

Close observation of the stars’ poise was made so as to teach best state
for permeating books, ye speak, we the tablets.

The hero was sent forth to war at certain periods marked by stars, and
Government forbade that ships of commerce sail when stars portended
loss. The tablets tell the tale—each moon—change marking destruction by
madness or disease, or yet of safety and success with blessed health.

The laws were regulated by the Mars trend for the wars, and Mercury held
the subject for the insect plague, and all were guarded from their
ravages by the instructions of the Government whose laws fulfilled must
be or punishment was meted out, nor stayed.

Ah, nay! The idea of the pyramid was born not in Atlantis. The pyramids
were builded from model from afar, nor in Atlantis rose the shape; there
round obtained in form, a pretext for much chiselling and caught the
fancy of the builders there.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

From other land the pyramids; from "Yucatan" a land that rose and fell
in government for centuries before Atlantis reared above the sea a mark
of civilization.

This is truth.

Unto Atlantis came the sons of Yucatan—in truth as spoilers first, but
later stayed to so convert—and did become the citizens who always caused
much agitation; in the army, navy, all adown the line where ran their
blood.

A fretful, soulful people; turned to war or prayer. To building
quaintly, hugely, cornered structures. Angles were their theme and model
patterned from a mind that followed rule, not lines of grace, and thus
were born the pyramids in brain of one who had conceived a fortress
strong, impregnable. A fortress set on mountain top, the blocks of stone
raised by the law I mentioned <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md) and the
help of slaves, or captives, who were held by thousands in the parent
land. (Yucatan)

Nor would Atlantis bear the structure-pyramid. Threatened exile to the
one who contemplated building, but this one did carry into Egypt when
the exodus of princes did proceed the water death. And when the day had
come that, at command, a tomb was builded for a monarch old, rose he—the
son of sons of him who from Atlantis came—and builded as desired through
help of chosen ones who studied so complete the hints obtained from
him—descendant of old Yucatan and foster child of lost Atlantis’ shore.

The object strength. No earthquake's shock could overthrow, no whirlwind
topple to destruction, no foe could penetrate. In Yucatan—the land of
mystery ye call, yet I, "the land of silent power"

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of speech to them who open wide their ears—that pyramid first builded
was a home for hosts of warriors.

Tunneled in the hill on which it rose were chambers vast—a city—well ye
call such labyrinth, and sealed to all intruders could it be; its
streets, its groves, its parks, save for the opening in the pyramid, a
handful guarded in the time of siege. For from the plains, now barren
save for "farms" that dot them here and there, came swarms of men akin
to brute in force and brain. The offspring of the steppes were they,
where solitude breeds thoughts, yet grand or fierce or foul.

Their leaders, men of minds so well endowed they understood all arts and
sciences. The rabble, creatures of the outcast-man in that young age
when first the cities rose where serpents whirr in deadly stroke, and
wolves howl long when night shuts down, and red men creep to labor or
sun-warmth on sight of greatness that hath struck with awe the men of
worlds now passed away. And this the land that gave Atlantis foes, or
allies, when her navy grew so great it were defeat to seek her, warring,
on the sea.

Atlantis made her boast that none might build her temples mighty. But in
that far off isle was one who wrote on parchment all the mode of rearing
and of hewing from the rock such pillars as were needed. His sons, too,
learned the method. It was my father's ancestor who spake the way of
reading poise. He left that sunken isle while yet it stood in glory.

He was of that band who did betake to boats in young Osiris’ reign, for
reign did he in all the state his sire had kept when Egypt's shore was
reached. And thus was Karnak builded. Karnak grand, whose

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

pillar’d arches touched the vault of blue in man's imagination.

Yea, Karnak hath a measure all its own. A measure born of greatness of
the mind that delved and brought to light from atom's realm the thoughts
which soared in beauty, solid worth, and made a city where the night
looks down through roofless palace, temple, tomb! A work that man hath
wrought, but Fate in stern decree, so linked to the Ages that as one are
they, mowed from the earth; its grandeur lost to eye save where a broken
arch or pillar speaks in tongue of ruin, potent.

Yet the mood of them who builded lingers still about the arch that
crumbles where the stars look down and Moon glints with new glory—glory
vast but mocking. Such is ruin—but reminder of a day now passed forever.
Yet it holdeth tantalizing mood; for like the gauds which hide not yet
entrance, it rests where eye may linger and be held yet meaneth naught
save that man's builded greatness is a mock.

It warmeth not the heart, but gnaws its way through all remembrance of
another age that may not rest beneath the selfsame sky that once looked
on its greatness. Old Karnak stood as warrior-shield on heart-defying
hordes that looked with greedy eye, well knowing that within those
temples vast lay treasures—"emeralds."

Aye, emeralds the men had brought even from Atlantis; globes whose worth
meant fortunes for each owner journeying, but so sacred they that none
dared barter for the gold each saw yet dared not gain at risk of ruined
life. For such the story, that he who bartered one, if gift it was,
brought untold sorrow to the latest of his line. And thus there resteth
one within the breast where beat the heart attuned to mine in other age!

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Alas! that day has fled and yet another dawns upon my sight. Within
these temple cells lie buried, pillar’d o’er, such sheets of metal as
had known the fire of old Atlantis’ smiths, who beat so thin the weight
was naught, a scroll that tooth of Time eats. not, and characters and
lines mark history of the land beneath the waves.

And on one sheet is marked instructions plain to read the colors of the
rainbow, Moon and clouds and blossoms; tone of birds, aye, all that
star-men taught. And there lies wisdom held from higher planets where
the journeying soul resided for a space to learn the tongue, the song or
story.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Yea, O Mine Own, the early races of old Yucatan—"Mayans" ye call—had
there dwelt long ere peopled was Atlantis, and from the "Orient" came
they—subtle souls who knew of "Ur" and "Babylon"—in later day and came
unto the wilds of Yucatan through stress of famine not but stress of
war. In that young day no jungle growth prevailed in Yucatan; thus was
it writ: (hieroglyphics) in alphabet of other age.

Long years have made the tangle; serpents vicious, poisonous, dwelt not
there in that young age, but out of "India" came the serpent mass, a
treasured "curiosity" for one vicious priest to torture with wild fright
his rebel followers in time of war, and thus they multiplied as forests
grew, became a menace and ye see today results of one man's vicious mood
…

Yea, those Mayans from the heights of India came, and fled one company
from king's oppression and remained to people wilds, yet not the tangle
of the jungle waste unknown in that first age of Yucatan.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Those mighty
builders methods used as they did who raised the pyramids in Egypt later
and subject they to man's achievement—the poise of stone and currents of
the air as I have written on an earlier page.

Behold, O Soul of mine, I bring thee proof that Mayan industries throve
through knowledge gleaned from other land in that dim past, for not upon
the soil now clogged with rooted trees had they been born, but upon
heights with snow besprinkled, or vast plains where they were once
inhabitants, but fleeing from oppression set their feet—a generous band
of "experts," on the soil of Yucatan.

They grew as nations grow and held throughout the years the knowledge of
the past when structures rose through patient toil like to those other
ones in land afar, and every man was disciplined to learn the method and
to build those piles which crumble ’neath the ravage of the wild and
mock the modern trend of minds which vaunt themselves as master
builders; thus they grew apace to mock the builded cities of the western
land to which they drifted in those later days when population, hunger
weakened, war encroached, did set them forth to lands afar or "homeward"
unto India; set them forth to perish, some of stern fatigue, of famine
reft of life, or on the ocean sailing, sunk by storms.

Yea, wolves did howl among the temples vast where serpents multiplied
and warred on weakened man, and many died by poison fangs.

Those ancient Mayans, O mine own, a people were who ravaged not as
nations throve beside, but peaceful bode amidst their palaces, grew wise
with age and sedulously they worshipped gods who throve on their
credulity, for not the image only did they worship, but the living man
who represented Deity, grew wise and bold as followers did endow

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

with attributes of wisdom and of power that quelled the storms and
caused the gentle rain to fall.

Yea, I give thee origin of human sacrifice as thou hast asked. It rose
from subtle motives, power, held by them who would dictate life or death
and followers caught the thought, and thus, behold, the lovely virgins
hurled to pits or slaughtered on the altar, bathed in blood creating
frenzy in the multitudes.

They reasoned, they those priests so arrogant, that subject to their
will became the virtuous maids cast at their feet by parents less than
brutes, to whom the suffering of their young is agony of self.

They bought them power, those parents vile, by "casting to the gods,"
the fairest maids, and thus the habit grew and fouled the land by such
indulgence. Knowledge in the brain, or mind ye speak, creates not
tenderness or pity in the heart, and there was one, called wise, so
cruel that the other priests shrank from his proud presence, who did
conceive a viler sacrifice than instant death.

"The serpent sacrifice" ’twas called, and in a pit were nurtured
poisonous snakes by thousands, and upon a "platform" in that sullied pit
was placed the victim and the serpents twined and struck at one who
shrank and shrieked for aid and prayed to heedless gods who represented
wanton cruelty.

The years passed by and serpents grew and multiplied, but at the last
the Mayan "gods" did weary of that mode of sacrifice and lost the habit;
yet until the last a sacrifice of man and virgin fair was made to
satisfy a senseless thirst for lust and power.

Nay, mine own, Atlantis was not peopled when the monuments to greatness
first rose on soil of Yucatan, vast mansions first builded in the mind
of them who years before had watched the growth of other palaces, and so
designed to build still greater

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

far those habitations and made a mock of greatness borne in minds long
passed from bodies.

Yea as one hath said, their tools were simple, yet the toil performed
was equal and more lasting than that which implements of modern men do
fashion, and exact the poise of stone which, formed by a law they
understood full well, that built the pyramids in later age. Yea, from
the hills of India came the tribes, sent forth by sore oppression, from
a race who once had conquered and who on the plains had dwelt, and also
builded from designs of their proud ancestors.

They were men of mind endowed with reason; calculation and that
sentiment which yearns to reproduce the works of God, ye call, in
marble, stone of certain value bent to methods man designed; stone which
caught electric currents; thus the secret note of poise which lifted
with aid of men by thousands brought, perchance, from other climes. Men
of intellect not yet conversant with the secret law of builders in that
age.

Disease did fell that nation-smitten without warning; plague in grimmest
form assailed. Yea, records be where men may one day find, that tell of
disease encroaching hand which none could stay; of wolves and crawling
things which battened on the scattered dead in seasons dark when from a
distant isle came men with plague infested, and disease and death unto
those early Mayans brought.

No leech of skill had they to warn them, thus many died and others fled
from that "accursed spot," and foul became the cities vast and temples
spoiled by one invader fell. But ere one temple was destroyed, in hidden
crypt the blocks of stone inscribed with name of that disease, disaster,
were safe hid from the despoilers who came once yearly to engage the men
of that reft land in war.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

And thus the people dwindled, fled from that disease-infested spot, and
wars and great invasions rid it of the remnant of that race which once
dwelt there in great magnificence.

"Accursed spot," ’twas called, with all its grandeurs did it perish as a
spot of great fertility, and wondrous structures built from moods of
minds attuned to lofty models, and to patient fashioning of structures
so designed they stand through centuries.

Thine eyes shall read the writing classified with other ancient tablets’
mysteries, and all, at last, revealed be the mystery of that land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[20:\*](smoa04.htm#fr_3.md) Perhaps the dragon of
the Norse sagas.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[22:\*](smoa04.htm#fr_4.md) The law of poise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The origin of wheat. Marriage customs. Laws
regarding children born. Cremation of the dead. Some industries.
Music.](smoa05.md)
