[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa23)  [Next](smoa25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

### CHAPTER XXII

*Death of the king of Atlantis on the day of the great sea-fight*.

Thou asketh of the fate of him, the king who reigned when the great
nations met in war upon the day that followed fête?

Aye, thus I speak as through thy hand I mark events to make the world of
knowledge learn that I am man, though yet unseen by thee or others’
eyes—am called but "Selestor."

False the name, and history writes in tomes my name once known to
nations; yet I hold it well to guard the secret—secret of a line which,
sunk in deep oblivion all that bore the emblem of a state but mocked
today.

The death of him who reigned when Northmen bold did seek to barter
strength for beauty's prize, for gems, the isle itself, exchange
perchance for northern border cold and grey, the haunt of bear and
snarling wolf, and frost, black, deadly to the tender Southern ones.
Such was our theme.

He whom Atlantis called her king was wise, not wily, and excess he did
abhor; and yet that day his galleys sailed to war he drank him deep of
"liquor," as ye speak in modern times.

An alcoholic liquor made from wheat and juice of palm. A mixture fiery
and reserved for revelers; but the king befitting thought the draught in
time of stress, so drank he long and deep.

His brain grew dizzy nor sight nor sound he knew, and falling prone, ere
slaves could spring to save, the kingly brow smote marble and his senses

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

fled and yet he lingered. Slaves stood near to spring at leeches'
bidding for the quickening draught or cooling mixture, for the bowl of
gold that caught the flow from pierced arm.

And yet no sense returned till evening. No glance of recognition met the
gaze of her, his queen, nor of them—the buds of kingly tree to bloom
when he had passed, the daughters fair, and son, the prince—the king!

And as he lingered came an ancient one unto his door—door bereft of
hanging, that the wind of eve might freshly blow across the clammy brow,
perchance bring healing in its salted breath all scented with the kisses
of the rose, the lily white which marked the king's domain, the jasmine
growing where the palm tree's shade cast cooling shadows.

All was peace and calm, save in the hearts of subjects, torn that day
with various woes—the youth of nation on the sea to war—the king in
stupor—waiting they.

Crept an ancient one into the hall where on the ivory couch the king lay
prone.

Spake she, unchecked, for grief had so sore beset the leech that vaunted
skill fulfilled no purpose.

Statesmen stood dumb, the queen had fled and by the hand led children
weeping sore—the offspring of a line of kings for generations, but their
hearts, as tender as the slaves bore sorrow ill.

With lips that set all firmly, brow that frowned, spake she, the
ancient: "King, but not a god, ye now are called! and going take not
state nor thing of earth, not life nor love nor gold to mark thee aught
save but a wandering soul!

"And yet, mayhap, the state which Earth doth keep the gods permit in
realms more fair than

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

thine, which yet is fairer than this earth holds other-where."

“Why speakest thou? Begone! hushed the voice of one big with authority.
And slaves were bidden take the intruder from the palace.

“But the ancient rose to height unthought of: “Touch me not! He dieth!
He—the son who drew his life from this shrunk form! This do I swear who
face the stroke of Ses and shall I, whose moments thus are numbered,
dare speak me false?

“Ah, nay! His sire a king, but I, whose glorious crown of womanhood was
beauty *and my curse*, bore him who lieth on the ivory couch!

“The rightful heir, ye men of earth may speak, died at his birth; yet ye
knew naught of this, so well my secret kept the favored slaves.

“He liveth yet again on ether planes—my son! Not her’s—the hated
rival's—the queen ye knew who early passed. My son! The pomp and state,
with knowledge, too, were mine as thine and in them gloated I. No less a
king because, forsooth, the maid they chose for him—thy sire—was not thy
dam.

“I was and am no slave. A 'trader' was my sire. One of that land ye
speak of as a cloud, or mist, so far away it seems to you who journey
not. And scorn ye, too, its people who, born to war, in time of stress
take to them deadly moods and harbor hate, and so demand what thou dost
deem a sin—the eye for eye and tooth for tooth—adown their line for
centuries.

“He dieth!

“As the sun sinks!

“Low lies he!

“My son!

“The well beloved!

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

“The son of him beloved in my youth and loving me till beauty fled.
Farewell!”

Her chant was finished, sank she on the threshold. Passed her soul.

The secret, kept so well by them who, awe-struck heard, no seeming break
in line occurred; and thus the prince born of the sinning line reigned
long reigned well.

The sun had set ere called the gods the soul of him, the king, to realms
of peace.

And double sorrow had the people all, and double mourning, for them, the
battle slain, and for their reigning king. A monarch wise in much that
wisdom gives to thought—a purpose for the betterment of people subject
unto him. And kindly spake the nation as one voice:

"The son, now king, perchance will strive to reign with just humility,
yet fail to reach the standard of his sire."

And thus it fell.

All day, I spake, the king did linger, but at eve the mists of deep
oblivion left the sunken eye, and reaching out his arms as though to
clasp he cried:

“’Tis won! I see them meet the foe!

“Tonight Earth's sun doth set for me indeed, but subjects spring around
me on the ether planes where soul doth trend.

“My subjects sent in haste through stress of battle, yet I seek not
alone the planes, but with fitting band, a king and subjects!”

Thus he spake and died.

The third in line was he. His sires brave and wise. His son no traitor
to ancestral grasp of power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. The destruction of Atlantis. Activities of the
inhabitants on the morning the island sank into the ocean](smoa25)
