[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa06)  [Next](smoa08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

### CHAPTER V

*Other inventions of the Atlantians. The science of Ellipse of Sound*.

They measured grains of metal by the weight of rule and caught the
secret of another metal still; ’twas made by so compounding several
metals, that there stood forth a wondrous slab of lightness and of
gloss, on its bright surface, golden slab it seemed, the characters were
carven so to represent the objects one might wish to hold in thought, as
well as characters denoting time and substance, journeyings, reigns of
various kings and deaths of nobles, criminals. All writ so fair upon the
gleaming stuff by chiseling, and pleasure brought to science's laws and
rules could never be surpassed.

This metal wore not neither rusted, nor yet cleft in particles, but
stood superb throughout the ages; aye, ye could see it still if ye,
perchance, could raise the block of stone which means the temple wall;
and lying prone, or standing where first set would be this tablet; aye,
would hundreds be as as fair as any page from master's hand today.

Components for "cement," ye speak, were understood as now, and firm and
smoothe rose many a palace wall made of the sand and slime—"bitumen,"
ye. Pebbles were, too, employed in building. Of colors unknown to you
cold people of the North. Aye, shells so turned by flexity of carbon gas
that stone they seemed and set in pillars’-walls. The secret of the
priesthood, understood by few, to crystallize or "petrify" all things of
nature. None that secret took to Egypt, lost.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Aye, even blossoms could they so solidify. A difficult but certain task
to them who understood; and these, too, live beneath the feet of things
that walk and swim—the monsters of the deep.

"Sea onion" made in cups like ivory seemed when petrified. The "kelp"
they wove in nets so strong a "shark" could scarcely rend. Aye, dipped
in liquid made by science's rules made perfect in its toughening
quality, retaining color, shape, the all which nature gave with added
worth.

From bones of certain fish—the "shark," the "gar," they made them
weapons in the early-crudest age; such ivory as ye seldom see because
the seeming, worthless bones by simple method long ago employed. A bath
in nitrate was compounded, though they who made knew not a name for that
one simple liquid of which their fathers held the knowledge since
earliest dawn of race.

A bath in sunshine, laid on rock which held a property those men of
earliest dawn ne’er knew held values, but a certain instinct told them
of its worth to harden when in contact with another, foreign matter.
Such the work of earlier and of later day that held the hands and minds
of old Atlantis’ sons.

A happy custom sprang to life in that past day—the custom of so reaping
sound from out the "silence," ye, that melody was brought to ear.

Old instruments are found today which people know not nor can speak
their use, and little dream they gleaned the strong, vibrative force of
Nature's laws which are exact and reproduction sometimes a work that art
may win. The tissue, clear and strong as gold, doth melt to Time's hot
touch, but shape of frame have ye in "museum," lauded as some great
pedestal, staff, "the origin of looms," perhaps, but never music
instrument. Yet so it was.

When breezes strong, salt and full charged with

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

deep vibrations borne from far in circles, as vibrations trend, smote
the sheet of luminated composition—silk and metal particles—they made a
rhythmic melody of worth which sages studied to determine storm forecast
or fate of sun-smote country, passing of a storm upon the desert,
peoples on a raid, the nearness of a foe, while all swung to a tune
remote or near as circles broken did denote the foreign body in the
rhythmic whirl of vibratory coil; for Circle is Eternity! Great master
stroke! Completeness.

These the words that God doth change by naught in Nature nor through all
His laws!

A simple mind determined all for man to ponder on. The son of statesman
sitting where the shade made happy bower, had watched the waves and
drawn from out the mind realm, through the eye, a force of wondrous
discernment, power. The structure which he builded, with the help of
sage, to catch the circle's action long did want completion.

Suddenly, at dawn the sunlight on the water made the mark that smote the
power with which to grasp, and all was plain to him.

Ellipse of light. The motes of atmosphere. The current on the dampened
surface of the sheets of glass took form before his eyes. The science of
ellipse of sound was born! Made perfect by a law well known to mariners
of steering by the gurgle of the waves ’gainst rock. A tongue all nature
owns.

Discernment taught them then the proper stuff to weave to catch the
sound *in form*. Attraction well was studied, and the shape born in
their mind was emulated. Circle made of floss so delicate it seemed the
gossamer of the spider's house, yet strength was there. A metal in the
sand which made the glass soon told its certain worth by testing.

Strands of glass enwoven with the silk—a sensitive

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to sound which draws (casts) atmosphere and *dryness* points to
*source*. A movement breaks the rhythm, ear well trained catches the
weight of volume—shape of volume—thus the law is read. Long years of
study taught the distance. Near, a medley; far a rhythmic murmur of the
chords, the distance for such sounds did he determine by examination.

Sent he boats afar or near which brought to bear a clang of shields and
spears, great shouting, all that might disturb, and when the record
smote the sheet enwound about a staff of glass he marked the distance to
the point where rested fleet, and thus determined distance readily.

The men of that lost land were thinkers. Thought is born in brain which
long doth feel the pressure of a word spake with a grain of wisdom; thus
it holdeth meaning on which pondering bringeth great results, for like
all growths it clingeth to the source, and Source is nurtured in the lap
of Age, and thus doth drink of substance which promotes a germ that
breeds yet other thoughts that makes a garland of the knowledge
scattered through the matter of a mind.

And so it was those men of "lost Atlantis" learned to fashion instrument
to cast their thoughts by delving into matter of the brain; it drew such
atoms as did smite and yet again cast forth the word to them who waited.

Suddenly the thought did come to one who long had delved in brain-lore,
its forces, all that makes a stroke of will of other methods; for a
stroke of thought can give a world of power to them who dwell on thought
as force—as factor in the world on which ye bide—on planets where thy
kind, yet wholly not thy kind, do live a life of nearness to the
Source—to breadth—to Scope—to lightness of the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

heart which is the spring of Form set in a model made from molecules
condensed and cell besprinkled, yet with purpose, law and reason.

Nurtured through the ages by that great Force which is the Spring of
Life that buildeth worlds and maketh moods from out the work-shop of a
Mind so vast that it doth hold the great immensity of "space" within its
bounds. And like the insects swarming round seem planets, world, the
All.

The law is simple in its workings, but, ah man! Ah, man! the spring is
set to beatings of a Heart that grew when Time was not! A Heart that
casteth life-blood to the million, million arteries of the world! That
checketh not the beatings of the hearts of men by aught that is amiss,
but is so well attuned to laws of growth that all may live, but in that
vaster Life.

That Life so vast, so full of mystery to thee that thou hast cast the
thought from out thy puny mind as something harassing and fraught with
woe; and yet the mind rejecting is attuned and liveth in the fullness
and the warmth of that so well attuned and perfect Heart.

The law of the beginning none may know; but law of Life on ether planes
we drink, who stand bereft of "body" and where mind and shape of soul
are formed of ether-force magnetic, which may pierce all substances and
yet be soft to feel the moods of sadness in the one it loves.

It penetrates the brain with sense of brain to thee unseen, and yet,
that force of brain unseen by eye is stronger far than bands of brass ye
weave! And ye, who by the flesh are bound to earth, may drink the higher
knowledge through the soul, if so ye live the Soul is recognized and
questioned as a thing apart from Mind.

All better promptings cometh from the soul. All

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

evil whispers are the lower self, yet welded are the soul and
earth-mind, kin, and yet are severed by the sense of God, ye call for
want of name to designate the vast—the mighty—all pervading Force, which
entereth every form born from the womb of mother. Blessed state, for she
is co-creator, nurturer with the One we name with reverence and awe.

That One so subtly held to self yet casting out the sparks of Life and
Knowledge. Growth and reason's flow, yet ne’er depleted. Wondrous birth
of Time and forces which we read not, yet they lie about us giving unto
each a spray of force.

Not in fullest power doth Nature fill the form of man, else Man were but
a senseless block whose shape and subtle sense, attuned to law of growth
alone, were all his heritage, but atoms rarefied build up the form which
is the plan of soul. These atoms hold the essence of a Life. God-All-in
greatest portion.

Such is Man. Built of the sentient matter from the stars—the work of
sunbeams—ether held in leash by strong electric force. Of tide-play of
the Moon the creature formed from stroke of Potency which lies within
its center and its growth-realms.

Such is Man—the man of clay, all imbued with life which is the motive
force. The Soul—that subtle spring which beateth out the numbered days
and years, and draws to higher Soul by love inborn through its
soul-birth, biddeth man to hold the thought that divine himself is he,
and that he may drink the nectar of the thither spheres which bringeth
strength to soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Atlantian knowledge of creation's laws. Origin of the
priesthood. Authority of the priests.](smoa08.md)
