[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa16)  [Next](smoa18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### CHAPTER XV

*Origin of the Mongolian race. Kling, from Atlantis, tempted*.

Atlantis held no kings who warred upon the land thou names, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) for they were wise and as allies held the
people near and far nor yet desired war where peace could give all that
they asked.

They knew the law of greed, and this they read with eyes so well attuned
to higher moods that all was wisely done, and Mercy tempered Greed.

Those yellow forms thou namest first came to shape, and soon a nation
formed, in that dim morn when in the time of dearth Atlantis drew her
bread supply from plains now rank with growth of trees—with bloom that
cloys the sense, where serpents twine amid the broad, lush leaves, and
beasts prowl greedily among coarse reeds which stand where once great
grains of maize did grow.

A people dark, but lacking not in brain, lived where the river which
knows fleet of boats for commerce laves the banks of slime; yet once
upon those banks grew grain to feed the world. And thither sent Atlantis
men of trust to barter what the smiths did beat from gold, or yet those
pictures rare wrought in the metal fair ye name upon the scroll, and yet
not so exact in every point of worth, for it still held another added
part which saved the metal for the tooth of Time to gnaw and yet not
crumble. Aye, I give the method when the hour hath struck.

One man whom king Arman Dorth sent to hold

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

commercial speech with people of that land was Kling. A wise and crafty
and far seeing one, who bore him wife and babe with train of slaves. And
as he bartered for the filling of his galley's vast, a crafty spokesman
of the land of grain held thus his ear:

"Oh man of worth," spake he, “the plains lie to the northward in the sun
that thou couldst people with thy slaves and kin and garner greatest
wealth. Wild camels prowl o’er sands whose richness, when the river
drinks the drouth, will yield thee wealth of grain like this we hold.
And where the ooze of rivers ply the soil great grains, whose whiteness
mocks the bloom of lilies, grow.

“Let us depart. Take store of grain and make a nation all our own; thou
king, I lord of finance to thy house; and thus in time the world shall
wonder at our courage and our wealth, and people thrive where now alone
the night bat flies and night beasts prowl.”

Then he from Atlantis shore spake slow: “I value much thy trust in me,
but kindred have I none. None have I save these I bear in carven
device—wife and child; for I am but a waif of Ocean. All save I went
down in galley.

“I alone am left of four score souls. My father of the plains, my
mother, brother, sisters—all, alas! and lesser ties did break in that
wild siege of Nature ’gainst mankind.”

Spake one: “Thou shalt know a people all thine own ere thou goest hence
to that, unseen, far land which shadows people, and where light that
laves doth draw its glow and worth from out a Heart that once was all
when Earth revolved about a central Sun that held the Life-spark.
Nothing else was there.

“Take thou wives of this, my land, and bear with

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

her thou now namest wife to that far country. In secret go we. Of the
coffers of this state hold I the key, and we depart with store
sufficient for our needs.”

He pondered, Kling, the man of varying moods, was tempted, fell! The
stores ne’er reached that isle where he as wanderer met and loved the
one who mother of a nation did become, and lives again on earth,
revered, in shape on strange and battered jar which sheddeth incense
o’er the worshippers who live and die, give place to other hordes.

Aye, Kling did turn within his mind these promptings of the one who
learned of growth of nations by much study. Knew the worth of power, and
long had held in ample cave such "goods" as he had pillaged through the
years of his high office.

Kling this crafty one had named as chief. "For," argued he, "the chief
hath but the word, the power to bind with reason. I hold power in keys
that lock and unlock all the coffers great the state doth own. An empty
title tempts me not, for matter not what I am called. Praise is an empty
casket. Gold doth fill the mind with fairest visions; in their midst the
one who owneth gold is shrined."

And thus began their journey secretly. At night the ships set out for
northern point well known to the advisor. Many days both long and weary
sailed they until that point was reached. Their ships they bartered to
squat men with craft for beasts, for food and for safe conduct to the
kingdom's boundary.

At last the boundary reached, the caravan's great beasts went crashing
through the forests' rim which bordered on the desert. Keen, alert rode
spearsmen to the rear as to the front, for in that day the world teemed
with fierce ones who sought but slaughter.

Mankind is restless. None may taste the joys of peace while in the body.
Earth must fade from

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

mortal vision ere the mind is well prepared to grasp the note of peace.
And thus the heart of man turns fierce when long balked of adventure.

Interruption is the spur in side of beast which brings forth thought of
slaughter; and the tribes inhabiting the land through which they passed
made protest—pricked by spleen; and greed was also born through visions
of the state the well-born plunderers did affect, and men were made bold
by trespass, fit excuse for war.

The hordes hung long upon the footsteps of the caravan, and once
attacked where desert met the trees which hid the wild assailants; but
their mode of warfare being crude they fell an easy prey to those swart
spearmen on the great brute's flanks perched arrogant. So peace at last
was won and safety held.

Kling's thoughts were wavering still on his forsaking that fair isle—his
home, on deeds of kindness at the hand of her, the foster mother, old
and sore beset with ingrate children of her blood; on him—the patriarch
Atlantian, who had held his hand that day the storm-cast lad lay weeping
sore, with bruised limbs and heart that ached for them who sank in that
wild storm which cast him forth upon the harbor of the fruitful isle.

And she, his wife, had father, mother there, beneath whose roof her rosy
childhood passed, and from whose sheltering arms he had decoyed with
promises of love unfailing as the gods!

Sore beset with memories did Kling glide forth from out his tent at
night and paced the sands, unmindful of the eyes which gleamed and
glowed, where hillocks vast held long-haired brutes that fought to
death. One night he wandered far and halted in surprise, for in the
starlight, making

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

hideous moan, lay form of man with speech he once had known.

"Ah, son!" so spake the creature, tattered, long of hair and beard, a
thing of skin which tightly clung to bone—"My son, why fearless wander
on the steppes where prowls the tiger that doth live by blood, and
serpents, which do sting the prisoned soul to Light? So young, so
fearless, who art thou, I pray?" The voice spake low, Kling fell unto
his knees.

“Ah, Father! Stranger! Man with tongue that draws from out the chambers
of my mind the mark of speech like unto them who made my life a heaven
when boyhood held my form! My father thus did speak, my mother sweet,
with eyes aslant and sparkling, sang fond lays in this, thy tongue which
then was mine own tongue.

“Whence cometh thou? Do the gods cast down to earth such self-neglected
ones as thou to sight appearest? Or from the sands send up the nether
gnomes such manhood to the beasts that prowl and sting?”

And, in a voice as feeble as the sigh of wind across the plain when
first is born the mists of eve, the stranger made reply: “I am the last
of a lost clan. Though lost to men of other lands we held in kinsmen's
bonds till came dissension.

“My brothers one by one, with followers, set to reach again our land
that always far and far away did seem; then famine smote those
lingering, and thirst and pestilence. Thus all were lost to history of
the World, for none save I survived.

“The others' fates through years I know not, nor shall know till I have
passed! For Death is nigh, but He, my people's God, will gather to
Himself the scattered shards and make again a mighty tribe

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

if so He wills; but I shall seek the sky ere this be done.

“I bore the name of Asher; I knew thy father, for I feel the touch of
mind with meaning in this hour. Thy father was my kinsman. Side by side
we fought in battle. Love touched both our hearts, its rosy finger
pointing to the same sweet face, vet he, not I, was chosen by the god to
claim the one who bore thee.

“He to other land from our far home set sail in galley manned by many
oars. I watched them sail—those brothers who with me had wandered
far—and then turned I and mine our faces to the eastern sun, intent on
seeking burial place, for to this end doth man forever trend.

“The tribes beset us; reft us of our instruments, our beasts, our women.
Driven thus to seek but food for sustenance for our worn bodies, not of
North or South thought we, but wandering on and on we set at last our
feet upon the desert confines.

“Some of the tribe died early, stung by serpents. Others followed,
lingering wanly, clung to life till fell disease had claimed, as I have
told. I, last of all, was left as though the life which had imbued my
form refused to lift itself to kindred ether.

“Long years passed by. I counted not their flight, for I have scorned to
measure Time as man may count, but brain hath wove its stories; brain
conjectured. Brain hath teemed with products of a state so grown to fit
conditions that it felt no woe in loneliness.

“Thus I read the stars. Have peered into the lives of things that prowl
and gnash white fangs at all save of their breed. To me an open book the
weather's moods. I learn of tempests, sand storms, days to come. I
learned to crush with foot, all bared, the deadly head and yet remain
unharmed.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

“Low at my feet creep wounded beasts; the young that whimper at
desertion of their dam beside my door are fed. (If door, indeed, be
skins from thorny rod suspended.)

“Now doth the body shrink and soul look forth, I read of future methods
which shall be employed by thinkers wise in many crafts and arts in ages
yet to come. I read, alas! my earth-eyes soon must close, and soul be
borne to strange and brilliant planes where sense of touch, they taught,
is dead, and sight alone and voice and hearing shall so linger one
forgets that Earth is his no more.

“And yet I read of earth's strange change. Of people crowding steppes
where now the sand alone doth move to mood of wind, or agitation of the
globe, or law that doth prevail and which is life! And thus these sands
shall move by drops of dew into a mass of blackness. Blades of grass
shall cover all, and beauteous blossoms.

“All is writ so plain upon a parchment swinging in the 'space' where
sunbeams, making big the tiny dust-speck, laugh at man's all futile
grasp, for growth is all about us. This I read in days so long, with
solitude alone to call my friend, companion, that the heart stood still
with dread lest Night and Sleep and Death might never fall!

“I read thy purpose. *Read*, and for long days I watched and waited for
thy coming. Get thee hence when I have passed and to the northward turn
thy face to solitude; and where long stretches of green reeds wave broad
raise thou thy tents.

“In time a city vast shall spring of people all thine own. A race of men
adhering to thy teachings through all time. A race of cunning craftsmen,
skilled in arts, shall rule. The world at large apart shall view with
keen surprise.

“Behold, thou art the son of him I loved full

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

well, who hath communed through soul since that wild day when, reft of
body, lying on the sands he *fled in speech to me!* And I have woven
thoughts as strands to draw to me thy presence, son of him once loved,
of her I loved, but later, she—the bone of strife that brought me hence!

“I wander from my purpose through this speech and, weaker growing,
cannot hope to tell my secret—secret of the desert. Wild the barren
plain where Death stalks white and dread! Aye, even here with none to
peer at me, I hold my secret cuddled to my heart!

“In yonder cave it lies. The new day dawns soon. Hold thou my hand till
it's appearing, for the chill of night is yet supplanted by another
thrill that loosens cords and muscles, rends the bonds and frees the
dove that nestles in my breast. To freedom, dove, which is a soul!

“And ere it flieth take, my son, this talisman. Hand loosen! soon
thou’lt know the touch of gold no more! Why clingeth thou?”

And feebly, in the hand of Kling he laid a bauble, once worn by her he
loved—the mother of the man who knelt beneath the sky, red-stained with
hint of dawn, nor knew his history would cling to centuries.

“Take thou the path that wanders from this tiny spring and by a rock,
all whitened, seek the long, loose hanging of my portal. Pass within and
’neath the stone which makes the inner threshold find thou that which
thou shalt hand adown the years.

“That which the myriad eyes of nations read. That which shall dictate
unto kings, that crowns shall bow to, Death himself divert.”

He passed as wandering sunbeams smote the rocks and sand and called the
serpents from their sleep and sent to lair the graceful leopard. As he
spake so Kling indeed performed.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

The hiding place gave forth a priceless store. Long histories of peoples
passed of whom no other trace was held. Of people to the westward, where
great temples rose, where sons had set them forth to find a land more
fitted to their needs. Of those who perished on the great sea flight, of
others of the tribe who now abode neath Orient sun. His brothers all in
speech and mode of thought, and mode of harmony in song.

And yet they stood apart from alien tribes. Were strangers in a land
where strangers sought commingling with the nations at their door. Would
stand apart, a race intensified by thought and custom from the
centuries’ line for ages yet to come.

Marked were they by the hand of isolation. Strong the will still binding
to the country left afar. A people chosen for their stolid worth to
self. A chosen race to hold tradition strong and mark in time the
history of the world. His race that lives today! <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11)

There stored, the forming of a government made plain. The law of Life—of
Death—the full, deep thought born of communion with the unseen world
through sense attuned to Reason. Toil of many years was there bound
stone to stone or traced on skins as custom held that age.

And to the North the wanderers bore, fulfilling prophecy of him who
learned in solitude the lessons for the world to glean and make it
wiser, better, all fulfilled as he had said who in the desert died at
stroke of day. The secret learned, the story told in teachings to the
young adown the years.

Ah, Kling! thy monument still stands, though Time hath strove to
crumble; yet the proof is there and in great tomes the speech of other
days speaks

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

potently. Thy blood but passed to younger rulers. Down the line hath
History handed something of the tale I tell with lips that lie not,
neither do pervert, from the first sentence.

Nations grow but slow, yet thou hast grown, O Nation, of such people as
ne’er change, to fill the crannied spaces of the plain and overflow to
seas. The land which teemed with plenty at its birth hath fallen. In the
wilds and ’neath the sands are hid vast temples where stored knowledge
lies. And yet they shall endure when brighter lands have darkened—shall
become a star of destiny to nations that have scoffed at thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[110:\*](smoa17.htm#fr_10) Mongolia.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[118:\*](smoa17.htm#fr_11) Chinese.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The first Mongolian city. Mention of
Yucatan](smoa18)
