[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa02)  [Next](smoa04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# Selestor's Men of Atlantis

### CHAPTER I

*Growth of an island. Its location. Physical features and peopling*.

Atlantis was once a speck blown on the ocean's waves, a spot upon the
foam, a floating nut that gathered to itself still other flotsam through
the aeons gone and grew as all hath grown.

At first a clod of earth on which no life existed, but the birds of air
found rest for weary wings, and sore distress of thirst was quenched in
the low pools which caught the water from a weeping sky. Wrecked ships
gave matter for its shape and size, and elements in motion added much
towards the building of that ocean isle—a grain from out the granary of
the deep.

Thus long it floated, sent out roots and sprays down to the coral of the
deep sea bed and anchored; solid was it, not else could it have arisen
from that dread wall of water in which it was engulfed.

The aeons are the builders in God's building mart, and gave it size and
beauty, all that land e’er gathered or land needeth. Fairer far it was
than mine <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md) which shows its wastes of
sand unsightly; blossoms on that isle were touched with rainbow tints as
fair as those where ether makes the planes which ye call "Paradise."

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

The seeds of fruits and trees were wafted from that land named Africa,
and gems which made much wealth were once in galleys borne, and boats
once torn to fragments by the wind and waves had given treasure to the
ocean isle.

The gold had formed in God's great crucible where matter formeth by a
method man cannot grasp but through the aeons, for no speck of time can
so create that man may turn and say: "Behold the wonders of the earth
and sea which have been formed in this brief span of time!"

Volcanoes there rose pointed, high, through that fixed law of earth
revolvement known to them who study earthy substances. Hot from friction
of a mingled soil the growth is brief and thus a passage gives
throughout the cone; gasses then are formed through suction, friction of
the ether and the water force and all that activates the law, or task,
and liquid from the solid thus is born, as steam from the heart of solid
substance forms.

The cooler surface of the earthy crust checks spreading principle and
thus, condensed, the vapor rises, bursts the bonds of earth and makes a
channel for the heated stone and moulten substance-lava.

Like to all growths of short duration, these volcanic mountains; brief
their beauty as a Summer's morn when all is calm, before the thunder's
crash bursts fully, rending face of sky, distorting, piling high its
clouds of blackness.

And thus had grown Atlantis off the Western coast of Africa one long
day's rowing if the winds were fair and waves beat not.

The girth of that lost land was thrice, mayhap, of this strange spot
thou callest "State," <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) and every span
was made a nest for seed, or to up-bear some

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

work of man's deft art, or yet of forests grand with growth of giant
trees.

It rose a jewel on the ocean's breast and not one link of land to land
was cast, but he who sought the shore of alien spot must journey in the
galleys pierced for oars where slaves sat dumbly rowing all the day,
chained, numb with labor or went down to death with shackles smiting and
with curse on lips that man dared chain his fellow-God's own son as
he—the brother—who was held as slave.

The miles which lay between the isle and Africa were, by computation of
the law thy nation knoweth, five hundred stadia; it none the less the
refuge was for persecuted men who risked their lives in fragile barks
and every refugee was welcomed to that isle.

They built them homes and throve upon its shores, for there was need of
many men to till, to weave the golden reed, to build, at first but
crudely, then the costly piles that crumble, crumble where the fish
desport in sullen pleasure and where bright shells mark a spot within
the shadows of the deep.

The verdure on the island's plains from Africa was borrowed. The people
of the isle, ere reason taught or one had learned a government to form,
made war upon the tribes of that great country—in that day more great
than any land of earth, vast temples rose where forests crowd the soil
and cities mocked the marts ye view today.

The people of Atlantis, question ye? A boat once drifted from the shore
of "Italy"—then a barbarous land of murderous men who only held them
higher than the brute, for those who knew them ranked them equal to the
lower shape.

Such people drifted, reft of sail and oar and cast by sea upon the
fertile isle remained to people and to build in time, when generations
passed who owed their lives to this one boat of fishermen and maids.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From wreck of
ships that drifted there to beat, perchance, in staves upon the shore,
they added to their nation, to their grain and to their flocks, which
but a bleating lamb began.

The men of old Atlantis held the form of men today, save that the skull
did thicker bone growth show and slanting was each forehead. Shape
designed to change as ages rolled along.

Aye, beautiful the women of that race; lithe formed and pale the olive
tint, nor faces black did mark the race and hair and eyes were dark as
bird that croaks complaint.

A people born to look on God's great world as His fair gift must turn to
Him their constant thought, and thus a people born to worship they.

Long isolation from the world doth breed much thought, and thought is
builder, thus they grew a people none might rival.

With scorn ye learn my people were descended from that race begat by
fishermen and wanton maids—but twain. Yet thus I speak: no shame is in
my heart, for all God's creatures hold the spark of lust and only mind
directeth what the lower will deems needful. Estate and name have had no
place in God's creative law.

Atlantis first was peopled by the sons of they who drifted, but through
the centuries came an alien horde, and yet the Government observed the
purity of strain and none held power save those born on the isle, or
when a custom held, by few observed, of taking foreign offspring if it
pleased the mood or sight and giving birthright. This was done according
to the law of priest, not King who made no laws which did conflict with
old observance of his sires from the beginning—first—of Government and
code of laws held sacred by the king in line unsullied.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

The traders lived apart if alien to Atlantis, such there were in
numbers; a people none did love save their own kind. A crafty sect from
over sea; a set of men with faces whiter far than their Atlantian lords,
but in their brain was craft which knew no check if so a purpose came
into that brain.

Long haired were they, with beards that flowed into their knees; their
women beautiful and tender-nurtured, all unused to toil. They came from
where the sun set. Western land they called "home." A race begot by
zealots for a system all their own, nor brooked the customs of their
neighbor lords nor yet their speech. Their language teemed in syllables,
and names cut short with consonants were theirs.

Their God a unity of forces—matter typified by instinct and
intelligence. They flesh abhorred as food, though as the centuries
passed the custom grew to eat of flesh as the Atlantians; thus, their
early whim in food forgot, they did excell in bartering meat of quality
far purer than their neighbors knew or sold.

A care was theirs that animals they slew should bear the stamp of health
and symmetry, for their contention was the food one ate gave to the body
like condition.

They burned to God such matter as was fit—a simple sacrifice of flowers
or fruit was theirs like unto the Atlantians. Their priests were men of
mind, yet simple in their speech, nor arrogant like the Atlantian
priests—all arrogance and consciousness of a power none should admit
save in their soul.

Nay, not of theirs but of Atlantian origin the cross. A symbol in the
temples to that god they designated "Ram." Aye, it was born in mind of
one who woke to consciousness of God's creative force, not form, and
also man's great part in distribution of the gifts of Him—the Mighty
One. A crossing of God's work by man's to make a perfect whole.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The symbol of the stars so set in form bespake God's nearness to the
land He had created; they taught God's nearness and man's art to so
protect that with which He had studded Earth's great plains and hills. A
symbol sacred; near the Throne it brought man's consciousness, so, when
the cross shone brightest all were joyous; peace and plenty it bespake.

Yea, thus it was and is unto this day; a cross betokens God's great
power and man's adaptation of material given for his uses by that One
who set the stars on high in form of cross.

The Atlantian language nearer thine <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md)
than any other tongue extant. Absorbing characters that learned were by
man self-taught through wisdom of the soul. Aye, like unto the Greek,
perhaps, in measure, for the people of those isles but spake the tongue
of their ancestry—all Atlantian as they were.

The characters for speech, at first but crude, soon caught the grace of
every art employed by those deft fingered people; greater far than any
nation that has trod God's earth since their grand day was set.

The characters? Aye, less Greek than Magyr were they, in their infancy
but crude. The picture of some object meant emotion also pictured as a
human form in contact point of similarity with need, or grief or pain.

Old records hid neath sand shall yet be brought to light, absorbing men
of nations near and far, which show ye all I mention; plates of metal
made by skillful smith by skillful chemist's rule.

Thou asketh for proof of characters? This I show as taught me or as eye
of soul beholds: A man in drunken frenzy, and all helpless first I show
as

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

on the tablets drawn, or cut by tempered "steel" the greater was the cup
he held, the grapes full big, extolled the strength of wine which could
a man subdue.

A sickness of the heart was well explained. Though man might smile to
cover his intense but hidden grief, there ever rose before his eyes the
image of his bleeding heart inscribed upon the tablet, or the scroll, in
pictured form significant; thus was all conveyed to mind of they who
sought to read.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[11:\*](smoa03.htm#fr_0.md) Egypt.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[12:\*](smoa03.htm#fr_1.md) State of Washington.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[16:\*](smoa03.htm#fr_2.md) English.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The government of Atlantis. Educational methods.
Peopling and customs.](smoa04.md)
