[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa15)  [Next](smoa17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

*The death of Prince Osiris’ bride—Albirothisis*.

Osiris sought that farther border from the fear of swift and stern
pursuit.

A thousand galleys did comprise Atlantis’ fleet; and so had he no hope
to reach that land to which their thoughts had turned if so the king
directed men to follow, barge on barge and barque with barque.

The fleet could overtake through force of oar, for rested twelve while
twelve did furious ply the long day through, and when the night had set
they also plied, nor lacked a light to so direct their stroke, that
distance, too, was gained.

In that past age, as now, the cage that swung at prow did hold a
fearsome bird which shot forth from its eyes a light that mocked the
stars. Full half a mile it showed the pathway of the sea. And "farther
still! still farther!" was the loud command of him, Aamhotep, when the
Nile bore refugees upon its breast. "Still up and up."

The desert passed, the plains which later hid their city's wealth. For
storms of sand have filled the arches broad and hid the dome, the wall
of brittle spar, the pride of King Osiris. It lieth deep where sands
still drift.

The strength of numbers stemmed the cataract. Philae was reached—a point
of rock-set land. "We tarry," spake the king, "for she doth feel the
stress of flight—our queen."

And so they bode a space where barren rocks

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

mocked hunger. Bode till she had passed—the loved one, virgin wife of
him, the king.

Alas! I see the picture as ’twas drawn for me. Slaves were so stilled at
thought of sorrow smiting, that no voice rose in a wail. The night
breeze flapped the standards borne at prow of anchored galleys, barques.

The galley-slave lay still with eyes fixed on the stars and thought,
perchance, beyond was rest from toil.

She lay—the loved, the beautiful, the blessed, her beauty fading as the
rose leaf dies; the film slow creeping o’er her jet black eyes, her
hands all listless lying clasped in her lord's. "I go," she murmured.
“Go from hence. But thou, beloved, shalt dwell long years upon this ball
called Earth. Long years where palms wave moodily above the spot where
rests the urn that doth contain my ashes.

“One shall come at last and thou shalt her behold and dream thou lovest;
what care I? for in that higher world I shall be crowned queen and still
be thine. She is of earth for thee, I for Eternity.

“Down near the rapids where the slaves tugged long upon the chain of
galley let me sleep—’neath carven shape—to meet the eye of man long
centuries hence. Let sleep the semblance. I shall watch the night fold
wings above the spot, and smile and keep close vigil over thee, my
loved, my lord, when in a casket clasped with golden bands the all shall
lie in ashes that thy earth-mind deemest that thou lovest. ’Tis not so;
the state and semblance of a queen may live on earth, but *I* am of the
stars!

“I go to keep the watch of one who wanders from her earthly home to
claim her heritage, in courts of ether built, where One holds sway in
mind and love and all the senses. There shall come a day, far distant,
when thou, too, shalt claim thy heritage—

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

that of a throne less than the builded pile where One, whose face we may
not see, abideth.

“Down where the cataract doth lull the sense of vastness and of
loneliness thou, too, shalt rest—thy mortal part—thine ashes by my urn,
for Earth hath, too, her heritage and claims her children. Brittle toys
they seem beside the splendor drawn from Light and Life, from whom the
soul descendeth.

“Let my husk—the mortal part—be born upon the barge thou calledst ours
in that day we two were wed. That barge a gift from him—my father in the
island home.

“Down, down the river sweepeth. I shall be no more of earth. Mourn not.
The stars at night shall speak to thee of me, and He—the One whom lesser
gods would thrust from out the temple home, holds safely.

“Mourn never thou for me, oh Lord, so loved the day seems night when
from my side thou strayest!

“One shall come at last who in thy arms shall lie and down the line of
history be absolved from sin, but her thou lovest never, for the tie of
soul to soul is held between us, born on heights where Nature readeth
Law at *first*, breathed from the lips of Majesty, the king God of the
gods.”

She passed. A fitting splendor marked the day they piled the wood, the
spice on carven throne, and over all was cast a moulten mass which
caught the flames that leaped unto the clouds and bore the soul from
husk, they then believed.

Her ashes in the urn of golden metal stands far down amid the rocks that
circle round the spot. A carving of her face, divine in love and youth,
still holdeth semblance of the one who died—young Albirothisis, child of
old Amsolabis—that grandest

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

minister, who ruled the king though meek in mien and seeming ruled by
him.

No history gives her name, yet shall it live on page of alien people
side by side with his—Osiris, King of Egypt first.

The spot where she had died Osiris sought to shield from vulgar purpose.
Thus they digged a channel deep, made island of that spot where first
their feet in Egypt rested. "Barren be the spot, and lone" he spake,
"where I bereft did mourn in this strange land the one I loved."

And down the graceful river moved the fleet and builded grandly where
the cataract marked the sacred spot—the tomb of one who passed—nor wife
nor maid of him—Osiris. Yet so dear he held her memory that the years
fled by and left him aging ere he held his hand to maiden, speaking:
"Come to me as bride."

The sand still drifts and, underneath, the urns with ashes of a king and
queen hold court. Deliverance is at hand and all the world shall drink
the history of the king who mourned a score of years for one they named
his queen.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Philae asketh thou? Aye, such of old bore mark in that dim day of
numbers. Yet no wall doth stand, but farther down are palace walls of
marble buried deep in sand. And one hath shown an architrave of white,
embossed marble writ with figures of the gods they worshipped in
Atlantis.

Thus it is the past leaps out, a ghost of olden time, of time remote. Of
time that held the arts, as thou today dost know, with added numbers
wrought in gold. That wealth of stone, of metal made from

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

brass and stone fine ground and other matter, held at bay old Time and
lieth yet up-bearing arch.

A statue wrought to life is also of that metal. Statue made to show the
features beautiful of him—Osiris—never found as mummy. False the world
hath breathed! Osiris lieth in his rock-bound tomb below Abydos; thus ye
speak the name; his hands outspread to bless his followers, his loved
wife beside him, wrought in stone.

False the word that husk of him doth meet the eye embalmed and seen in
walls of glass! Ah, no! such is not nor has been. Osiris’ tomb is hid
from prying eye. His generals stand at portal, sword in hand, to guard
the sacred dead! Three sculptured forms shall meet the eye of
man—Osiris, Aamhotep, Usertsen, wrought so well that later art seems
crude.

A casket wrought of cypress bound with gold held once the ashes. Egypt's
art to hold the husk was later yet employed, for in Atlantis ashes but
remained of forms once loved. Yea, the spot which holds is near to man;
is bound by rock and sand. Yet priceless store still lies where camels
browse and other creatures stamp in angry mood, and toiling man seeks
rest from burning sun.

The temples raised by skill are ruins now, but here an arch, a pillar
shattered there, shows still the wondrous colors. Cleft the marble base,
and sculptured leaf is broken, yet there lies a wondrous store for man
who dreams, and dreams above, and seeks to shape a history from the
blocks that teach of peoples once so versed in arts that other ways seem
baubles set by gems.

Great vases wrought of many-colored glass lie far beneath the bed of
hungry Nile, with histories writ in colors. Foreign form speaks loud …
of craft which mocks at any plan to imitate. Broad braids

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

tell calmly that a smith may beat, entwine, and weave his vase at will,
but bubbles blown from forms, or cords in shape, may not this day hold
wine or lotus. With the strength of gold, thus ancient vase was wove.

A quaintly fashioned volume bound with gems and made from jasper, block
on block, so thin the words of other page show through, doth lie within
Osiris’ tomb.

On this is told the history of the flight. Shows kingly emblem. Stars
tell point of date, if so the men versed well in star-lore read. Ah, man
in husk of flesh, think not that Earth hath seen the all old Egypt's
bosom holds, for thou shalt read in language of the past a history which
doth make thee seem a child.

Atlantis thou hast sunk, but Earth doth hold today the records of thy
greatness and thy power.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Aye, where Thebes stood the camel still may browse, but parchment hid in
golden case is still intact, and wall that carven image shows of
him—Osiris—still doth stand enwrapped in sands which clog the
well-wrought lines depicting flight and subsequent events.

Aye, there is writ a volume on the arts by one named Ad-em. Such the
name they spake; none knew his origin. A mother dying at his birth, the
victim of some bold marauder; such the state of country at that age.

I know no more. And yet God's image, sometimes sore defaced, did linger
in his brain power to extent that carven lines were wonder of all ages.
And his tales thus told in stone were listened to with wonder

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

by the king who held in bonds a thousand versed in story-telling art.

In line of other digging lies this lair of wonders—objects hid by depth
of sand none yet have sought to "shovel." At the base of one great crag
another store is hid far out from water's reach; and this shall tell the
story of the Norsemen as it was told by mighty Norse invader to the old
Atlantians.

The histories of today shall lie ’neath buried earth in centuries to
come, and there shall moulder to the prying eye of them who follow, but
the stone shall give its secret to the world when volumes frail shall
crumble. Speak I thus in prophecy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Origin of the Mongolian race. Kling, from Atlantis,
tempted.](smoa17.md)
