[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa14)  [Next](smoa16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

*The flight of Prince Osiris. His Egyptian court*.

Dark was the night and still, Osiris sailed. One star alone peeped out
from somber clouds.

"A star of destiny we follow; guarding eye of god," spake she, the
virgin wife of him, Osiris. For thus he swore, that but as sister she,
until the land was reached which yet his kingdom in the future days
might be, was this young bride, the beauteous one whose name has died to
history.

Not she the "goddess" did become, but one who lived and died and lived
again and left no trace, no name save in the hearts of them who loved
her.

"Aye, the star! perchance the eye of god we follow," spake the
all-appointed king, the banished prince—the father of a line so kingly
that the world did speak with awe the names of sons and of descendants
all adown the line of Egypt's monarchs.

This was he who drew his barques, who pitched his tents upon the shore
where Philae stands, ye call. And near the spot the men of origin from
out the clouds—the first created man forms abode nor yet attempted war.

Great trunks of cypress shut the sun from faces dark, and eyes that
blazed with feeling looked with awe—with pity, too, upon the son of him
who for a beauteous face cast off the bloom of kingly tree. Yet kingly
blood will bubble in the fount and raise itself in any land. No clime
can make it sluggish, bow to taint nor sink to level of the lowly born.

Aamhotep? He was a prince who set to war a fleet at his command. All men
then bowed in honor

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

to the high born one who drew first breath in chambers of the king. For
old Osiris claimed, as soul to soul, a sister, born in wedlock, passing
fair and born in that same hour as he.

And when Osiris—king the first—did wed, the sister also laid her snowy
hand in that of consort—brother of the queen who lived a life of sweet
content and died with blessings on her lips, and swore the king, her
lord, that he would never wed, but keep her line unsullied, centered in
the son first born to them—Osiris—named as then the custom was for
father—that old king who did break his oath and wed, alas! the pagan
woman—she of that lost race who won contempt for deeds so foully done
that all looked with alarm when men of her strange land drew nigh.

Aamhotep? brave and true and tender he. A maid he wed with eyes of that
rare hue, in that young age of earth, the eyes which catch their color
from the sky. And she a waif of ocean cast ashore in shattered barque, a
royal barge emblazoned; brave with many a spear, and head of bear, and
claw of wolf, the banner token of the North.

And lashed to swivel-bench of slave, wrapped close in robe of fleece
with gems, the infant lay in arm all stiff in death's fell bonds!—An arm
that, hung with jewels, showed in wondrous shape and texture pure the
blood of kings, mayhap, froze in the inert veins.

One gem on that white, burdened arm alone was worth a monarch's
crown—one massive emerald that shone, and still doth shine if but the
light of day could strike it fair, but hid in mummy's breast it lies.

The child of sea, as sacred thing, esteemed was held in royal nursery.
Her youth the childhood of her kind who drank of pleasure and content.
No

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

daughters blessed the home of king Osiris. Sons but three to him were
early born. And she, the winsome, flax-haired maid, blue eyed, a thing
of lands where ice prevailed and storms blew fierce with cruel sting,
was held as treasure. Sacred she as gift from gods indeed.

And young Aamhotep in his early youth did love and long to wed her. The
king but smiled: "In infancy," he spake, "I wed in thought, and by the
law of Custom, the son of her—mine other—sister—half—and this strange
god-sent creature born 'mid elements I ne’er beheld. Blessed be thy
union, O my sister's son, with this loved, radiant one."

And blessed indeed was that strange tie—the child of frost and snow, the
castaway of elements, and he, the child of fire, the son of forty lords
in line so plainly marked none could dispute his claim.

And in their union winter met with summer's fierce and fervid glow, and
unto other souls in line they gave their fire, their pride, their
calmness and their grace—all that the sons of kings might claim. And
loved was Aamhotep of that young prince and kinsman, Osiris. Nor enmity
was there, the twain between, so long as breath did animate each body.

Usertsen second was in naval fleet. A minister of state, his sire, well
wed and well endowed with golden grains, and slaves and stately home.
His children like the buds about the rose. Twelve sons, three daughters
clustered 'round the knee of one who seemed a bride as yet when he, the
elder son, Usertsen, gave voice and claimed the robe a mother's hand
alone might weave.

A valiant man was Usertsen. Born a power who brought to Egypt battle
lore, and caused the Nile to broaden at command and by the work of
slaves full forty score.

He later waged upon the land called Assyria bitter

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

war; drove from its plains the kindred, people of that queen who, being
queen, brought deep disgrace upon the fairest name Atlantis knew, the
bravest king, the kindest heart that ever beat in monarch's breast.
Still others of that fleeing band did win great names among the tribes
who sought the state of war.

Great names through skill as artisans or builders did they win. One
indeed had planned the building of the king's own palace in far
Atlantis—a pile of marble, golden, fluted harp in fountain set adorned.
The columns of that palace were like the palm and palm indeed in
seeming. Notched marble at the base, but upwards, broader grown, took
color from the native tree in jasper, a stone from land afar in merchant
galleys brought unto Atlantis.

The dome created by his skill showed Moon and Stars—the Pleiades, Orion,
Mars the worshipped one, and other sparks of ether there shone down. And
in the center of one mighty dome in temple old, well builded, rose and
always rose the sun in waves of rare sardonyx; sun of gold and other
burnished metal casting out such sheen that Sun indeed it seemed.

Great garlands twined about the columns’ base; the grape with beryl
splendor, riper yet, the dusky marble. Leaves of jade in spar mocked
nature. All so well was wrought, the leaves did seem to wave at touch of
wind across the sea. The selfsame sea that sweeps above and not at base
of columns on this day!

The selfsame sea that bore the barques that night; the barques
assembling far to sea, as Day, new born, cast her first faint line
across the glistening waves in one great fleet, defying stern pursuit.

From northern point of Atlantis floated they. Some from the south, some
west, and all intent on one great purpose—fleeing from their homes to

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

build a nation unto him, the rightful heir to that stern, dotard king
who was thrust from out the palace of his birth to taste humiliation.

To taste humiliation! *he*, the son of kingly line! and she, the foreign
queen, the early slave of one who sold her to a throne, brought forth
another son to him—the lord she loathed. Behold! the wailing cry of that
young child—"usurper, hated thing" the people called—filled loud the
ears of that old, dotard sire when island kingdom melted, palace sunk to
deeps and she—the loved, the won by loss of soul, sunk down in waves'
embrace.

The luster of her braided hair befouled with slime! Her white hands
grasping sand! Her jewels mocking eyes of monstrous things that soon
would batten on the beauteous dead!

The sea doth sparkle, sun-smote, as I tell the tale.

I turned from picture of the hastening barques. The barques of men who
stern, intent, had but one object to complete; thought not of home;
thought not of ease nor luxury which fed the sense. They thought alone
of him, their prince bereft, and minds leaped out to future years and
drank of joy, of freedom and of power for him who soon would challenge
all the world, they spake.

The women of that land were brave, as well. They hushed the cry of
peevish child with words so stern that in the future years it still
remembered. "Hush! hush, my child! ’tis well; we journey from
oppression. He, our king, sits yonder in his galley, and our thoughts
are pleasant poems, for they ring to tunes of other kingdoms over which
he reigns."

And even the slaves smiled slowly, worn with toil, for haste had sore
impelled.

"Our king is young and beautiful," they sang.

“Our king is brave.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

“We journey to that land which soon shall know his power as king.”

Osiris, father, in his island palace spake all lightly as the eyes of
her, the temptress, sought his face—the subtle woman with ten thousand
wiles: "He hath departed! stole he out at night and seeks, perchance, a
land afar. And others go; his friends, his allies. The son of her, our
sister loved, our chancellors; the priests who prayed, condemned or yet
abode content to listen to the music's plaint nor exercise their minds
with matters grave.

"Depart they like the rovers of the sea! I call not back these rebels of
my line. 'The world is wide,' they speak—the sages who from far appear
through stress of elements. Ah! well! I seek no wider world than is
contained within the walls of this, thy chamber, sweet. Let them
depart!"

And so his galleys idly swung to play of chains. The slaves slept deeply
or deeply quaffed the malted draught or juice of grape, and lovers met
and mated, aired their woes; the old died, young were born and Life and
Time and atoms of the air all moved to Law.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

But thrice three years did pass ere sunk the island home. Egypt already
had become a power in war, for certain mighty tribes adhered to young
Osiris’ rule ere sunk Atlantis. This the old king learned and knew the
power his son had gained.

A city sprung as though from magic touch beside the Nile and to it came
"barbarians," in that day, and others learned from the misty west, and
from the plains which then did teem with life and energy.

And thus the court of young Osiris bore a dignity, a power and Fame
already marked it. Known was it to people of the North. Aye, thrice
three years,

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

ye call the circles which the sun doth breed, had passed when Nature
rent the spot within the bosom of the southern sea and forth belched
baleful motion, terror, scourge, and all engulfed went forth the souls
from form.

This they in Egypt read through stress and flames which lit the sky.
From planet's vortex vast a tale of horror sprang. "They go, alas! We
live," they spake. "The world doth spell but happiness for us, and ours,
at last."

Ah, Philae, thou art but an island spot upon the sluggish or yet swifter
stream, yet in the past, all dim to history lost, thou wast the
birthplace of mine ancient sires, who sleep ’neath sand that drifts and
drifts to tune of desert winds, and [jackal's](errata.htm#5) screams,
and shadows chase across the spot where feet of emperors trod all
stately!

Philae was rent from shore by slaves who cut the rock, cut sod and made
a channel where no water ran before. In carven casket midst the
mouldering specks of husk shall be revealed thy history ere this hand
that pens is stilled, and Earth may read what once the sun hath
witnessed; message old, dug from the earth, and written by the hand of
him who held the scepter first to Egypt known, Osiris—king!

Aye, was Egypt peopled when prince Osiris sought her shore. Peopled by
the descendants of a race of men who collected knowledge by the mind
alone. No graven language held, save marks to warn. This race did
pre-exist Atlantian age; full 5000 years before the fishermen did reach
Atlantis’ shore. I give thee not the number of the years exact, because
no measure for the state of day or week or years exists, and thus no
records may appear.

Yet that great race, impelled by store of thought, held well a line of
sages, if ye will, who read the law from memory as ’twas held for many
years. Made

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

records of events through will and mind and stored them in the brains of
chosen ones.

Old men taught younger. At an early age, called ten, the boy was learned
in all secret thoughts and thus his training was a source of help and
safety to the country. Great circles did uprear upon the sands which
bordered on the Nile at overflow—the time, they argued, when the
thoughts of men flowed freest.

Thus they read the law—"all nature at its flood."

Aye, men in circles sat and pondered long. Brought from the ether
streams of knowledge, which may be drawn by all if well is understood
the law. This law perfected they, and so they spake "Another word hath
come to me."

The sages numbered many hundreds. Tribes of sturdy men held sway upon
the steppes where desert sands now drift, not sea then as contended. But
all verdure clothed and fruit in clusters grew by every pool and
blossoms sprung, amid the grass so long and green that waved as waves
the sea.

Yea, many learned the method—to contain the secrets of a nation—Secrets
held as life is held, all dearly; told to none save in the council talk.
The youths appointed to this sacred task were held in bonds from birth,
nor spake to women more. Nor yet to men save on the sacred themes. But
learning, teaching, made the sum of life to these.

Thus was the history of the comet handed down the line till men who
learned to build, not dig their homes, had caught the history and
emblazoned on stone, or skin, in crevice of the rock it lay fair hidden
when my sires from Atlantis came.

I tell the tale as told to me. I read it not. The records lost to all
save in tradition as some hint in history gave. Yea, world of
disintegration. Comet, to thee, is but a ball of ether, yet the central
core,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

solidified and casting out of gasses sometimes loses in shock the
central force of rock and thus it falls to earth.

The "world" which made destruction on the steppes was but a comet force
drawn in the vortex of an older globe, akin to Moon but greater in its
bulk. It fell not all on Earth, else it were here no more as Earth, but
mass of molten strata. For, to vortex drawn, it made a wall far out of
man's research, yet such exists.

"The nether world," ye speak. Aye, so it be; beneath this world of thine
is massed a shapeless, formless mass or matter-dead. The drift, the
flux, the substance of no name, which sways at times in vapor of the
ether bulk, yet all unseen so far and far it lies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The death of Prince Osiris’
bride—Albirothisis](smoa16)
