[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa12)  [Next](smoa14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### CHAPTER XI

*Mining and minerals of Atlantis. The man who came to Atlantis from
"Spain" to study its minerals*.

Atlantis was athirst for gold which lay within her soil, and also for
that ruddy metal which abounds in strongest nitrates from the saline
trend of earth. Of these she held rich store, and men toiled deep
beneath the surface gold and dug such rare and perfect metal blocks as
man hath seldom seen.

Aye, harm was done by digging deep through centuries, for by digging,
inner fires were loosed, and wall of water seething through it bore
beneath the waves the block of land so huge and rich it seemed the home
of gods—Atlantis.

Aye, copper ye call, was buried deep, grown from a force, the sages—men
of science—taught, of pressure of the world's deep crust in other age.
The suction of the water ’gainst the oxide-gas formed crystals which
solidified to stone in substance hard and gathered by the magnet law all
other minerals held in great or less degree.

Nay, they taught that sulphur enters not the copper growth; bitumen
first in making copper stands. Aye, thus they taught; a hardened slime
expresses what I wish to give. I can employ no words they spake in other
age. Forbear to judge of all I say today in this—thy alien tongue.

The presence of its neighbor, gold, cast a shade of color on the mass.
Where gold predominates a ruddy hue is seen; where "lead," the color ye
call "peacock" shows, they spake. Blue vitriol, taught

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

they, was an essence of the copper lode, because the overflow of salts
was such in casting off when the work perfected was.

Aye, silver, too, but poor in quality, was found thereon, or in, as
always when the rock commingling with the leaden pulp, made sure by
oxides, in the dawn of growth-formation. Thus the Atlantians spake. Lead
bears the proof within itself that all its trend towards the water-force
is birthright.

Water is the first formative force of lead; water is the first of lead;
a particle of soil, admixed with finest rock so worn through action of
the law of molecules in given state doth form. The alum in the water is
the hardening property. The iodide, the melting; bitumen in the clay in
finest form, the pliable, and thus doth lead stand forth enformed by
heat which melted earth's greatest bulk long ages since.

The aeons roll along and leave behind the products of their arcs and
pressures, molten state as well. The period of the ice uncovered much,
but more is hid where man doth dig and delve to reach.

The copper mines which held the greatest worth lay on the western shore.
To East the gold on sands did lie, the grains, they called, the ocean
seemingly had washed upon the beach. In that day it was a common product
of that land, yet prized as now, for nations far brought products,
goods, to barter for the precious metal.

Ornaments were made, some beautiful, and all were prized, for instinct
seemed to recognize the purity of gold which they taught God had made of
sun-rays smiting rock that held the greatest sulphide matter. Sulphide—a
casting out from soil, drawn by the sun rays, and the kindred heat of
inner fires.

"The trend of atoms certain forms of metal make," was their philosophy.
"The heat or cold

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

makes texture. Heat enformed, a finer growth is there; by pressure
formed, a coarser grain doth show. Pure oxide ’gainst the mass (rock)
which holds strong sulphur fumes, and saline forms but crystals.

Evaporation, the first cause of rock; then stagnation followed by
decomposition produced matter partaking of both saline and acid
property. Acid from atmosphere, more pronounced in the beginning than
later age; saline through water evaporation and planetary property
brought out (which in-so-far has not been explained save by growth laws,
a property needful to the sustenance of plant and also planetary life).
Salt, etheric property, stimulus, electric. Next came hardening of rock
formation in which entered the acid and saline-making mineral.

Bitumen may be formed by interior earth fumes, or lava fumes, admixed
with the acidity in the atmosphere caused by excessive drouth.
Drouth—fervid pressure of heat destroying certain properties in the
atmosphere and in the rock at formative period, and bringing out others
which might have been destroyed, had water-force instead of heat
deployed the mass when in state of formation.

The intense, creative heat which beat upon this and other globes when
directly focussed by the sun-rays which were at that period much nearer
and the globes unprotected by haze or separate planes or systems of
ether as now exist, cannot be described by numbers—statistics—now
employed.

Such state was also a cause for mineralization; the upper and lower
fires, or inside and outside forces for heat, bringing about a state
which today, with reduced heat system, cannot be accomplished. Yea,
bismuth was known in Atlantis, as now, in conjunction with other metals.
Nor was its presence

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

detrimental to those other ores. It was there mined with copper and
lead.

Iron they claimed was formed from slough of wooden matter first. A
rustless property called simply "matter." Iron, they taught, was not
formed as other metals. Iron has two methods of formation according to
the "quality," spake they.

One, "the drift formation," comes from wooden property reduced through
decay, and when all oxides (oxides lie in wood as in metal though in
different form) were loosened and became dust property the fruit of the
world-growth and the formative growth of shale substance, akin to chalk,
took up the work and so commingling made a substance, lost to all
analysis today.

The atmosphere they did assert had much to do with the creation of
metal. The heat intense the humid character, the charring and blistering
ashes made, which, when the water was infused, in age of steam, with all
its saline worth and iodine and alum—all that water held—made mass of
iron, ye.

Look to the fiber of the newly dug iron. It is the "ashes" heap ye view,
hardened by a process Nature knows, not names. The Iodine gives color.
In the seas surrounding Earth, in days primeval, waters held the
thickening, stiffening quality of "tar," yet in less degree than that to
commerce known. Mark ye its hardness, catching all prismatic light, the
color of the iron at its best.

No theory today better fits the growth of that dark ore than the
Atlantian. Mark ye also its trend in mass or mine. A "drift" ye speak,
of snow or ashes blown, or sand, and iron was a drift in days gone by.
Days? Aeons! Cycles! all that God doth count, but man may stand appalled
and dare not think the ages in one column, for ’tis Time!

Yea, silver was there found, but not in quantities.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

Thus bismuth they contended, was more pure, for silver detracted from
its value and it cannot be found in quantities where silver
predominates. Acidity in metal, they believed, was a test that bismuth
could not be found within the radius of its growth, for acidity in metal
was bismuth's foe.

That certain acid of the ore was called "glo" a casting out as metal
hardens and coats the rock, nor is it found inside the mass. As medicine
the use of bismuth was not known, but it was used as softening property
in brittle rock when ground to make the composition slab to build, or
yet for tablets raised to gods, or for the use of mariner, in stating
laws in moist, hot countries under the Atlantian rule. Bismuth as a drug
was best understood in Egypt when the old alchemists ruled the world of
science. Learned they, too, its uses in a draught—elixir—sluggish
medicine for ailments of the mad; those "moon-struck," called, for so
tradition spake, that bismuth was a casting out of planets in their
growth in dawn of time—Eternity's great dust which maketh worlds.
Cementing, bismuth, all the molecules of light or air in one great mass.

Aye, bismuth was our subject; little more I say of what Atlantis taught
of that prized substance, for they held it of priceless worth in so
cementing rock that pillars grew eternal in their wearing, so to hold
the thoughts of men whose bodies turned to dust for centuries had been.

Antimony was to the Atlantians an unknown metal. Tin? The knowledge of
that substance, metal, was brought from far to northward in the dawn of
old Atlantian knowledge, but its uses were not known as now.

Atlantian minds were bent not on that metal, yet a beaten stuff was
sometimes brought for barter and later it led to knowledge of its use,
for so intent

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the priests on learning others’ arts that tin invested was in other
metals—flux. And bronze was formed with parts of tin and iron with the
copper—flux.

Bronze was formed with parts of tin and iron with the copper flux to
give it gloss and substance.

Gold also was sometimes wrought in shape by pouring molten wax and tin
of quality, refined into one cauldron, rolling forth the mass upon the
sea sand and beating thin. Thus was the metal of the finest quality
made. Tough, elastic, brittle not and could withstand the beating blasts
of Time and rust not; neither was it rent by waves of sea. And barques
were keeled with such—the galleys of the king.

Yea, the copper mines of "Spain" <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8)
Atlantis knew. A warring tribe took captive such a one as always sought
to learn all secrets. He it was who brought the knowledge of such copper
ore upon that great peninsula; and forth set men—when he had been loosed
from bonds—returning. These men made search for copper, as ye call, and
found, alas! a grave beside the "shafts" save one alone.

And he, content to grow in power and knowledge, there abode for "twenty
years" upon the soil of alien. But at last his heart turned to his home
and kind and he returned unto Atlantis, nor spake he of his intent to
those adopted of his heart in "Spain."

But ere his death his early kin and sons he did foreswear to seek the
spot and to enrich his early home—his country—with strange weapons,
implements of household thrift, by digging, smelting and so turning into
shapes the ore as times then taught.

They went—a galley of strong men who learned to toil in mines and those,
returning, brought the secret to Atlantis. Men of Spain were not
Atlantian

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

born when this occurred, but of a race from northward in that day. But
later, all Atlantian was the blood infused by trader, toiler in the
mines, and they who sought in commerce to maintain a rank above the
"people."

"People! hated word to ears that hear the Higher Voice proclaim: My
people all!"

And by those men who delved in mines in Spain, was brought the knowledge
that Atlantis held great wealth in ores, and digging was begun. Yea, I
spake before, the tin, ye call, was brought in boats at large to carry
commerce, and its certain worth was partly understood.

The fuel used in "smelting of the ores?" It was hardened tree trunks;
aloes make heat as full of fierce and melting tendency as "coal," and
aloe trees abounded there. Tulip is also a fierce, hot wood when
fire-smitten. Tulip trees grew upon Atlantis, huge as the trees <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) in this, thy land called wonders of the
world by ye in this strange spot; and these great tulip trees were hewn
to staves and dried in matter-soaked in slime from out the gushing wells
to southward on that island.

Yea, wells of slimy wash as thou hast here, and from which ye make light
in this new land. And yet those people knew no light like this ye make
from the same stuff which permeated wood, caused it to yield them heat
for "furnace" great, to smelt the ore dug in that land, now sunk beneath
the waves, alas!

Light, askest thou? Oil of the fish gave all the light Atlantis knew in
homes when darkness hid the light of day. In southern seas a monster
sometimes did appear all phosphorescent, and the fishers slew such
monster. In their nets it havoc made. Its pelt

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (no scales upon it
grew) gave even in death and foul decay a light most luminous.

And to preserve this light, which vanished when it dried and turned to
ashes, they soaked the pelt in oil—clarified and pure, and thus was
light preserved most luminous and giving out no odor. A phosphorescent
light which softly lit the hall as doth moon rays smiting at the
full—the southern moon, when stored in crystal globe the oil. A pleasant
light indeed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[86:\*](smoa13.htm#fr_8) Reo Tinto.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[87:\*](smoa13.htm#fr_9) Redwoods of California.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The crime of old King Osiris and the king Atlantis
gave to Egypt](smoa14)
