[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac08)  [Next](rac10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### CHAPTER VI

# THE GODS OF THE BRYTHONS

OUR knowledge of the gods of the Brythons, *i.e.* as far as Wales is
concerned, is derived, apart from inscriptions, from the *Mabinogion*,
which, though found in a fourteenth century MS., was composed much
earlier, and contains elements from a remote past. Besides this, the
*Triads*, probably of twelfth-century origin, the *Taliesin*, and other
poems, though obscure and artificial, the work of many a "confused bard
drivelling" (to cite the words of one of them), preserve echoes of the
old mythology. <span id="fr_327"></span>[1](#fn_326) Some of the gods
may lurk behind the personages of Geoffrey of Monmouth's *Historia
Britonum* and of the Arthurian cycle, though here great caution is
required. The divinities have become heroes and heroines, kings and
princesses, and if some of the episodes are based on ancient myths, they
are treated in a romantic spirit. Other episodes are mere *Märchen*
formulæ. Like the wreckage of some rich galleon, the debris of the old
mythology has been used to construct a new fabric, and the old
divinities have even less of the god-like traits of the personages of
the Irish texts.

Some of the personages bear similar names to the Irish divinities, and
in some cases there is a certain similarity of

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

incidents to those of the Irish tales. <span
id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_327) Are, then, the gods dimly revealed in
Welsh literature as much Goidelic as Brythonic? Analysing the incidents
of the *Mabinogion*, Professor Anwyl has shown that they have an
entirely local character, and are mainly associated with the districts
of Dyfed and Gwent, of Anglesey, and of Gwynedd, of which Pryderi,
Branwen, and Gwydion are respectively the heroic characters. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[2](#fn_328) These are the districts where a strong
Goidelic element prevailed, whether these Goidels were the original
inhabitants of Britain, driven there by Brythons; <span
id="fr_330"></span>[3](#fn_329) or tribes who had settled there from
Ireland, <span id="fr_331"></span>[4](#fn_330) or perhaps a mixture of
both. In any case they had been conquered by Brythons and had become
Brythonic in speech from the fifth century onwards. On account of this
Goidelic element, it has been claimed that the personages of the
*Mabinogion* are purely Goidelic. But examination proves that only a few
are directly parallel in name with Irish divinities, and while here
there are fundamental likenesses, the *incidents* with Irish parallels
may be due to mere superficial borrowings, to that interchange of
*Märchen* and mythical *données* which has everywhere occurred. Many
incidents have no Irish parallels, and most of the characters are
entirely different in name from Irish divinities. Hence any theory which
would account for the likenesses, must also account for the differences,
and must explain why, if the *Mabinogion* is due to Irish Goidels, there
should have been few or no borrowings in Welsh literature

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

from the popular Cúchulainn and Ossianic sagas, <span
id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_331) and why, at a time when Brythonic
elements were uppermost, such care should have been taken to preserve
Goidelic myths. If the tales emanated from native Welsh Goidels, the
explanation might be that they, the kindred of the Irish Goidels, must
have had a certain community with them in divine names and myths, while
others of their gods, more local in character, would differ in name. Or
if they are Brythonic, the likenesses might be accounted for by an early
community in myth and cult among the common ancestors of Brythons and
Goidels. <span id="fr_333"></span>[2](#fn_332) But as the date of the
composition of the *Mabinogion* is comparatively late, at a time when
Brythons had overrun these Goidelic districts, more probably the tales
contain a mingling of Goidelic (Irish or Welsh) and Brythonic
divinities, though some of these may be survivals of the common Celtic
heritage. <span id="fr_334"></span>[3](#fn_333) Celtic divinities were
mainly of a local, tribal character. Hence some would be local Goidelic
divinities, others, classed with these, local Brythonic divinities. This
would explain the absence of divinities and heroes of other local
Brythonic groups, *e.g.* Arthur, from the *Mabinogion*. But with the
growing importance of these, they attracted to their legend the folk of
the *Mabinogion* and other tales. These are associated with Arthur in
*Kulhwych*, and the Dôn group mingles with that of Taliesin in the
*Taliesin* poems. <span id="fr_335"></span>[4](#fn_334) Hence Welsh
literature, as far as concerns the old religion, may be regarded as
including both local Goidelic and Brythonic

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

divinities, of whom the more purely Brythonic are Arthur, Gwynn,
Taliesin, etc. <span id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_335) They are regarded
as kings and queens, or as fairies, or they have magical powers. They
are mortal and die, and the place of their burial is pointed out, or
existing tumuli are associated with them, All this is parallel to the
history of the Tuatha Dé Danann, and shows how the same process of
degradation had been at work in Wales as in Ireland.

The story of the Llyr group is told in the *Mabinogion* of Branwen and
of Manawyddan. They are associated with the Pwyll group, and apparently
opposed to that of Don. Branwen is married to Matholwych, king of
Ireland, but is ill-treated by him on account of the insults of the
mischievous Evnissyen, in spite of the fact that Bran had atoned for the
insult by many gifts, including that of a cauldron of regeneration. Now
he crosses with an army to Ireland, where Evnissyen throws Branwen's
child, to whom the kingdom is given, on the fire. A fight ensues; the
dead Irish warriors are resuscitated in the cauldron, but Evnissyen, at
the cost of his life, destroys it. Bran is slain, and by his directions
his head is cut off and carried first to Harlech, then to Gwales, where
it will entertain its bearers for eighty years. At the end of that time
it is to be taken to London and buried. Branwen, departing with the
bearers, dies of a broken heart at Anglesey, and meanwhile Caswallyn,
son of Beli, seizes the kingdom. <span id="fr_337"></span>[2](#fn_336)
Two of the bearers of the head are Manawyddan and Pryderi, whose
fortunes we follow in the *Mabinogi* of the former. Pryderi gives his
mother Rhiannon to Manawyddan as his wife, along with some land which by
magic art is made barren. After following different crafts, they are led
by a boar to a strange castle, where Rhiannon and Pryderi disappear
along with the building.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Manawyddan, with Pryderi's wife Kicva, set out
as shoemakers, but are forced to abandon this craft on account of the
envy of the craftsmen. Finally, we learn how Manawyddan overcame the
enchanter Llwyt, who, because of an insult offered by Pryderi's father
to his friend Gwawl, had made Rhiannon and Pryderi disappear. They are
now restored, and Llwyt seeks no further revenge.

The story of Branwen is similar to a tale of which there are variants in
Teutonic and Scandinavian sagas, but the resemblance is closer to the
latter. <span id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_337) Possibly a similar story
with their respective divinities or heroes for its characters existed
among Celts, Teutons, and Norsemen, but more likely it was borrowed from
Norsemen who occupied both sides of the Irish Sea in the ninth and tenth
century, and then naturalised by furnishing it with Celtic characters.
But into this framework many native elements were set, and we may
therefore scrutinise the story for Celtic mythical elements utilised by
its redactor, who probably did not strip its Celtic personages of their
earlier divine attributes. In the two *Mabinogi* these personages are
Llyr, his sons Bran and Manawyddan, his daughter Branwen, their
half-brothers Nissyen and Evnissyen, sons of Llyr's wife Penardim,
daughter of Beli, by a previous marriage with Eurosswyd.

Llyr is the equivalent of the Irish Ler, the sea-god, but two other
Llyrs, probably duplicates of himself, are known to Welsh story--Llyr
Marini, and the Llyr, father of Cordelia, of the chroniclers. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_338) He is constantly confused with Lludd
Llawereint, *e.g.* both are described as one of three notable prisoners
of Britain, and both are called fathers of Cordelia or Creiddylad. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[3](#fn_339) Perhaps the two were once identical, for

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Manannan is sometimes called son of Alloid (=
Lludd), in Irish texts, as well as son of Ler. <span
id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_340) But the confusion may be accidental, nor
is it certain that Nodons or Lludd was a sea-god. Llyr's prison was that
of Eurosswyd, <span id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_341) whose wife he may
have abducted and hence suffered imprisonment. In the *Black Book of
Caermarthen* Bran is called son of Y Werydd or "Ocean," according to M.
Loth's interpretation of the name, which would thus point to Llyr's
position as a sea-god. But this is contested by Professor Rhŷs who makes
Ywerit wife of Llyr, the name being in his view a form of the Welsh word
for Ireland. In Geoffrey and the chroniclers Llyr becomes a king of
Britain whose history and that of his daughters was immortalised by
Shakespeare. Geoffrey also refers to Llyr's burial in a vault built in
honour of Janus. <span id="fr_343"></span>[3](#fn_342) On this Professor
Rhŷs builds a theory that Llyr was a form of the Celtic Dis with two
faces and ruler of a world of darkness. <span
id="fr_344"></span>[4](#fn_343) But there is no evidence that the Celtic
Dispater was lord of a gloomy underworld, and it is best to regard Llyr
as a sea-divinity.

Manawyddan is not god-like in these tales in the sense in which the
majestic Manannan of Irish story is, though elsewhere we learn that
"deep was his counsel." <span id="fr_345"></span>[5](#fn_344) Though not
a magician, he baffles one of the great wizards of Welsh story, an he is
also a master craftsman, who instructs Pryderi in the arts of
shoe-making, shield-making, and saddlery. In this he is akin to
Manannan, the teacher of Diarmaid. Incidents of his career are reflected
in the *Triads*, and his union with Rhiannon may point to an old myth in
which they were from the first a divine pair, parents of Pryderi. This
would give point to his deliverance of Pryderi and Rhiannon from the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

hostile magician. <span id="fr_346"></span>[1](#fn_345) Rhiannon
resembles the Irish Elysium goddesses, and Manawyddan, like Manannan, is
lord of Elysium in a Taliesin poem. <span
id="fr_347"></span>[2](#fn_346) He is a craftsman and follows
agriculture, perhaps a reminiscence of the old belief that fertility and
culture come from the god's land. Manawyddan, like other divinities, was
drawn into the Arthurian cycle, and is one of those who capture the
famous boar, the *Twrch Trwyth*. <span id="fr_348"></span>[3](#fn_347)

Bran, or Bendigeit Vran ("Bran the Blessed"), probably an old pagan
title which appropriately enough denotes one who figured later in
Christian hagiology, is so huge that no house or ship can hold him.
Hence he wades over to Ireland, and as he draws near is thought to be a
mountain. This may be an archaic method of expressing his divinity--a
gigantic non-natural man like some of the Tuatha Dea and Ossianic
heroes. But Bran also appears as the *Urdawl Ben*, or "Noble Head,"
which makes time pass to its bearers like a dream, and when buried
protects the land from invasion. Both as a giant squatting on a rock and
as a head, Bran is equated by Professor Rhŷs with Cernunnos, the
squatting god, represented also as a head, and also with the Welsh Urien
whose attribute was a raven, the supposed meaning of Bran's name. <span
id="fr_349"></span>[4](#fn_348) He further equates him with Uthr Ben,
"Wonderful Head," the superior bard, harper and piper of a *Taliesin*
poem. <span id="fr_350"></span>[5](#fn_349) Urien, Bran, and Uthr are
three forms of a god worshipped by bards, and a "dark" divinity, whose
wading over to Ireland signifies crossing to Hades, of which he, like
Yama, who first crossed the rapid waters to the land of death, is the
ruler. <span id="fr_351"></span>[6](#fn_350) But Bran is not a "dark"
god in the sense implied here. Cernunnos is god of a happy underworld,
and there is nothing

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

dark or evil in him or in Bran and his congeners. Professor Rhŷs's
"dark" divinities are sometimes, in his view, "light" gods, but they
cannot be both. The Celtic lords of the dead had no "dark" character,
and as gods of fertility they were, so to speak, in league with the
sun-god, the slayer of Bran, according to Professor Rhŷs's ingenious
theory. And although to distracted Irish secretaries Ireland may be
Hades, its introduction into this *Mabinogi* merely points to the
interpretation of a mythico-historic connection between Wales and
Ireland. Thus if Bran is Cernunnos, this is because he is a lord of the
underworld of fertility, the counterpart of which is the distant
Elysium, to which Bran seems rather to belong. Thus, in presence of his
head, time passes as a dream in feasting and joy. This is a true Elysian
note, and the tabued door of the story is also suggestive of the tabus
of Elysium, which when broken rob men of happiness. <span
id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_351) As to the power of the head in
protecting the land, this points to actual custom and belief regarding
the relies of the dead and the power of divine images or sculptured
heads. <span id="fr_353"></span>[2](#fn_352) The god Bran has become a
king and law-giver in the *Mabinogion* and the *Triads*, <span
id="fr_354"></span>[3](#fn_353) while Geoffrey of Monmouth describes how
Belinus and Brennus, in the Welsh version Beli and Bran, dispute the
crown of Britain, are reconciled, and finally conquer Gaul and
Rome. <span id="fr_355"></span>[4](#fn_354) The mythic Bran is confused
with Brennus, leader of the Gauls against Rome in 390 B.C., and Belinus
may be the god Belenos, as well as Beli, father of Lludd and Caswallawn.
But Bran also figures as a Christian missionary. He is described as
hostage at Rome for his son Caradawc, returning thence as preacher of
Christianity to the Cymry--a legend arising out

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of a misunderstanding of his epithet "Blessed" and a confusing of his
son with the historic Caractacus. <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_355)
Hence Bran's family is spoken of as one of the three saintly families of
Prydein, and he is ancestor of many saints. <span
id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_356)

Branwen, "White Bosom," daughter of a sea-god, may be a sea-goddess,
"Venus of the northern sea," <span id="fr_358"></span>[3](#fn_357)
unless with Mr. Nutt we connect her with the cauldron described in her
legend, <span id="fr_359"></span>[4](#fn_358) symbol of an orgiastic
cult, and regard her as a goddess of fertility. But the connection is
not clear in the story, though in some earlier myth the cauldron may
have been her property. As Brangwaine, she reappears in romance, giving
a love-potion to Tristram--perhaps a reminiscence of her former
functions as a goddess of love, or earlier of fertility. In the
*Mabinogion* she is buried in Anglesey at Ynys Bronwen, where a cairn
with bones discovered in 1813 was held to be the grave and remains of
Branwen. <span id="fr_360"></span>[5](#fn_359)

The children of Dôn, the equivalent of Danu, and probably like her, a
goddess of fertility, are Gwydion, Gilvæthwy, Amæthon, Govannon, and
Arianrhod, with her sons, Dylan and Llew. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[6](#fn_360) These correspond, therefore, in part to
the Tuatha Dea, though the only members of the group who bear names
similar to the Irish gods are Govannon (= Goibniu) and possibly Llew (=
Lug). Gwydion as a culture-god corresponds to Ogma. In the *Triads* Beli
is called father of Arianrhod, <span id="fr_362"></span>[7](#fn_361) and
assuming that this Arianrhod is identical with the daughter of Dôn,
Professor Rhŷs regards Beli as husband of Don. But the identification is
far from certain, and the theory built upon it that Beli is one with the
Irish Bile, and that both

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

are lords of a dark underworld, has already been found precarious. <span
id="fr_363"></span>[1](#fn_362) In later belief Don was associated with
the stars, the constellation Cassiopeia being called her court. She is
described as "wise" in a *Taliesin* poem. <span
id="fr_364"></span>[2](#fn_363)

This group of divinities is met with mainly in the *Mabinogi* of Math,
which turns upon Gilvæthwy's illicit love of Math's "foot-holder"
Goewin. To assist him in his *amour*, Gwydion, by a magical trick,
procures for Math from the court of Pryderi certain swine sent him by
Arawn, king of Annwfn. In the battle which follows when the trick is
discovered, Gwydion slays Pryderi by enchantment. Math now discovers
that Gilvæthwy has seduced Goewin, and transforms him and Gwydion
successively into deer, swine, and wolves. Restored to human form,
Gwydion proposes that Arianrhod should be Math's foot-holder, but Math
by a magic test discovers that she is not a virgin. She bears two sons,
Dylan, fostered by Math, and another whom Gwydion nurtures and for whom
he afterwards by a trick obtains a name from Arianrhod, who had sworn
never to name him. The name is Llew Llaw Gyffes, "Lion of the Sure
Hand." By magic, Math and Gwydion form a wife for Llew out of flowers.
She is called Blodeuwedd, and later, at the instigation of a lover,
Gronw, she discovers how Llew can be killed. Gronw attacks and wounds
him, and he flies off as an eagle. Gwydion seeks for Llew, discovers
him, and retransforms him to human shape. Then he changes Blodeuwedd
into an owl, and slays Gronw. <span id="fr_365"></span>[3](#fn_364)
Several independent tales have gone to the formation of this *Mabinogi*,
but we are concerned here merely with the light it may throw on the
divine characters who figure in it.

Math or Math Hen, "the Ancient," <span id="fr_366"></span>[4](#fn_365)
is probably an old

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

divinity of Gwyned, of which he is called lord. He is a king and a
magician, pre-eminent in wizardy, which he teaches to Gwydion, and in a
*Triad* he is called one of the great men of magic and metamorphosis of
Britain. <span id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_366) More important are his
traits of goodness to the suffering, and justice with no trace of
vengeance to the wrong-doer. Whether these are derived from his
character as a god or from the Celtic kingly ideal, it is impossible to
say, though the former is by no means unlikely. Possibly his supreme
magical powers make him the equivalent of the Irish "god of Druidism,"
but this is uncertain, since all gods were more or less dowered with
these.

Gwydion's magical powers are abundantly illustrated in the tale. At
Pryderi's court he changes fungus into horses and dogs, and afterwards
slays Pryderi by power of enchantments; he produces a fleet by magic
before Arianrhod's castle; with Math's help he forms Blodeuwedd out of
flowers; he gives Llew his natural shape when he finds him as a wasted
eagle on a tree, his flesh and the worms breeding in it dropping from
him; he transforms the faithless Blodeuwedd into an owl. Some of these
and other deeds are referred to in the *Taliesin* poems, while Taliesin
describes himself as enchanted by Gwydion. <span
id="fr_368"></span>[2](#fn_367) In the *Triads* he is one of the three
great astrologers of Prydein, and this emphasis laid on his powers of
divination is significant when it is considered that his name may be
derived from a root *vet*, giving words meaning "saying" or "poetry,"
while cognate words are Irish *fáith*, "a prophet" or "poet," German
*wuth*, "rage," and the name of Odinn. <span
id="fr_369"></span>[3](#fn_368) The name is suggestive of the ecstasy of
inspiration producing prophetic and poetic utterance. In the
*Mabinogion* he is a mighty bard, and in a poem, he, under the name of

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gweir, is imprisoned in the Other-world, and
there becomes a bard, thus receiving inspiration from the gods'
land. <span id="fr_370"></span>[1](#fn_369) He is the ideal
*fáith*--diviner, prophet, and poet, and thus the god of those
professing these arts. Strabo describes how the Celtic *vates* (*fáith*)
was also a philosopher, and this character is given in a poem to Seon
(probably = Gwydion), whose artists are poets and magicians. <span
id="fr_371"></span>[2](#fn_370) But he is also a culture-god, bringing
swine to men from the gods' land. For though Pryderi is described as a
mortal who has himself received the swine from Annwfn (Elysium), there
is no doubt that he himself was a lord of Annwfn, and it was probably on
account of Gwydion's theft from Annwfn that be, as Gweir, was imprisoned
there "through the messenger of Pwyll and Pryderi." <span
id="fr_372"></span>[3](#fn_371) A raid is here made directly on the
god's land for the benefit of men, and it is unsuccessful, but in the
*Mabinogi* a different version of the raid is told. Perhaps Gwydion also
brought kine from Annwfn, since he is called one of the three herds of
Britain, <span id="fr_373"></span>[4](#fn_372) while he himself may once
have been an animal god, then an anthropomorphic deity associated with
animals. Thus in the *Mabinogi*, when Gwydion flees with the swine, he
rests each night at a place one of the syllables of which is *Moch*,
"swine"--an ætiological myth explaining why places which were once sites
of the cult of a swine-god, afterwards worshipped as Gwydion, were so
called.

Gwydion has also a tricky, fraudulent character in the *Mabinogi*, and
although "in his life there was counsel," yet he had a "vicious
muse." <span id="fr_374"></span>[5](#fn_373) It is also implied that he
is lover of his sister Arianrhod and father of Dylan and Llew--the
mythic reflections of a time when such unions, perhaps only in royal
houses, were permissible. Instances occur in Irish tales,

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and Arthur was also his sister's lover. <span
id="fr_375"></span>[1](#fn_374) In later belief Gwydion was associated
with the stars; and the Milky Way was called Caer Gwydion. Across it he
had chased the faithless Blodeuwedd. <span
id="fr_376"></span>[2](#fn_375) Professor Rhŷs equates him with Odinn,
and regards both as representing an older Celto-Teutonic hero, though
many of the alleged similarities in their respective mythologies are not
too obvious. <span id="fr_377"></span>[3](#fn_376)

Amæthon the good is described in *Kulhwych* as the only husbandman who
could till or dress a certain piece of land, though Kulhwych will not be
able to force him or to make him follow him. <span
id="fr_378"></span>[4](#fn_377) This, together with the name Amæthon,
from Cymric *amæth*, "labourer" or "ploughman," throws some light on his
functions. <span id="fr_379"></span>[5](#fn_378) He was a god associated
with agriculture, either as one who made waste places fruitful, or
possibly as an anthropomorphic corn divinity. But elsewhere his taking a
roebuck and a whelp, and in a Triad, a lapwing from Arawn, king of
Annwfn, led to the battle of Godeu, in which he fought Arawn, aided by
Gwydion, who vanquished one of Arawn's warriors, Bran, by discovering
his name. <span id="fr_380"></span>[6](#fn_379) Amæthon, who brings
useful animals from the gods' land, plays the same part as Gwydion,
bringer of the swine. The dog and deer are frequent representatives of
the corn-spirit, of which Amæthon may have been an anthropomorphic form,
or they, with the lapwing, may have been earlier worshipful animals,
associated with Amæthon as his symbols, while later myth told how he had
procured them from Annwfn.

The divine functions of Llew Llaw Gyffes are hardly apparent in the
*Mabinogi*. The incident of Blodeuwedd's unfaithfulness is simply that
of the *Märchen* formula of the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

treacherous wife who discovers the secret of her husband's life, and
thus puts him at her lover's mercy. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[1](#fn_380) But since Llew is not slain, but changes
to eagle form, this unusual ending may mean that he was once a bird
divinity, the eagle later becoming his symbol. Some myth must have told
of his death, or he was afterwards regarded as a mortal who died, for a
poem mentions his tomb, and adds, "he was a man who never gave justice
to any one." Dr. Skene suggests that truth, not justice, is here meant,
and finds in this a reference to Llew's disguises. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[2](#fn_381) Professor Rhŷs, for reasons not held
convincing by M. Loth, holds that *Llew*, "lion," was a misapprehension
for his true name *Lleu*, interpreted by him "light." <span
id="fr_383"></span>[3](#fn_382) This meaning he also gives to *Lug*,
equating Lug and Llew, and regarding both as sun-gods. He also equates
*Llaw Gyffes*, "steady or strong hand," with Lug's epithet *Lám fada*,
"long hand," suggesting that *gyffes* may have meant "long," although it
was Llew's steadiness of hand in shooting which earned him the
title. <span id="fr_384"></span>[4](#fn_383) Again, Llew's rapid growth
need not make him the sun, for this was a privilege of many heroes who
had no connection with the sun. Llew's unfortunate matrimonial affairs
are also regarded as a sun myth. Blodeuwedd is a dawn goddess dividing
her love between the sun-god and the prince of darkness. Llew as the sun
is overcome by the latter, but is restored by the culture-hero Gwydion,
who slays the dark rival. The transformation of Blodeuwedd into an owl
means that the Dawn has become the Dusk. <span
id="fr_385"></span>[5](#fn_384) As we have seen, all this is a *Märchen*
formula with no mythical significance. Evidence of the precariousness of
such an interpretation is furnished from

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the similar interpretation of the story of Curoi's wife, Blathnat, whose
lover Cúchulainn slew Curoi. <span id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_385) Here
a supposed sun-god is the treacherous villain who kills a dark divinity,
husband of a dawn goddess.

If Llew is a sun-god, the equivalent of Lug, it is curious that he is
never connected with the August festival in Wales which corresponds to
Lugnasad in Ireland. There may be some support to the theory which makes
him a sun-god in a *Triad* where he is one of the three *ruddvoawc* who
cause a year's sterility wherever they set their feet, though in this
Arthur excels them, for he causes seven years' sterility! <span
id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_386) Does this point to the scorching of
vegetation by the summer sun? The mythologists have not made use of this
incident. On the whole the evidence for Llew as a sun-god is not
convincing. The strongest reason for identifying him with Lug, rests on
the fact that both have uncles who are smiths and have similar
names--Govannon and Gavida (Goibniu). Like Amæthon, Govannon, the
artificer or smith (*gôf*, "smith"), is mentioned in *Kulhwych* as one
whose help must be gained to wait at the end of the furrows to cleanse
the iron of the plough. <span id="fr_388"></span>[3](#fn_387) Here he is
brought into connection with the plough, but the myth to which the words
refer is lost. A *Taliesin* poem associates him with Math--"I have been
with artificers, with the old Math and with Govannon," and refers to his
Caer or castle. <span id="fr_389"></span>[4](#fn_388)

Arianrhod, "silver wheel," has a twofold character. She pretends to be a
virgin, and disclaims all knowledge of her son Llew, yet she is mistress
of Gwydion. In the *Triads* she appears as one of the three blessed (or
white) ladies of Britain. <span id="fr_390"></span>[5](#fn_389) Perhaps
these two aspects of her character may point to a divergence between
religion and mythology, the cult of a virgin

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

goddess of whom myth told discreditable things. More likely she was an
old Earth-goddess, at once a virgin and a fruitful mother, like Artemis,
the virgin goddess, yet neither chaste nor fair, or like a Babylonian
goddess addressed as at once "mother, wife, and maid." Arianrhod,
"beauty famed beyond summer's dawn," is mentioned in a *Taliesin* poem,
and she was later associated with the constellation Corona
Borealis. <span id="fr_391"></span>[1](#fn_390) Possibly her real name
was forgotten, and that of Arianrhod derived from a place-name, "Caer
Arianrhod," associated with her. The interpretation which makes her a
dawn goddess, mother of light, Lleu, and darkness, Dylan, is far from
obvious. <span id="fr_392"></span>[2](#fn_391) Dylan, after his baptism,
rushed into the sea, the nature of which became his. No wave ever broke
under him; he swam like a fish; and hence was called Dylan Eil Ton or
"son of the wave." Govannon, his uncle, slew him, an incident
interpreted as the defeat of darkness, which "hies away to lurk in the
sea." Dylan, however, has no dark traits and is described as a blonde.
The waves lament his death, and, as they dash against the shore, seek to
avenge it. His grave is "where the wave makes a sullen sound," but
popular belief identifies him with the waves, and their noise as they
press into the Conway is his dying groan. Not only is he *Eil Ton*, "son
of the wave," but also *Eil Mor*, "son of the sea." <span
id="fr_393"></span>[3](#fn_392) He is thus a local sea-god, and like
Manannan identified with the waves, and yet separate from them, since
they mourn his death. The *Mabinogi* gives us the *débris* of myths
explaining how an anthropomorphic sea-god was connected with the goddess
Arianrhod and slain by a god Govannon.

Another *Mabinogion* group is that of Pwyll, prince of Dyved, his wife
Rhiannon, and their son Pryderi. <span id="fr_394"></span>[4](#fn_393)
Pwyll

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

agrees with Arawn, king of Annwfn (Elysium), to reign over his kingdom
for a year. At the end of that time he slays Arawn's rival Havgan. Arawn
sends him gifts, and Pwyll is now known as Pen or Head of Annwfn, a
title showing that he was once a god, belonging to the gods' land, later
identified with the Christian Hades. Pwyll now agrees with
Rhiannon, <span id="fr_395"></span>[1](#fn_394) who appears mysteriously
on a magic hillock, and whom he captures, to rid her of an unwelcome
suitor Gwawl. He imprisons him in a magical bag, and Rhiannon weds
Pwyll. The story thus resolves itself into the formula of the Fairy
Bride, but it paves the way for the vengeance taken on Pryderi and
Rhiannon by Gwawl's friend Llwyt. Rhiannon has a son who is stolen as
soon as born. She is accused of slaying him and is degraded, but Teyrnon
recovers the child from its superhuman robber and calls him Gwri. As he
grows up, Teyrnon notices his resemblance to Pwyll, and takes him to his
court. Rhiannon is reinstated, and because she cries that her anguish
(*pryderi*) is gone, the boy is now called Pryderi. Here, again, we have
*Märchen* incidents, which also appear in the Fionn saga. <span
id="fr_396"></span>[2](#fn_395)

Though there is little that is mythological here, it is evident that
Pwyll is a god and Rhiannon a goddess, whose early importance, like that
of other Celtic goddesses, appears from her name, a corruption of
Rigantona, "great queen." Elsewhere we hear of her magic birds whose
song charmed Bran's companions for seven years, and of her marriage to
Manawyddan--an old myth in which Manawyddan may have been Pryderi's
father, while possibly in some other myth Pryderi may have been child of
Rigantona and Teyrnon (= Tigernonos, "king"). <span
id="fr_397"></span>[3](#fn_396) We may postulate an old Rhiannon saga,
fragments of which

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

are to be found in the *Mabinogi*, and there may have been more than one
goddess called Rigantona, later fused into one. But in the tales she is
merely a queen of old romance.

Pryderi, as has been seen, was despoiled of his swine by Gwydion. They
were the gift of Arawn, but in the *Triads* they seem to have been
brought from Annwfn by Pwyll, while Pryderi acted as swineherd. <span
id="fr_398"></span>[1](#fn_397) Both Pwyll and Pryderi are thus
connected with those myths which told of the bringing of domestic
animals from the gods' land. But since they are certainly gods,
associated with the gods' land, this is perhaps the result of
misunderstanding. A poem speaks of the magic cauldron of Pen Annwfn,
*i.e.* Pwyll, and this points to a myth explaining his connection with
Annwfn in a different way from the account in the *Mabinogi*. The poem
also tells how Gweir was imprisoned in Caer Sidi (= Annwfn) "through the
messenger of Pwyll and Pryderi." <span id="fr_399"></span>[2](#fn_398)
They are thus lords of Annwfn, whose swine Gweir (Gwydion) tries to
steal. Elsewhere Caer Sidi is associated with Manawyddan and Pryderi,
perhaps a reference to their connection as father and son. <span
id="fr_400"></span>[3](#fn_399) Thus Pryderi and Pwyll belong to the
bright Elysium, and may once have been gods of fertility associated with
the under-earth region, which was by no means a world of darkness.
Whatever be the meaning of the death of Pryderi at the hands of Gwydion,
it is connected with later references to his grave. <span
id="fr_401"></span>[4](#fn_400)

A fourth group is that of Beli and his sons, referred to in the
*Mabinogi* of Branwen, where one of them, Caswallawn, usurps the throne,
and thus makes Manawyddan, like MacGregor, landless. In the *Dream of
Maxen*, the sons of Beli are Lludd, Caswallawn, Nynnyaw, and
Llevelys. <span id="fr_402"></span>[5](#fn_401) Geoffrey calls Beli
Heli, and speaks of an earlier king Belinus, at enmity with his brother
Brennius. <span id="fr_403"></span>[6](#fn_402) But probably Beli or
Heli and

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Belinus are one and the same, and both represent
the earlier god Belenos. Caswellawn becomes Cassivellaunus, opponent of
Cæsar, but in the *Mabinogi* he is hostile to the race of Llyr, and this
may be connected with whatever underlies Geoffrey's account of the
hostility of Belinus and Brennius (= Bran, son of Llyr), perhaps, like
the enmity of the race of Dôn to Pryderi, a reminiscence of the strife
of rival tribes or of Goidel and Brython. <span
id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_403) As has been seen, the evidence for
regarding Beli as Dôn's consort or the equivalent of Bile is slender.
Nor, if he is Belenos, the equivalent of Apollo, is he in any sense a
"dark" god. He is regarded as a victorious champion, preserver of his
"honey isle" and of the stability of his kingdom, in a *Taliesin* poem
and in the *Triads*. <span id="fr_405"></span>[2](#fn_404)

The personality of Casswallawn is lost in that of the historic
Cassivellaunus, but in a reference to him in the *Triads* where, with
Caradawc and Gweirydd, he bears the title "war king," we may see a
glimpse of his divine character, that of a god of war, invisibly leading
on armies to battle, and as such embodied in great chiefs who bore his
name. <span id="fr_406"></span>[3](#fn_405) Nynnyaw appears in
Geoffrey's pages as Nennius, who dies of wounds inflicted by Cæsar, to
the great grief of Cassivellaunus. <span id="fr_407"></span>[4](#fn_406)

The theory that Lludd Llaw Ereint or *Lodens Lamargentios* represents
*Nodens* (Nuada) *Lāmargentios*, the change being the result of
alliteration, has been contested, <span id="fr_408"></span>[5](#fn_407)
while if the Welsh Lludd and Nudd were identical it is strange that they
should have become distinct personalities, Gwyn, son of Nudd, being the
lover of Creiddylad, daughter of Lludd <span
id="fr_409"></span>[6](#fn_408) unless in some earlier myth their love
was that of brother and sister. Lludd is

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

also confused or is identical with Llyr, just as the Irish Ler is with
Alloid. He is probably the son of Beli who, in the tale of *Lludd and
Llevelys*, by the advice of Llevelys rids his country of three
plagues. <span id="fr_410"></span>[1](#fn_409) These are, first, the
Coranians who hear every whisper, and whom he destroys by throwing over
them water in which certain insects given him by Levelys have been
bruised. The second is a shriek on May-eve which makes land and water
barren, and is caused by a dragon which attacks the dragon of the land.
These Lludd captures and imprisons at Dinas Emreis, where they
afterwards cause trouble to Vortigern at the building of his castle. The
third is that of the disappearance of a year's supply of food by a
magician, who lulls every one to sleep and who is captured by Lludd.
Though the Coranians appear in the *Triads* as a hostile tribe, <span
id="fr_411"></span>[2](#fn_410) they [may](errata.htm#5) have been a
supernatural folk, since their name is perhaps derived from *còr*, "
dwarf," and they are now regarded as mischievous fairies. <span
id="fr_412"></span>[3](#fn_411) They may thus be analogous to the
Fomorians, and their story, like that of the dragon and the magician who
produce blight and loss of food, may be based on older myth or ritual
embodying the belief in powers hostile to fertility, though it is not
clear why those powers should be most active on May-day. But this may be
a misunderstanding, and the dragons are overcome on May-eve. The
references in the tale to Lludd's generosity and liberality in giving
food may reflect his function as a god of growth, but, like other
euhemerised gods, he is also called a mighty warrior, and is said to
have rebuilt the walls of Caer Ludd (London), his name still surviving
in "Ludgate Hill," where he was buried. <span
id="fr_413"></span>[4](#fn_412) This legend doubtless points to some
ancient cult of Lludd at this spot.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

Nudd, already discussed under his title Nodons, is less prominent than
his sort Gwyn, whose fight with Gwthur we have explained as a mythic
explanation of ritual combats for the increase of fertility. He also
appears as a hunter and as a great warrior, <span
id="fr_414"></span>[1](#fn_413) "the hope of armies," and thus he may be
a god of fertility who became a god of war and the chase. But legend
associated him with Annwfn, and regarded him, like the Tuatha Dea, as a
king of fairyland. <span id="fr_415"></span>[2](#fn_414) In the legend
of S. Collen, the saint tells two men, whom he overhears speaking of
Gwyn and the fairies, that these are demons. "Thou shalt receive a
reproof from Gwyn," said one of them, and soon after Collen was summoned
to meet the king of Annwfn on Glastonbury Tor. He climbed the hill with
a flask of holy water, and saw on its top a splendid castle, with crowds
of beautiful and youthful folk, while the air resounded with music. He
was brought to Gwyn, who politely offered him food, but "I will not eat
of the leaves of the tree," cried the saint; and when he was asked to
admire the dresses of the crowd, all he would say was that the red
signified burning, the blue coldness. Then he threw the holy water over
them, and nothing was left but the bare hillside. <span
id="fr_416"></span>[3](#fn_415) Though Gwyn's court on Glastonbury is a
local Celtic Elysium, which was actually located there, the story marks
the hostility of the Church to the cult of Gwyn, perhaps practised on
hilltops, and this is further seen in the belief that he hunts souls of
the wicked and is connected with Annwfn in its later sense of hell. But
a mediant view is found in *Kulhwych*, where it is said of him that he
restrains the demons of hell lest they should destroy the people of this
world. In the *Triads* he is, like other gods, a great magician and
astrologer. <span id="fr_417"></span>[4](#fn_416)

Another group, unknown to the *Mabinogion*, save that

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Taliesin is one of the bearers of Bran's head,
is found in the *Book of Taliesin* and in the late story of Taliesin.
These, like the *Arthur* cycle, often refer to personages of the
*Mabinogion*; hence we gather that local groups of gods, originally
distinct, were later mingled in story, the references in the poems
reflecting this mingling. Late as is the *Hanes Taliesin* or story of
Taliesin, and expressed as much of it is in a *Märchen* formula, it is
based on old myths about Cerridwen and Taliesin of which its compiler
made use, following an old tradition already stereotyped in one of the
poems in the *Märchen* formula of the Transformation Combat. <span
id="fr_418"></span>[1](#fn_417) But the mythical fragments are also
mingled with traditions regarding the sixth century poet Taliesin. The
older saga was perhaps developed in a district south of the Dyû
estuary. <span id="fr_419"></span>[2](#fn_418) In Lake Tegid dwell Tegid
Voel, Cerridwen, and their children--the fair maiden Creirwy, Morvran,
and the ugly Avagddu. To give Avagddu knowledge, his mother prepares a
cauldron of inspiration from which three drops of inspiration will be
produced. These fall on the finger of Gwion, whom she set to stir it. He
put the finger in his mouth, and thus acquired the inspiration. He fled,
and Cerridwen pursued, the rest of the story being accommodated to the
Transformation Combat formula. Finally, Cerridwen as a hen swallows
Gwion as a grain of wheat, and bears him as a child, whom she throws
into the sea. Elphin, who rescues him, calls him Taliesin, and brings
him up as a bard. <span id="fr_420"></span>[3](#fn_419)

The water-world of Tegid is a submarine Elysium with the customary
cauldron of inspiration, regeneration, and fertility, like the cauldron
associated with a water-world in the *Mabinogion*. "Shall not my chair
be defended from the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

cauldron of Cerridwen," runs a line in a Taliesin poem, while another
speaks of her chair, which was probably in Elysium like that of Taliesin
himself in Caer Sidi. <span id="fr_421"></span>[1](#fn_420) Further
references to her connection with poetry show that she may have been
worshipped by bards, her cauldron being the source of their
inspiration. <span id="fr_422"></span>[2](#fn_421) Her anger at Gwion
may point to some form of the Celtic myth of the theft of the elements
of culture from the gods' land. But the cauldron was first of all
associated with a fertility cult, <span id="fr_423"></span>[3](#fn_422)
and Cerridwen must therefore once have been a goddess of fertility, who,
like Brigit, was later worshipped by bards. She may also have been a
corn-goddess, since she is called a goddess of grain, and tradition
associates the pig--a common embodiment of the corn-spirit--with
her. <span id="fr_424"></span>[4](#fn_423) If the tradition is correct,
this would be an instance, like that of Demeter and the pig, of an
animal embodiment of the corn-spirit being connected with a later
anthropomorphic corn-goddess.

Taliesin was probably an old god of poetic inspiration confused with the
sixth century poet of the same name, perhaps because this boastful poet
identified himself or was identified by other bards with the gods. He
speaks of his "splendid chair, inspiration of fluent and urgent song" in
Caer Sidi or Elysium, and, speaking in the god's name or identifying
himself with him, describes his presence with Llew, Bran, Gwydion, and
others, as well as his creation and his enchantment before be became
immortal. <span id="fr_425"></span>[5](#fn_424) He was present with
Arthur when a cauldron was stolen from Annwfn, and basing his verses on
the mythic transformations and rebirths of the gods, recounts in highly
inflated

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

language his own numerous forms and rebirths. <span
id="fr_426"></span>[1](#fn_425) His claims resemble those of the Shaman
who has the entrée of the spirit-world and can transform himself at
will. Taliesin's rebirth is connected with his acquiring of inspiration.
These incidents appear separately in the story of Fionn, who acquired
his inspiration by an accident, and was also said to have been reborn as
Mongan. They are myths common to various branches of the Celtic people,
and applied in different combinations to outstanding gods or
heroes. <span id="fr_427"></span>[2](#fn_426) The Taliesin poems show
that there may have been two gods or two mythic aspects of one god,
later combined together. He is the son of the goddess and dwells in the
divine land, but he is also a culture-hero stealing from the divine
land. Perhaps the myths reflect the encroachment of the cult of a god on
that of a goddess, his worshippers regarding him as her son, her
worshippers reflecting their hostility to the new god in a myth of her
enmity to him. Finally, the legend of the rescue of Taliesin the poet
from the waves became a myth of the divine outcast child rescued by
Elphin, and proving himself a bard when normal infants are merely
babbling.

The occasional and obscure references to the other members of this group
throw little light on their functions, save that Morvran, "sea-crow," is
described in *Kulhwych* as so ugly and terrible that no one would strike
him at the battle of Camlan. He may have been a war-god, like the
scald-crow goddesses of Ireland, and he is also spoken of in the
*Triads* as an "obstructor of slaughter" or "support of battle." <span
id="fr_428"></span>[3](#fn_427)

Ingenuity and speculation have busied themselves with

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

trying to prove that the personages of the Arthurian cycle are the old
gods of the Brythons, and the incidents of the romances fragments of the
old mythology. While some of these personages--those already present in
genuinely old Welsh tales and poems or in Geoffrey's *History*--are
reminiscent of the old gods, the romantic presentment of them in the
cycle itself is so largely imaginative, that nothing certain can be
gained from it for the understanding of the old mythology, much less the
old religion. Incidents which are the common stock of real life as well
as of romance are interpreted mythologically, and it is never quite
obvious why the slaying of one hero by another should signify the
conquest of a dark divinity by a solar hero, or why the capture of a
heroine by one knight when she is beloved of another, should make her a
dawn-goddess sharing her favours, now with the sun-god, now with a
"dark" divinity. Or, even granting the truth of this method, what light
does it throw on Celtic religion?

We may postulate a local Arthur saga fusing an old Brythonic god with
the historic sixth century Arthur. From this or from Geoffrey's handling
of it sprang the great romantic cycle. In the ninth century Nennius
Arthur is the historic war-chief, possibly Count of Britain, but in the
reference to his hunting the *Porcus Troit* (the *Twrch Trwyth*) the
mythic Arthur momentarily appears. <span id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_428)
Geoffrey's Arthur differs from the later Arthur of romance, and he may
have partially rationalised the saga, which was either of recent
formation or else local and obscure, since there is no reference to
Arthur in the *Mabinogion*--a fact which shows that "in the legends of
Gwynedd and Dyfedd he had no place whatever," <span
id="fr_430"></span>[2](#fn_429) and also that Arthur the god or mythic
hero was also purely local. In Geoffrey Arthur is the fruit

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of Igerna's *amour* with Uther, to whom Merlin has given her husband's
shape. Arthur conquers many hosts as well as giants, and his court is
the resort of all valorous persons. But he is at last wounded by his
wife's seducer, and carried to the Isle of Avallon to be cured of his
wounds, and nothing more is ever heard of him. <span
id="fr_431"></span>[1](#fn_430) Some of these incidents occur also in
the stories of Fionn and Mongan, and those of the mysterious begetting
of a wonder child and his final disappearance into fairyland are local
forms of a tale common to all branches of the Celts. <span
id="fr_432"></span>[2](#fn_431) This was fitted to the history of the
local god or hero Arthur, giving rise to the local saga, to which was
afterwards added events from the life of the historic Arthur. This
complex saga must then have acquired a wider fame long before the
romantic cycle took its place, as is suggested by the purely Welsh tales
of *Kulhwych* and the *Dream of Rhonabwy*, in the former of which the
personages (gods) of the *Mabinogion* figure in Arthur's train, though
he is far from being the Arthur of the romances. Sporadic references to
Arthur occur also in Welsh literature, and to the earlier saga belongs
the Arthur who spoils Elysium of its cauldron in a Taliesin poem. <span
id="fr_433"></span>[3](#fn_432) In the *Triads* there is a mingling of
the historic, the saga, and the later romance Arthur, but probably as a
result of the growing popularity of the saga Arthur he is added to many
*Triads* as a more remarkable person than the three whom they
describe. <span id="fr_434"></span>[4](#fn_433) Arthurian place-names
over the Brythonic area are more probably the result of the popularity
of the saga than that of the later romantic cycle, a parallel instance
being found in the extent of Ossianic place-names over the Goidelic area
as a result of the spread of the Fionn saga.

The character of the romance Arthur--the flower of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

knighthood and a great warrior--and the blending of the historic
war-leader Arthur with the mythic Arthur, suggest that the latter was
the ideal hero of certain Brythonic groups, as Fionn and Cúchulainn of
certain Goidelic groups. He may have been the object of a cult as these
heroes perhaps were, or he may have been a god more and more idealised
as a hero. If the earlier form of his name was Artor, "a ploughman," but
perhaps with a wider significance, and having an equivalent in Artaius,
a Gaulish god equated with Mercury, <span
id="fr_435"></span>[1](#fn_434) he may have been a god of agriculture
who became a war-god. But he was also regarded as a culture-hero,
stealing a cauldron and also swine from the gods' land, the last
incident euhemerised into the tale of an unsuccessful theft from March,
son of Meirchion, <span id="fr_436"></span>[2](#fn_435) while, like
other culture-heroes, he is a bard. To his story was easily fitted that
of the wonder-child, who, having finally disappeared into Elysium (later
located at Glastonbury), would reappear one day, like Fionn, as the
Saviour of his people. The local Arthur finally attained a fame far
exceeding that of any Brythonic god or hero.

Merlin, or Myrddin, appears in the romances as a great magician who is
finally overcome by the Lady of the Lake, and is in Geoffrey son of a
mysterious invisible personage who visits a woman, and, finally taking
human shape, begets Merlin. As a son who never had a father he is chosen
as the foundation sacrifice for Vortigern's tower by his magicians, but
he confutes them and shows why the tower can never be built, namely,
because of the dragons in the pool beneath it. Then follow his
prophecies regarding the dragons and the future of the country, and the
story of his removal of the Giant's Dance, or Stonehenge, from Ireland
to its present site--an ætiological myth explaining the origin of the
great

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

stone circle. His description of how the giants used the water with
which they washed the stones for the cure of sickness or wounds,
probably points to some ritual for healing in connection with these
megaliths. Finally, we hear of his transformation of the lovelorn Uther
and of his confidant Ulfin, as well as of himself. <span
id="fr_437"></span>[1](#fn_436) Here he appears as little more than an
ideal magician, possibly an old god, like the Irish "god of Druidism,"
to whose legend had been attached a story of supernatural conception.
Professor Rhŷs regards him as a Celtic Zeus or as the sun, because late
legends tell of his disappearance in a glass house into the sea. The
glass house is the expanse of light travelling with the sun (Merlin),
while the Lady of the Lake who comes daily to solace Merlin in his
enchanted prison is a dawn-goddess. Stonehenge was probably a temple of
this Celtic Zeus "whose late legendary self we have in Merlin." <span
id="fr_438"></span>[2](#fn_437) Such late romantic episodes and an
ætiological myth can hardly be regarded as affording safe basis for
these views, and their mythological interpretation is more than
doubtful. The sun is never prisoner of the dawn as Merlin is of Viviane.
Merlin and his glass house disappear for ever, but the sun reappears
every morning. Even the most poetic mythology must conform in some
degree to actual phenomena, but this cannot be said of the systems of
mythological interpretation. If Merlin belongs to the pagan period at
all, he was probably an ideal magician or god of magicians, prominent,
perhaps, in the Arthur saga as in the later romances, and credited with
a mysterious origin and an equally mysterious ending, the latter
described in many different ways.

The boastful Kei of the romances appears already in

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Kulhwych*, while in Geoffrey he is Arthur's
seneschal. <span id="fr_439"></span>[1](#fn_438) Nobler traits are his
in later Welsh poetry; he is a mighty warrior, fighting even against a
hundred, though his powers as a toper are also great. Here, too, his
death is lamented. <span id="fr_440"></span>[2](#fn_439) He may thus
have been a god of war, and his battle-fury may be poetically described
in a curious passage referring to him in Kulhwych: "His breath lasted
nine days and nine nights under water. He could remain without sleep for
the same period. No physician could heal a wound inflicted by his sword.
When he pleased he could make himself as tall as the tallest tree in the
wood. And when it rained hardest, whatever he carried remained dry above
and below his hand to the distance of a handbreadth, so great was his
natural heat. When it was coldest he was as glowing fuel to his
companions." <span id="fr_441"></span>[3](#fn_440) This almost exactly
resembles Cúchulainn's aspect in his battle-fury. In a curious poem
Gwenhyvar (Guinevere) extols his prowess as a warrior above that of
Arthur, and in *Kulhwych* and elsewhere there is enmity between the
two. <span id="fr_442"></span>[4](#fn_441) This may point to Kei's
having been a god of tribes hostile to those of whom Arthur was hero.

Mabon, one of Arthur's heroes in *Kulhwych* and the *Dream of Rhonabwy*,
whose name, from *mab* (*map*), means "a youth," may be one with the god
Maponos equated with Apollo in Britain and Gaul, perhaps as a god of
healing springs. <span id="fr_443"></span>[5](#fn_442) His mother's
name, Modron, is a local form of *Matrona*, a river-goddess and probably
one of the mother-goddesses as her name implies. In the *Triads* Mabon
is one of the three eminent prisoners of Prydein. To obtain his help in
hunting the magic boar his prison must be found, and this is done by

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

animals, in accordance with a *Märchen* formula, while the words spoken
by them show the immense duration of his imprisonment--perhaps a hint of
his immortality. <span id="fr_444"></span>[1](#fn_443) But he was also
said to have died and been buried at Nantlle, <span
id="fr_445"></span>[2](#fn_444) which, like Gloucester, the place of his
prison, may have been a site of his widely extended cult. <span
id="fr_446"></span>[3](#fn_445)

 

Taken as a whole the various gods and heroes of the Brythons, so far as
they are known to us, just as they resemble the Irish divinities in
having been later regarded as mortals, magicians, and fairies, so they
resemble them in their functions, dimly as these are perceived. They are
associated with Elysium, they are lords of fertility and growth, of the
sea, of the arts of culture and of war. The prominent position of
certain goddesses may point to what has already been discovered of them
in Gaul and Ireland--their pre-eminence and independence. But, like the
divinities of Gaul and Ireland, those of Wales were mainly local in
character, and only in a few cases attained a wider popularity and cult.

Certain British gods mentioned on inscriptions may be identified with
some of those just considered--Nodons with Nudd or Lludd, Belenos with
Belinus or Beli, Maponos with Mahon, Taranos (in continental
inscriptions only), with a Taran mentioned in *Kulhwych*. <span
id="fr_447"></span>[4](#fn_446) Others are referred to in classical

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

writings--Andrasta, a goddess of victory, to whom Boudicca prayed; <span
id="fr_448"></span>[1](#fn_447) Sul, a goddess of hot springs, equated
with Minerva at Bath. <span id="fr_449"></span>[2](#fn_448) Inscriptions
also mention Epona, the horse-goddess; Brigantia, perhaps a form of
Brigit; Belisama (the Mersey in Ptolemay), <span
id="fr_450"></span>[3](#fn_449) a goddess in Gaulish inscriptions.
Others refer to the group goddesses, the *Matres*. Some gods are equated
with Mars--Camulos, known also on the Continent and perhaps the same as
Cumal, father of Fionn; Belatucadros, "comely in slaughter"; Cocidius,
Corotiacus, Barrex, and Totatis (perhaps Lucan's Teutates). Others are
equated with Apollo in his character as a god of healing--Anextiomarus,
Grannos (at Musselburgh and in many continental inscriptions), Arvalus,
Mogons, etc. Most of these and many others found on isolated
inscriptions were probably local in character, though some, occurring
also on the continent, had attained a wider popularity. <span
id="fr_451"></span>[4](#fn_450) But some of the inscriptions referring
to the latter may be due to Gaulish soldiers quartered in Britain.

 

COMPARATIVE TABLE OF DIVINITIES WITH SIMILAR NAMES IN IRELAND, BRITAIN,
AND GAUL.

Italics denote names found in Inscriptions.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>IRELAND.</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>BRITAIN.</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>GAUL.</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Anextiomarus</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Anextiomarus</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ann</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Anna (?)</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Anoniredi, "chariot of Anu"</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Badb</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Bodua</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Beli, Belinus</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Belenos</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Belisama</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Belisama</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Brigit</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Brigantia</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Brigindu</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Bron</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Bran</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Brennus (?)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Buanann</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Buanu</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Cumal</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Camulos</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Camulos</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Danu</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Dôn</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Epona</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Epona</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p><span id="page_126">p. 126</span></p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Goibniu</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Govannon</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Grannos</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Grannos</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ler</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Llyr</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Lug</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Llew or Lleu (?)</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Lugus, <em>Lugoves</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Mabon, <em>Maponos</em></p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Maponos</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Manannan</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Manawyddan</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Matres</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Matres</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Mider</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Medros (?)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Modron</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Matrona (?)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Nemon</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Nemetona</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Nét</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Neton</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Nuada</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Nodons, Nudd</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Hael, Llûdd (?)</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ogma</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ogmios</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Silvanus</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Silvanus</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Taran</p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Taranis</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><em></em>
<p>Totatis, <em>Tutatis</em></p></td>
<td width="33%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Teutates</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_326"></span>[95:1](rac09.htm#fr_327) The text of the
*Mabinogion* has been edited by Rhŷs and Evans, 1887, and it has been
translated into English by Lady Guest, and more critically, into French,
by Loth. Many of the *Triads* will be found in Loth's second volume. For
the poetry see Skene, *Four Ancient Books of Wales*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[96:1](rac09.htm#fr_328) These incidents are
found mainly in the story of Branwen, *e.g.* those of the cauldron, a
frequent accessory in Irish tales; the regeneration of the warriors,
also found in the story of Mag-tured, though no cauldron is used the
red-hot house, occurring also in *Mesca Ulad*; the description of Bran
paralleled by that of MacCecht.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[96:2](rac09.htm#fr_329) Anwyl, *ZCP* i. 277,
ii. 124, iii. 122.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[96:3](rac09.htm#fr_330) Bp. of S. Davids,
*Vestiges of the Gael in Gwynned*, 1851; Rhŷs, *TSC* 1894-1895, 21.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[96:4](rac09.htm#fr_331) Skene, i. 45; Meyer,
*TSC* 1895-1896, 55.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[97:1](rac09.htm#fr_332) Cf. John, *The
Mabinogion*, 1901, 19. Curoi appears as Kubert, and Conchobar as Knychur
in *Kulhwych* (Loth, i. 202). A poem of *Taliesin* has for subject the
death of Corroi, son of Dayry (Curoi mac Daire), Skene, i. 254.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[97:2](rac09.htm#fr_333) Loth, *RC* x. 356;
John, *op. cit.* 19; Nutt, *Arch. Rev.* i. 331.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[97:3](rac09.htm#fr_334) The giant Ysppadden in
*Kulhwych* resembles Balor, but has no evil eye.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[97:4](rac09.htm#fr_335) Anwyl, *ZCP* ii.
127-128, "The merging of the two legends \[of Dôn and Taliesin\] may
have arisen through the fusion of Penllyn with Ardudwy and Arvon."

<span id="fn_335"></span>[98:1](rac09.htm#fr_336) Professor Rhŷs thinks
that the Llyr family may be pre-Celtic, *TSC* 1894-1895, 29 f.; *CFL*
552.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[98:2](rac09.htm#fr_337) Loth, i. 97 f.; Lady
Guest, iii. 143 f.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[99:1](rac09.htm#fr_338) See Nutt, *Folk-lore
Record*, v. 1 f.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[99:2](rac09.htm#fr_339) Loth, i. 298, ii.
243-244; Geoffrey, *Hist. Brit.* ii. 11.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[99:3](rac09.htm#fr_340) Loth, i. 224, 265, ii.
215, 244; Geoff. ii. 11.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[100:1](rac09.htm#fr_341) Skene, i. 81; Rhŷs,
*Academy*, Jan. 7, 1882.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[100:2](rac09.htm#fr_342) *Triads*, Loth, ii.
\~93; Nutt, *Folk-lore Record*, v. 9.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[100:3](rac09.htm#fr_343) *Hist. Brit.* ii.
11-14.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[100:4](rac09.htm#fr_344) *AL* 131.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[100:5](rac09.htm#fr_345) Skene, i. 262.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[101:1](rac09.htm#fr_346) See Nutt-Meyer, ii.
17.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[101:2](rac09.htm#fr_347) Skene, i. 276.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[101:3](rac09.htm#fr_348) Loth, i. 208, 280;
see also i. 19 7, ii. 245, 294.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[101:4](rac09.htm#fr_349) See Skene i. 355. The
raven is rather the bird of prey come to devour Urien than his
"attribute."

<span id="fn_349"></span>[101:5](rac09.htm#fr_350) Skene, i. 298.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[101:6](rac09.htm#fr_351) For these theories
see Rhŷs, *HL* 90 f.; *AL* ch. 11; *CFL* 552.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[102:1](rac09.htm#fr_352) See Ch. XXIV.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[102:2](rac09.htm#fr_353) See [p.
242](rac19.htm#page_242).

<span id="fn_353"></span>[102:3](rac09.htm#fr_354) Loth, i. 65, ii. 285.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[102:4](rac09.htm#fr_355) *Hist. Brit.* iii. 1
f. Geoffrey says that Billingsgate was called after Belinus, and that
his ashes were preserved in the gate, a tradition recalling some
connection of the god with the gate.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[103:1](rac09.htm#fr_356) An early Caradawc
saga may have become mingled with the story of Caractacus.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[103:2](rac09.htm#fr_357) Rees, 77.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[103:3](rac09.htm#fr_358) So Elton, 291.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[103:4](rac09.htm#fr_359) *Folk-lore Record*,
v. 29.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[103:5](rac09.htm#fr_360) Lady Guest, iii. 134.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[103:6](rac09.htm#fr_361) Dôn is sometimes held
to be male, but she is distinctly called sister of Math (Loth, i. 134),
and as the equivalent of Danu she must be female.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[103:7](rac09.htm#fr_362) Loth, ii. 209.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[104:1](rac09.htm#fr_363) See [p.
60](rac07.htm#page_60), *supra*, and Rhŷs, *HL* 90 f.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[104:2](rac09.htm#fr_364) Lady Guest, iii. 255;
Skene, i. 297, 350.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[104:3](rac09.htm#fr_365) For this *Mabinogi*
see Loth, i. 117 f.; Guest, iii. 189 f.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[104:4](rac09.htm#fr_366) Skene, i. 286.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[105:1](rac09.htm#fr_367) Loth, ii. 229, 257;
and for other references to Math, Skene, i. 281, 269, 299.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[105:2](rac09.htm#fr_368) Skene, i. 296, 281.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[105:3](rac09.htm#fr_369) Loth, ii. 297; Rhŷs,
*HL* 276.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[106:1](rac09.htm#fr_370) Skene, i. 264.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[106:2](rac09.htm#fr_371) Rhŷs, *HL* 270.
Skene, i. 430, 537, gives a different meaning to *seon*.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[106:3](rac09.htm#fr_372) Skene, i. 264.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[106:4](rac09.htm#fr_373) Loth, ii. 296.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[106:5](rac09.htm#fr_374) Skene, i. 299, 531.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[107:1](rac09.htm#fr_375) See [p.
224](rac17.htm#page_224), *infra*.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[107:2](rac09.htm#fr_376) Guest, iii. 255;
Morris, *Celtic Remains*, 231.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[107:3](rac09.htm#fr_377) *HL* 283 f. See also
Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* i. 131.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[107:4](rac09.htm#fr_378) Loth, i. 240.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[107:5](rac09.htm#fr_379) Stokes, *US* 34.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[107:6](rac09.htm#fr_380) *Myvyrian Archæol.*
i. 168; Skene, i. 275, 278 f.; Loth, ii. 259.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[108:1](rac09.htm#fr_381) See my *Childhood of
Fiction*, 127. Llew's vulnerability does not depend on the discovery of
his separable soul, as is usual. The earliest form of this *Märchen* is
the Egyptian story of the Two Brothers, and that of Samson and Delilah
is another old form of it.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[108:2](rac09.htm#fr_382) Skene, i. 314, ii.
342.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[108:3](rac09.htm#fr_383) *HL* 408; *RC* x.
490.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[108:4](rac09.htm#fr_384) *HL* 237, 319, 398,
408.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[108:5](rac09.htm#fr_385) *HL* 384.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[109:1](rac09.htm#fr_386) *HL* 474, 424.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[109:2](rac09.htm#fr_387) Loth, ii. 231.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[109:3](rac09.htm#fr_388) Loth, i. 240.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[109:4](rac09.htm#fr_389) Skene, i, 286-287.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[109:5](rac09.htm#fr_390) Loth, ii. 263.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[110:1](rac09.htm#fr_391) Skene, ii. 159; Rhŷs,
*HL* 157; Guest, iii. 255.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[110:2](rac09.htm#fr_392) Rhŷs, *HL* 161, 566.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[110:3](rac09.htm#fr_393) Skene, i. 282, 288,
310, 543, ii. 145; Loth, i. 135; Rhŷs, *HL* 387.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[110:4](rac09.htm#fr_394) Loth, i. 27 f.;
Guest, iii. 7 f.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[111:1](rac09.htm#fr_395) Rhiannon is daughter
of Heveidd Hen or "the Ancient," probably an old divinity.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[111:2](rac09.htm#fr_396) In the *Mabinogi* and
in Fionn tales a mysterious hand snatches away newly-born children. Cf.
*ZCP* i. 153.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[111:3](rac09.htm#fr_397) Anwyl, *ZCP* i. 288.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[112:1](rac09.htm#fr_398) Loth, ii. 247.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[112:2](rac09.htm#fr_399) Skene, i. 264.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[112:3](rac09.htm#fr_400) *Ibid.* i. 276.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[112:4](rac09.htm#fr_401) *Ibid.* i. 310.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[112:5](rac09.htm#fr_402) Loth, i. 166.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[112:6](rac09.htm#fr_403) *Hist. Brit.* ii. 11,
iii. 1, 20, iv. 3.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[113:1](rac09.htm#fr_404) Cf. Anwyl, *ZCP* i.
287.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[113:2](rac09.htm#fr_405) Skene, i. 431; Loth,
ii. 278. Some phrases seem to connect Beli with the sea--the waves are
his cattle, the brine his liquor.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[113:3](rac09.htm#fr_406) Loth, ii. 209, 249,
260, 283.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[113:4](rac09.htm#fr_407) Geoffrey, *Brit.
Hist.* iv. 3. 4.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[113:5](rac09.htm#fr_408) Rhŷs, *HL* 125 L
Loth, i. 265; MacBain, *CM* ix. 66.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[113:6](rac09.htm#fr_409) See Loth, i. 269 and
Skene, i. 293.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[114:1](rac09.htm#fr_410) Loth, i. 173 f.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[114:2](rac09.htm#fr_411) Loth, ii. 256, 274.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[114:3](rac09.htm#fr_412) Rhŷs, *HL* 606. Cf.
the Breton fairies, the *Korr* and *Korrigan*.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[114:4](rac09.htm#fr_413) Geoffrey, iii. 20.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[115:1](rac09.htm#fr_414) Loth, i. 253-254;
Skene, i. 293.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[115:2](rac09.htm#fr_415) Guest, iii. 323.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[115:3](rac09.htm#fr_416) *Ibid.* 325.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[115:4](rac09.htm#fr_417) Loth, i. 253, ii.
297.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[116:1](rac09.htm#fr_418) See [p.
353](rac26.htm#page_353), *infra*.; Skene, i. 532.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[116:2](rac09.htm#fr_419) Anwyl, *ZCP* i. 293.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[116:3](rac09.htm#fr_420) Guest, iii. 356 f.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[117:1](rac09.htm#fr_421) Skene, i. 275, 296.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[117:2](rac09.htm#fr_422) *Ibid.* i. 498, 500.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[117:3](rac09.htm#fr_423) See [p.
382](rac27.htm#page_382), *infra*.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[117:4](rac09.htm#fr_424) *Mon. Hist. Brit.* i.
698, ii. 5; Thomas, *Revue de l'hist. des Religions*, xxxviii. 339.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[117:5](rac09.htm#fr_425) Skene, i. 263,
274-276, 278, 281-282, 286-287. His "chair" bestows immortal youth and
freedom from sickness.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[118:1](rac09.htm#fr_426) Skene, i. 264, 276
f., 309, 532. See [p. 356](rac26.htm#page_356), *infra*.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[118:2](rac09.htm#fr_427) See pp.
[350](rac26.htm#page_350)-1, *infra*. Fionn and Taliesin are examples of
the *Märchen* formula of a hero expelled and brought back to honour,
Nutt-Meyer, ii. 88.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[118:3](rac09.htm#fr_428) Loth, i. 209, ii.
238; Skene, ii. 459.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[119:1](rac09.htm#fr_429) Nennius, ch. 50, 79.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[119:2](rac09.htm#fr_430) Anwyl, *ZCP* i. 293.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[120:1](rac09.htm#fr_431) Geoffrey, viii. 9-xi.
3.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[120:2](rac09.htm#fr_432) Nutt-Meyer, ii. 22 f.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[120:3](rac09.htm#fr_433) See [p.
381](rac27.htm#page_381), *infra*.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[120:4](rac09.htm#fr_434) Loth, ii. 232, 245.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[121:1](rac09.htm#fr_435) Rhŷs, *AL* 39 f.
Others derive the name from *arto-s*, "bear." MacBain, 357.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[121:2](rac09.htm#fr_436) Loth. ii. 247; Skene,
ii. 459.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[122:1](rac09.htm#fr_437) Geoffrey, vi. 17-19,
vii. viii. 1, 10-12, 19. In a poem (Skene, i. 478), Myrddin is called
"the man who speaks from the grave "--a conception familiar to the
Celts, who thought of the dead as living on in the grave. See [p.
340](rac25.htm#page_340), *infra*.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[122:2](rac09.htm#fr_438) Rhŷs, *HL*, 154 f.,
158-159, 194.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[123:1](rac09.htm#fr_439) Geoffrey, ix. 12,
etc.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[123:2](rac09.htm#fr_440) Skene, ii. 51.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[123:3](rac09.htm#fr_441) Loth. i. 225; cf. [p.
134](rac10.htm#page_134), *infra*. From this description Elton supposes
Kei to have been a god of fire.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[123:4](rac09.htm#fr_442) *Myv. Arch.* i. 175;
Loth, i. 269. Rhŷs, *AL* 59, thinks Merlin may have been Guinevere's
ravisher.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[123:5](rac09.htm#fr_443) Holder, i. 414.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[124:1](rac09.htm#fr_444) Loth i. 250, 260 f.,
280, ii. 215, 244.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[124:2](rac09.htm#fr_445) Skene, i. 363, ii.
406; *Myv. Arch.* i. 78.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[124:3](rac09.htm#fr_446) Hu Gadarn is
mentioned in the *Triads* as a leader of the Cymry from the east and
their teacher in ploughing. He divided them into clans, and invented
music and song. The monster *avanc* was drawn by him from the lake which
had burst and caused the flood (see [p. 231](rac18.htm#page_231),
*infra*). Perhaps Hu is an old culture-god of some tribes, but the
*Triads* referring to him are of late date (Loth, ii. 271, 289, 290-291,
298-299). For the ridiculous Neo-Druidic speculations based on Hu, see
Davies, *Celtic Researches* and *Mythology and Rites of the Druids*.

Gurgiunt, son of Belinus, in Geoffrey, iii. 11, may be the French
legendary Gargantua, perhaps an old god. See the works of Sébillot and
Gaidoz on *Gargantua*.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[124:4](rac09.htm#fr_447) Loth, i. 270.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[125:1](rac09.htm#fr_448) Dio Cassius, lxii. 6.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[125:2](rac09.htm#fr_449) Solinus, xxii. 10.
See [p. 2](rac04.htm#page_2), *supra*.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[125:3](rac09.htm#fr_450) Ptol. ii. 3. 2.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[125:4](rac09.htm#fr_451) For all these see
Holder, &v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Cúchulainn Cycle](rac10)
