[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac05)  [Next](rac07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

### CHAPTER III.

# THE GODS OF GAUL AND THE CONTINENTAL CELTS.

THE passage in which Cæsar sums up the Gaulish pantheon runs: "They
worship chiefly the god Mercury; of him there are many symbols, and they
regard him as the inventor of all the arts, as the guide of travellers,
and as possessing great influence over bargains and commerce. After him
they worship Apollo and Mars, Juppiter and Minerva. About these they
hold much the same beliefs as other nations. Apollo heals diseases,
Minerva teaches the elements of industry and the arts, Juppiter rules
over the heavens, Mars directs war. . . . All the Gauls assert that they
are descended from Dispater, their progenitor." <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

As will be seen in this chapter, the Gauls had many other gods than
these, while the Roman gods, by whose names Cæsar calls the Celtic
divinities, probably only approximately corresponded to them in
functions. As the Greeks called by the names of their own gods those of
Egypt, Persia, and Babylonia, so the Romans identified Greek, Teutonic,
and Celtic gods with theirs. The identification was seldom complete, and
often extended only to one particular function or attribute. But, as in
Gaul, it was often part of a state policy, and there the fusion of cults
was intended to break the power of the Druids. The Gauls seem to have
adopted Roman civilisation easily, and to have acquiesced in the process
of assimilation of their

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

divinities to those of their conquerors. Hence we have thousands of
inscriptions in which a god is called by the name of the Roman deity to
whom he was assimilated and by his own Celtic name--Jupiter Taranis,
Apollo Grannus, etc. Or sometimes to the name of the Roman god is added
a descriptive Celtic epithet or a word derived from a Celtic place-name.
Again, since Augustus reinstated the cult of the Lares, with himself as
chief Lar, the epithet Augustus was given to all gods to whom the
character of the Lares could be ascribed, *e.g.* Belenos Augustus. Cults
of local gods became cults of the genius of the place, coupled with the
genius of the emperor. In some cases, however, the native name stands
alone. The process was aided by art. Celtic gods are represented after
Greco-Roman or Greco-Egyptian models. Sometimes these carry a native
divine symbol, or, in a few cases, the type is purely native, *e.g.*
that of Cernunnos. Thus the native paganism was largely transformed
before Christianity appeared in Gaul. Many Roman gods were worshipped as
such, not only by the Romans in Gaul, but by the Gauls, and we find
there also traces of the Oriental cults affected by the Romans. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

There were probably in Gaul many local gods, tribal or otherwise, of
roads and commerce, of the arts, of healing, etc., who, bearing
different names, might easily be identified with each other or with
Roman gods. Cæsar's Mercury, Mars, Minerva, etc., probably include many
local Minervas, Mars, and Mercuries. There may, however, have been a few
great gods common to all Gaul, universally worshipped, besides the
numerous local gods, some of whom may have been adopted from the
aborigines. An examination of the divine names in Holder's
*Altceltischer Sprachschatz* will show how numerous the local gods of
the continental Celts must have been. Professor

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Anwyl reckons that 270 gods are mentioned once
on inscriptions, 24 twice, 11 thrice, 10 four times, 3 five times, 2
seven times, 4 fifteen times, 1 nineteen times (Grannos), and 1
thirty-nine times (Belenos). <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)

The god or gods identified with Mercury were very popular in Gaul, as
Cæsar's words and the witness of place-names derived from the Roman name
of the god show. These had probably supplanted earlier names derived
from those of the corresponding native gods. Many temples of the god
existed, especially in the region of the Allobrogi, and bronze
statuettes of him have been found in abundance. Pliny also describes a
colossal statue designed for the Arverni who had a great temple of the
god on the Puy de Dôme. <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55) Mercury was
not necessarily the chief god, and at times, *e.g.* in war, the native
war-gods would be prominent. The native names of the gods assimilated to
Mercury are many in number; in some cases they are epithets, derived
from the names of places where a local "Mercury" was worshipped, in
others they are derived from some function of the gods. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_56) One of these titles is Artaios, perhaps
cognate with Irish *art*, "god," or connected with *artos*, "bear."
Professor Rhŷs, however, finds its cognate in Welsh *âr*, "ploughed
land," as if one of the god's functions connected him with
agriculture. <span id="fr_57"></span>[4](#fn_57) This is supported by
another inscription to Mercurius Cultor at Wurtemberg. Local gods of
agriculture must thus have been assimilated to Mercury. A god Moccus,
"swine," was also identified with Mercury, and the swine was a frequent
representative of the corn-spirit or of vegetation divinities in

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Europe. The flesh of the animal was often mixed
with the seed corn or buried in the fields to promote fertility. The
swine had been a sacred animal among the Celts, but had apparently
become an anthropomorphic god of fertility, Moccus, assimilated to
Mercury, perhaps because the Greek Hermes caused fertility in flocks and
herds. Such a god was one of a class whose importance was great among
the Celts as an agricultural people.

Commerce, much developed among the settled Gauls, gave rise to a god or
gods who guarded roads over which merchants travelled, and boundaries
where their transactions took place. Hence we have an inscription from
Yorkshire, "To the god who invented roads and paths," while another
local god of roads, equated with Mercury, was Cimiacinus. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)

Another god, Ogmios, a native god of speech, who draws men by chains
fastened to the tip of his tongue, is identified in Lucian with
Heracles, and is identical with the Goidelic Ogma. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) Eloquence and speech are important matters
among primitive peoples, and this god has more likeness to Mercury as a
culture-god than to Heracles, Greek writers speaking of eloquence as
binding men with the chains of Hermes.

Several local gods, of agriculture, commerce, and culture, were thus
identified with Mercury, and the Celtic Mercury was sometimes worshipped
on hilltops, one of the epithets of the god, Dumias, being connected
with the Celtic word for hill or mound. Irish gods were also associated
with mounds.

Many local gods were identified with Apollo both in his

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

capacity of god of healing and also that of god of light. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) The two functions are not incompatible,
and this is suggested by the name Grannos, god of thermal springs both
in Britain and on the Continent. The name is connected with a root which
gives words meaning "burning," "shining," etc., and from which comes
also Irish *grian*, "sun." The god is still remembered in a chant sung
round bonfires in Auvergne. A sheaf of corn is set on fire, and called
"Granno mio," while the people sing, "Granno, my friend; Granno, my
father; Granno, my mother." <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61) Another
god of thermal springs was Borvo, Bormo, or Bormanus, whose name is
derived from *borvo*, whence Welsh *berw*, "boiling," and is evidently
connected with the bubbling of the springs. <span
id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62) Votive tablets inscribed Grannos or Borvo
show that the offerers desired healing for themselves or others.

The name Belenos found over a wide area, but mainly in Aquileia, comes
from *belo-s*, bright, and probably means "the shining one." It is thus
the name of a Celtic sun-god, equated with Apollo in that character. If
he is the Belinus referred to by Geoffrey of Monmouth <span
id="fr_63"></span>[4](#fn_63) his cult must have extended into Britain
from the Continent, and he is often mentioned by classical writers,
while much later Ausonius speaks of his priest in Gaul. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[5](#fn_64) Many place and personal names point to the
popularity of his cult, and inscriptions show that he, too, was a god of
health and of healing-springs. The plant *Belinuntia* 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

was called after him and venerated for its healing powers. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65) The sun-god's functions of light and
fertility easily passed over into those of health-giving, as our study
of Celtic festivals will show.

A god with the name Maponos, connected with words denoting "
youthfulness," is found in England and Gaul, equated with Apollo, who
himself is called *Bonus Puer* in a Dacian inscription. Another god
Mogons or Mogounos, whose name is derived from Mayo, "to increase," and
suggests the idea of youthful strength, may be a form of the sun-god,
though some evidence points to his having been a sky-god. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66)

The Celtic Apollo is referred to by classical writers. Diodorus speaks
of his circular temple in an island of the Hyperboreans, adorned with
votive offerings. The kings of the city where the temple stood, and its
overseers, were called "Boreads," and every nineteenth year the god
appeared dancing in the sky at the spring equinox. <span
id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67) The identifications of the temple with
Stonehenge and of the Boreads with the Bards are quite hypothetical.
Apollonius says that the Celts regarded the waters of Eridanus as due to
the tears of Apollo--probably a native myth attributing the creation of
springs and rivers to the tears of a god, equated by the Greeks with
Apollo. <span id="fr_68"></span>[4](#fn_68) The Celtic sun-god, as has
been seen, was a god of healing springs.

Some sixty names or titles of Celtic war-gods are known, generally
equated with Mars. <span id="fr_69"></span>[5](#fn_69) These were
probably local tribal

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

divinities regarded as leading their worshippers to battle. Some of the
names show that these gods were thought of as mighty warriors, *e.g.*
Caturix, " battle-king," Belatu-Cadros--a common name in
Britain--perhaps meaning "comely in slaughter," <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) and Albiorix, "world-king." <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71) Another name, Rigisamus, from *rix* and
*samus*, "like to," gives the idea of "king-like." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72)

Toutatis, Totatis, and Tutatis are found in inscriptions from Seckau,
York, and Old Carlisle, and may be identified with Lucan's Teutates, who
with Taranis and Esus mentioned by him, is regarded as one of three
pan-Celtic gods. <span id="fr_73"></span>[4](#fn_73) Had this been the
case we should have expected to find many more inscriptions to them. The
scholiast on Lucan identifies Teutates now with Mars, now with Mercury.
His name is connected with *teuta*, "tribe," and he is thus a tribal
war-god, regarded as the embodiment of the tribe in its warlike
capacity.

Neton, a war-god of the Accetani, has a name connected with Irish *nia*,
"warrior," and may be equated with the Irish war-god Net. Another god,
Camulos, known from British and continental inscriptions, and figured on
British coins with warlike emblems, has perhaps some connection with
Cumal, father of Fionn, though it is uncertain whether Cumal was an
Irish divinity. <span id="fr_74"></span>[5](#fn_74)

Another god equated with Mars is the Gaulish Braciaca, god of malt.
According to classical writers, the Celts were

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

a drunken race, and besides importing quantities of wine, they had their
own native drinks, *e.g.* κοῦρμι, the Irish *cuirm*, and *braccat*, both
made from malt (*braich*). <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) These
words, with the Gaulish brace, "spelt," <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76) are connected with the name of this god,
who was a divine personification of the substance from which the drink
was made which produced, according to primitive ideas, the divine frenzy
of intoxication. It is not clear why Mars should have been equated with
this god.

Cæsar says that the Celtic Juppiter governed heaven. A god who carries a
wheel, probably a sun-god, and another, a god of thunder, called
Taranis, seem to have been equated with Juppiter. The sun-god with the
wheel was not equated with Apollo, who seems to have represented Celtic
sun-gods only in so far as they were also gods of healing. In some cases
the god with the wheel carries also a thunderbolt, and on some altars,
dedicated to Juppiter, both a wheel and a thunderbolt are figured. Many
races have symbolised the sun as a circle or wheel, and an old Roman
god, Summanus, probably a sun-god, later assimilated to Juppiter, had as
his emblem a wheel. The Celts had the same symbolism, and used the wheel
symbol as an amulet, <span id="fr_77"></span>[3](#fn_77) while at the
midsummer festivals blazing wheels, symbolising the sun, were rolled
down a slope. Possibly the god carries a thunderbolt because the Celts,
like other races, believed that lightning was a spark from the sun.

Three divinities have claims to be the god whom Cæsar calls Dispater--a
god with a hammer, a crouching god called Cernunnos, and a god called
Esus or Silvanus. Possibly the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

native Dispater was differently envisaged in different districts, so
that these would be local forms of one god.

1\. The god Taranis mentioned by Lucan is probably the Taranoos and
Taranucnos of inscriptions, sometimes equated with Juppiter. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) These names are connected with Celtic
words for "thunder"; hence Taranis is a thunder-god. The scholiasts on
Lucan identify him now with Juppiter, now with Dispater. This latter
identification is supported by many who regard the god with the hammer
as at once Taranis and Dispater, though it cannot be proved that the god
with the hammer is Taranis. On one inscription the hammer-god is called
Sucellos; hence we may regard Taranis as a distinct deity, a
thunder-god, equated with Juppiter, and possibly represented by the
Taran of the Welsh tale of *Kulhwych*. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79)

Primitive men, whose only weapon and tool was a stone axe or hammer,
must have regarded it as a symbol of force, then of supernatural force,
hence of divinity. It is represented on remains of the Stone Age, and
the axe was a divine symbol to the Mycenæans, a hieroglyph of Neter to
the Egyptians, and a worshipful object to Polynesians and Chaldeans. The
cult of axe or hammer may have been widespread, and to the Celts, as to
many other peoples, it was a divine symbol. Thus it does not necessarily
denote a thunderbolt, but rather power and might, and possibly, as the
tool which shaped things, creative might. The Celts made *ex voto*
hammers of lead, or used axe-heads as amulets, or figured them on altars
and coins, and they also placed the hammer in the hand of a god. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_80)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

The god with the hammer is a gracious bearded figure, clad in Gaulish
dress, and he carries also a cup. His plastic type is derived from that
of the Alexandrian Serapis, ruler of the underworld, and that of
Hades-Pluto. <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) His emblems, especially
that of the hammer, are also those of the Pluto of the Etruscans, with
whom the Celts had been in contact. <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82)
He is thus a Celtic Dispater, an underworld god, possibly at one time an
Earth-god and certainly a god of fertility, and ancestor of the Celtic
folk. In some cases, like Serapis, he carries a *modius* on his head,
and this, like the cup, is an emblem of chthonian gods, and a symbol of
the fertility of the soil. The god being benevolent, his hammer, like
the tool with which man forms so many things, could only be a symbol of
creative force. <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83) As an ancestor of
the Celts, the god is naturally represented in Celtic dress. In one
bas-relief he is called Sucellos, and has a consort, Nantosvelta. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[4](#fn_84) Various meanings have been assigned to
"Sucellos," but it probably denotes the god's power of striking with the
hammer. M. D'Arbois hence regards him as a god of blight and death, like
Balor. <span id="fr_85"></span>[5](#fn_85) But though this Celtic
Dispater was a god of the dead who lived on in the under-

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

world, he was not necessarily a destructive god. The underworld god was
the god from whom or from whose kingdom men came forth, and he was also
a god of fertility. To this we shall return.

2\. A bearded god, probably squatting, with horns from each of which
hangs a torque, is represented on an altar found at Paris. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) He is called Cernunnos, perhaps "the
horned," from *cerna*, "horn," and a whole group of nameless gods, with
similar or additional attributes, have affinities with him.

(*a*) A bronze statuette from Autun represents a similar figure,
probably horned, who presents a torque to two ram's headed serpents.
Fixed above his ears are two small heads. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87) On a monument from Vandœuvres is a
squatting horned god, pressing a sack. Two genii stand beside him on a
serpent, while one of them holds a torque. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88)

(*b*) Another squatting horned figure with a torque occurs on an altar
from Reims. He presses a bag, from which grain escapes, and on it an ox
and stag are feeding. A rat is represented on the pediment above, and on
either side stand Apollo and Mercury. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[4](#fn_89) On the altar of Saintes is a squatting but
headless god with torque and purse. Beside him is a goddess with a
cornucopia, and a smaller divinity with a cornucopia and an apple. A
similar squatting figure, supported by male and female deities, is
represented on the other side of the altar. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[5](#fn_90) On the altar of Beaune are three figures,
one horned with a cornucopia, another three-headed, holding a
basket. <span id="fr_91"></span>[6](#fn_91) Three figures, one female
and two male, are found on the Dennevy altar. One god is three-faced,
the other has a cornucopia, which he offers to a serpent. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[7](#fn_92)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

(*c*) Another image represents a three-faced god, holding a serpent with
a ram's head. <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93)

(*d*) Above a seated god and goddess on an altar from Malmaison is a
block carved to represent three faces. To be compared with these are
seven steles from Reims, each with a triple face but only one pair of
eyes. Above some of these is a ram's head. On an eighth stele the heads
are separated. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94)

Cernunnos may thus have been regarded as a three-headed, horned,
squatting god, with a torque and ram's-headed serpent. But a horned god
is sometimes a member of a triad, perhaps representing myths in which
Cernunnos was associated with other gods. The three-headed god may be
the same as the horned god, though on the Beaune altar they are
distinct. The various representations are linked together, but it is not
certain that all are varying types of one god. Horns, torque, horned
snake, or even the triple head may have been symbols pertaining to more
than one god, though generally associated with Cernunnos.

The squatting attitude of the god has been differently explained, and
its affinities regarded now as Buddhist, now as Greco-Egyptian. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95) But if the god is a Dispater, and the
ancestral god of the Celts, it is natural, as M. Mowat points out, to
represent him in the typical attitude of the Gauls when sitting, since
they did not use seats. <span id="fr_96"></span>[4](#fn_96) While the
horns were probably symbols of power and worn also by chiefs on their
helmets, <span id="fr_97"></span>[5](#fn_97) they may also show that the
god was an anthropomorphic form of an earlier animal god, like the
wolf-skin of other gods. Hence also horned animals would be regarded as
symbols of the god, and this may account for

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

their presence on the Reims monument. Animals are sometimes represented
beside the divinities who were their anthropomorphic forms. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) Similarly the ram's-headed serpent points
to animal worship. But its presence with three-headed and horned gods is
enigmatic, though, as will be seen later, it may have been connected
with a cult of the dead, while the serpent was a chthonian animal <span
id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99) These gods were gods of fertility and of
the underworld of the dead. While the bag or purse (interchangeable with
the cornucopia) was a symbol of Mercury, it was also a symbol of Pluto,
and this may point to the fact that the gods who bear it had the same
character as Pluto. The significance of the torque is also doubtful, but
the Gauls offered torques to the gods, and they may have been regarded
as vehicles of the warrior's strength which passed from him to the god
to whom the victor presented it.

Though many attempts have been made to prove the non-Celtic origin of
the three-headed divinities or of their images, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[3](#fn_100) there is no reason why the conception
should not be Celtic, based on some myth now lost to us. The Celts had a
cult of human heads, and fixed them up on their houses in order to
obtain the protection of the ghost. Bodies or heads of dead warriors had
a protective influence on their land or tribe, and myth told how the
head of the god Bran saved his country from invasion. In other myths
human heads speak after being cut off. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[4](#fn_101) It might thus easily have been believed
that the representation of a god's head had a still more powerful
protective influence, especially when it was triplicated, thus looking
in all directions, like Janus.

The significance of the triad on these monuments is

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

uncertain, but since the supporting divinities are now male, now female,
now male and female, it probably represents myths of which the horned or
three-headed god was the central figure. Perhaps we shall not be far
wrong in regarding such gods, on the whole, as Cernunnos, a god of
abundance to judge by his emblems, and by the cornucopia held by his
companions, probably divinities of fertility. In certain cases figures
of squatting and horned goddesses with cornucopia occur. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102) These may be consorts of Cernunnos, and
perhaps preceded him in origin. We may also go further and see in this
god of abundance and fertility at once an Earth and an Under-earth god,
since earth and under-earth are much the same to primitive thought, and
fertility springs from below the earth's surface. Thus Cernunnos would
be another form of the Celtic Dispater. Generally speaking, the images
of Cernunnos are not found where those of the god with the hammer
(Dispater) are most numerous. These two types may thus be different
local forms of Dispater. The squatting attitude of Cernunnos is natural
in the image of the ancestor of a people who squatted. As to the symbols
of plenty, we know that Pluto was confounded with Plutus, the god of
riches, because corn and minerals came out of the earth, and were thus
the gifts of an Earth or Under-earth god. Celtic myth may have had the
same confusion.

On a Paris altar and on certain steles a god attacks a serpent with a
club. The serpent is a chthonian animal, and the god, called Smertullos,
may be a Dispater. <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) Gods who are
anthropomorphic forms of earlier animal divinities, sometimes have the
animals as symbols or attendants, or are regarded as hostile to them. In
some cases Dispater

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

may have outgrown the serpent symbolism, the serpent being regarded
locally as his foe; this assumes that the god with the club is the same
as the god with the hammer. But in the case of Cernunnos the animal
remained as his symbol.

Dispater was a god of growth and fertility, and besides being lord of
the underworld of the dead, not necessarily a dark region or the abode
of "dark" gods as is so often assumed by writers on Celtic religion, he
was ancestor of the living. This may merely have meant that, as in other
mythologies, men came to the surface of the earth from an underground
region, like all things whose roots struck deep down into the earth. The
lord of the underworld would then easily be regarded as their
ancestor. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)

3\. The hammer and the cup are also the symbols of a god called
Silvanus, identified by M. Mowat with Esus, <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) a god represented cutting down a tree
with an axe. Axe and hammer, however, are not necessarily identical, and
the symbols are those of Dispater, as has been seen. A purely
superficial connection between the Roman Silvanus and the Celtic
Dispater may have been found by Gallo-Roman artists in the fact that
both wear a wolf-skin, while there may once have been a Celtic wolf
totem-god of the dead. <span id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106) The Roman
god was also associated with the wolf. This might be regarded as one out
of many examples of a mere superficial assimilation of Roman and Celtic
divinities, but in this case they still kept certain symbols of the
native Dispater--the cup and hammer.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Of course, since the latter was also a god of
fertility, there was here another link with Silvanus, a god of woods and
vegetation. The cult of the god was widespread--in Spain, S. Gaul, the
Rhine provinces, Cisalpine Gaul, Central Europe and Britain. But one
inscription gives the name Selvanos, and it is not impossible that there
was a native god Selvanus. If so, his name may have been derived from
*selva*, "possession," Irish *sealbh*, "possession," "cattle," and he
may have been a chthonian god of riches, which in primitive communities
consisted of cattle. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) Domestic
animals, in Celtic mythology, were believed to have come from the god's
land. Selvanus would thus be easily identified with Silvanus, a god of
flocks.

Thus the Celtic Dispater had various names and forms in different
regions, and could be assimilated to different foreign gods. Since Earth
and Under-earth are so nearly connected, this divinity may once have
been an Earth-god, and as such perhaps took the place of an earlier
Earth-mother, who now became his consort or his mother. On a monument
from Salzbach, Dispater is accompanied by a goddess called Aeracura,
holding a basket of fruit, and on another monument from Ober-Seebach,
the companion of Dispater holds a cornucopia. In the latter instance
Dispater holds a hammer and cup, and the goddess may be Aeracura.
Aeracura is also associated with Dispater in several inscriptions. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108) It is not yet certain that she is a
Celtic goddess, but her presence with this evidently Celtic god is
almost sufficient proof of the fact. She may thus represent the old
Earth-goddess, whose place the native Dispater gradually usurped.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

Lucan mentions a god Esus, who is represented on a Paris altar as a
woodman cutting down a tree, the branches of which are carried round to
the next side of the altar, on which is represented a bull with three
cranes--Tarvos Trigaranos. The same figure, unnamed, occurs on another
altar at Trèves, but in this case the bull's head appears in the
branches, and on them sit the birds. M. Reinach applies one formula to
the subjects of these altars--"The divine Woodman hews the Tree of the
Bull with Three Cranes." <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) The whole
represents some myth unknown to us, but M. D'Arbois finds in it some
allusion to events in the Cúchulainn saga. To this we shall
return. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) Bull and tree are perhaps
both divine, and if the animal, like the images of the divine bull, is
three-horned, then the three cranes (*garanus*, "crane") may be a rebus
for three-horned (*trikeras*), or more probably three-headed
(*trikarenos*). <span id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111) In this case
woodman, tree, and bull might all be representatives of a god of
vegetation. In early ritual, human, animal, or arboreal representatives
of the god were periodically destroyed to ensure fertility, but when the
god became separated from these representatives, the destruction or
slaying was regarded as a sacrifice to the god, and myths arose telling
how he had once slain the animal. In this case, tree and bull, really
identical, would be mythically regarded as destroyed by the god whom
they had once represented. If Esus was a god of vegetation, once
represented by a tree, this would explain why, as the scholiast on Lucan
relates, human sacrifices to Esus were suspended from a tree. Esus was
worshipped at Paris and at Trèves; a coin with the name Æsus was found
in England; and personal names like Esugenos, "son of Esus,"

<span id="page_">p.</span> 39

and Esunertus, "he who has the strength of Esus," occur in England,
France, and Switzerland. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112) Thus the
cult of this god may have been comparatively widespread. But there is no
evidence that he was a Celtic Jehovah or a member, with Teutates and
Taranis, of a pan-Celtic triad, or that this triad, introduced by Gauls,
was not accepted by the Druids. <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113)
Had such a great triad existed, some instance of the occurrence of the
three names on one inscription would certainly have been found. Lucan
does not refer to the gods as a triad, nor as gods of all the Celts, or
even of one tribe. He lays stress merely on the fact that they were
worshipped with human sacrifice, and they were apparently more or less
well-known local gods. <span id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_114)

The insular Celts believed that some of their gods lived on or in hills.
We do not know whether such a belief was entertained by the Gauls,
though some of their deities were worshipped on hills, like the Puy de
Dome. There is also evidence of mountain worship among them. One
inscription runs, "To the Mountains"; a god of the Pennine Alps,
Pœninus, was equated with Juppiter; and the god of the Vosges mountains
was called Vosegus, perhaps still surviving in the giant supposed to
haunt them. <span id="fr_115"></span>[4](#fn_115)

Certain grouped gods, *Dii Casses*, were worshipped by Celts on the
right bank of the Rhine, but nothing is known regarding their functions,
unless they were road gods. The name means "beautiful" or "pleasant,"
and *Cassi* appears in personal and tribal names, and also in
*Cassiterides*, an early name of Britain, perhaps signifying that the
new lands were "more beautiful" than those the Celts had left. When tin
was

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

discovered in Britain, the Mediterranean traders called it κασσίτερος
after the name of the place where it was found, as *cupreus*, "copper,"
was so called from Cyprus. <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116)

Many local tutelar divinities were also worshipped. When a new
settlement was founded, it was placed under the protection of a tribal
god, or the name of some divinised river on whose banks the village was
placed, passed to the village itself, and the divinity became its
protector. Thus Dea Bibracte, Nemausus, and Vasio were tutelar
divinities of Bibracte, Nimes, and Vaison. Other places were called
after Belenos, or a group of divinities, usually the *Matres* with a
local epithet, watched over a certain district. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117) The founding of a town was celebrated in
an annual festival, with sacrifices and libations to the protecting
deity, a practice combated by S. Eloi in the eighth century. But the
custom of associating a divinity with a town or region was a great help
to patriotism. Those who fought for their homes felt that they were
fighting for their gods, who also fought on their side. Several
inscriptions, "To the genius of the place," occur in Britain, and there
are a few traces of tutelar gods in Irish texts, but generally local
saints had taken their place.

The Celtic cult of goddesses took two forms, that of individual and that
of grouped goddesses, the latter much more numerous than the grouped
gods. Individual goddesses were worshipped as consorts of gods, or as
separate personalities, and in the latter case the cult was sometimes
far extended. Still more popular was the cult of grouped goddesses. Of
these the *Matres*, like some individual goddesses, were probably early
Earth-mothers, and since the primitive fertility-cults included all that
might then be summed up as "civilisation,"

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

such goddesses had already many functions, and might the more readily
become divinities of special crafts or even of war. Many individual
goddesses are known only by their names, and were of a purely local
character. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) Some local goddesses
with different names but similar functions are equated with the same
Roman goddess; others were never so equated.

The Celtic Minerva, or the goddesses equated with her, "taught the
elements of industry and the arts," <span
id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119) and is thus the equivalent of the Irish
Brigit. Her functions are in keeping with the position of woman as the
first civiliser--discovering agriculture, spinning, the art of pottery,
etc. During this period goddesses were chiefly worshipped, and though
the Celts had long outgrown this primitive stage, such culture-goddesses
still retained their importance. A goddess equated with Minerva in
Southern France and Britain is Belisama, perhaps from *qval*, "to burn"
or "shine." <span id="fr_120"></span>[3](#fn_120) Hence she may have
been associated with a cult of fire, like Brigit and like another
goddess Sul, equated with Minerva at Bath and in Hesse, and in whose
temple perpetual fires burned. <span id="fr_121"></span>[4](#fn_121) She
was also a goddess of hot springs. Belisama gave her name to the
Mersey, <span id="fr_122"></span>[5](#fn_122) and many goddesses in
Celtic myth are associated with rivers.

Some war-goddesses are associated with Mars--Nemetona (in Britain and
Germany), perhaps the same as the Irish Nemon, and Cathubodua, identical
with the Irish war-goddess Badb-catha, "battle-crow," who tore the
bodies of the slain. <span id="fr_123"></span>[6](#fn_123) Another
goddess Andrasta, "invincible," perhaps the same as the Andarta of the
Voconces, was worshipped by

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the people of Boudicca with human sacrifices, like the native Bellona of
the Scordisci. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124)

A goddess of the chase was identified with Artemis in Galatia, where she
had a priestess Camma, and also in the west. At the feast of the
Galatian goddess dogs were crowned with flowers, her worshippers feasted
and a sacrifice was made to her, feast and sacrifice being provided out
of money laid aside for every animal taken in the chase. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125) Other goddesses were equated with Diana,
and one of her statues was destroyed in Christian times at Trèves. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_126) These goddesses may have been thought of
as rushing through the forest with an attendant train, since in later
times Diana, with whom they were completely assimilated, became, like
Holda, the leader of the "furious host" and also of witches'
revels. <span id="fr_127"></span>[4](#fn_127) The Life of Cæsarius of
Arles speaks of a "demon" called Diana by the rustics. A bronze
statuette represents the goddess riding a wild boar, <span
id="fr_128"></span>[5](#fn_128) her symbol and, like herself, a creature
of the forest, but at an earlier time itself a divinity of whom the
goddess became the anthropomorphic form.

Goddesses, the earlier spirits of the waters, protected rivers and
springs, or were associated with gods of healing wells. Dirona or Sirona
is associated with Grannos mainly in Eastern Gaul and the Rhine
provinces, and is sometimes represented carrying grapes and grain. <span
id="fr_129"></span>[6](#fn_129) Thus this goddess may once have been
connected with fertility, perhaps an Earth-mother, and if her name means
"the long-lived," <span id="fr_130"></span>[7](#fn_130) this would be an
appropriate title for an Earth-goddess. Another goddess, Stanna,
mentioned in an inscription at Perigueux, is perhaps

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "the standing or abiding one," and thus may also
have been an Earth-goddess. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131)
Grannos was also associated with the local goddesses Vesunna and
Aventia, who gave their names to Vesona and Avanche. His statue also
stood in the temple of the goddess of the Seine, Sequana. <span
id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132) With Bormo were associated Bormana in
Southern Gaul, and Damona in Eastern Gaul--perhaps an animal goddess,
since the root of her name occurs in Irish *dam*, "ox," and Welsh
*dafad*, "sheep." Dea Brixia was the consort of Luxovius, god of the
waters of Luxeuil. Names of other goddesses of the waters are found on
*ex votos* and plaques which were placed in or near them. The Roman
Nymphæ, sometimes associated with Bormo, were the equivalents of the
Celtic water-goddesses, who survived in the water-fairies of later
folk-belief. Some river-goddesses gave their names to many rivers in the
Celtic area--the numerous Avons being named from Abnoba, goddess of the
sources of the Danube, and the many Dees and Dives from Divona. Clota
was goddess of the Clyde, Sabrina had her throne "beneath the
translucent wave" of the Severn, Icauna was goddess of the Yonne,
Sequana of the Seine, and Sinnan of the Shannon.

In some cases forests were ruled by goddesses--that of the Ardennes by
Dea Arduinna, and the Black Forest, perhaps because of the many waters
in it, by Dea Abnoba. <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133) While some
goddesses are known only by being associated with a god, *e.g.* Rosmerta
with Mercury in Eastern Gaul, others have remained separate, like Epona,
perhaps a river-goddess merged with an animal divinity, and known from
inscriptions as a horse-goddess. <span id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134)
But the most striking instance is found in the grouped goddesses.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

Of these the *Deæ Matres*, whose name has taken a Latin form and whose
cult extended to the Teutons, are mentioned in many inscriptions all
over the Celtic area, save in East and North-West Gaul. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) In art they are usually represented as
three in number, holding fruit, flowers, a cornucopia, or an infant.
They were thus goddesses of fertility, and probably derived from a cult
of a great Mother-goddess, the Earth personified. She may have survived
as a goddess Berecynthia; worshipped at Autun, where her image was borne
through the fields to promote fertility, or as the goddesses equated
with Demeter and Kore, worshipped by women on an island near
Britain. <span id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_136) Such cults of a
Mother-goddess lie behind many religious, but gradually her place was
taken by an Earth-god, the Celtic Dispater or Dagda, whose consort the
goddess became. She may therefore be the goddess with the cornucopia, on
monuments of the horned god, or Aeracura, consort of Dispater, or a
goddess on a monument at Epinal holding a basket of fruit and a
cornucopia, and accompanied by a ram's-headed serpent. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[3](#fn_137) These symbols show that this goddess was
akin to the *Matres*. But she sometimes preserved her individuality, as
in the case of Berecynthia and the *Matres*, though it is not quite
clear why she should have been thus triply multiplied. A similar
phenomenon is found in the close connection of Demeter and Persephone,
while the Celts regarded three as a sacred number. The primitive
division of the year into three seasons--spring, summer, and winter--may
have had its effect in triplicating a goddess of fertility with which
the course of the seasons was connected. <span
id="fr_138"></span>[4](#fn_138) In other mythologies groups of three
goddesses are found, the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hathors in Egypt, the Moirai, Gorgons, and Graiæ
of Greece, the Roman Fates, and the Norse Nornæ, and it is noticeable
that the *Matres* were sometimes equated with the Parcæ and Fates. <span
id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139)

In the *Matres*, primarily goddesses of fertility and plenty, we have
one of the most popular and also primitive aspects of Celtic religion.
They originated in an age when women cultivated the ground, and the
Earth was a goddess whose cult was performed by priestesses. But in
course of time new functions were bestowed on the *Matres*. Possibly
river-goddesses and others are merely mothers whose functions have
become specialised. The *Matres* are found as guardians of individuals,
families, houses, of towns, a province, or a whole nation, as their
epithets in inscriptions show. The *Matres Domesticæ* are household
goddesses; the *Matres Treveræ*, or *Gallaicæ*, or *Vediantæ*, are the
mothers of Trèves, of the Gallaicæ, of the Vediantii; the *Matres
Nemetiales* are guardians of groves. Besides presiding over the fields
as *Matres Campestræ* they brought prosperity to towns and people. <span
id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_140) They guarded women, especially in
childbirth, as *ex votos* prove, and in this aspect they are akin to the
*Junones* worshipped also in Gaul and Britain. The name thus became
generic for most goddesses, but all alike were the lineal descendants of
the primitive Earth-mother. <span id="fr_141"></span>[3](#fn_141)

Popular superstition has preserved the memory of these goddesses in the
three *bonnes dames*, *dames blanches*, and White Women, met by
wayfarers in forests, or in the three fairies or wise women of
folk-tales, who appear at the birth of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

children. But sometimes they have become hateful hags. The *Matres* and
other goddesses probably survived in the beneficent fairies of rocks and
streams, in the fairy Abonde who brought riches to houses, or Esterelle
of Provence who made women fruitful, or Aril who watched over meadows,
or in beings like Melusine, Viviane, and others. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142) In Gallo-Roman Britain the cult of the
*Matres* is found, but how far it was indigenous there is uncertain. A
Welsh name for fairies, *Y Mamau*, "the Mothers," and the phrase, "the
blessing of the Mothers" used of a fairy benediction, may be a
reminiscence of such goddesses. <span id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143)
The presence of similar goddesses in Ireland will be considered
later. <span id="fr_144"></span>[3](#fn_144) Images of the *Matres*
bearing a child have sometimes been taken for those of the Virgin, when
found accidentally, and as they are of wood blackened with age, they are
known as *Vierges Noires*, and occupy an honoured place in Christian
sanctuaries. Many churches of Nôtre Dame have been built on sites where
an image of the Virgin is said to have been miraculously found--the
image probably being that of a pagan Mother. Similarly, an altar to the
*Matres* at Vaison is now dedicated to the Virgin as the "good
Mother." <span id="fr_145"></span>[4](#fn_145)

In inscriptions from Eastern and Cisalpine Gaul, and from the Rhine and
Danube region, the *Matronæ* are mentioned, and this name is probably
indicative of goddesses like the *Matres*. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[5](#fn_146) It is akin to that of many rivers,
*e.g.* the Marne or Meyrone, and shows that the Mothers were associated
with rivers. The Mother river fertilised a large district, and

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

thus exhibited the characteristic of the whole group of goddesses.

Akin also to the *Matres* are the *Suleviæ*, guardian goddesses, called
*Matres* in a few inscriptions; the *Comedovæ*, whose name perhaps
denotes guardianship or power; the *Dominæ*, who watched over the home,
perhaps the *Dames* of mediæval folk-lore; and the *Virgines*, perhaps
an appellative of the *Matres*, and significant when we find that virgin
priestesses existed in Gaul and Ireland. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) The *Proxumæ* were worshipped in
Southern Gaul, and the *Quadriviæ*, goddesses of cross-roads, at
Cherbourg. <span id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148)

Some Roman gods are found on inscriptions without being equated with
native deities. They may have been accepted by the Gauls as new gods, or
they had perhaps completely ousted similar native gods. Others, not
mentioned by Cæsar, are equated with native deities, Juno with Clivana,
Saturn with Arvalus, and to a native Vulcan the Celts vowed spoils of
war. <span id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_149) Again, many native gods are
not equated with Roman deities on inscriptions. Apart from the
divinities of Pyrenæan inscriptions, who may not be Celtic, the names of
over 400 native deities, whether equated with Roman gods or not, are
known. Some of these names are mere epithets, and most of the gods are
of a local character, known here by one name, there by another. Only in
a very few cases can it be asserted that a god was worshipped over the
whole Celtic area by one name, though some gods in Gaul, Britain, and
Ireland with different names have certainly similar functions. <span
id="fr_150"></span>[4](#fn_150)

The pantheon of the continental Celts was a varied one. Traces of the
primitive agricultural rites, and of the priority of goddesses to gods,
are found, and the vaguer aspects of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

primitive nature worship are seen behind the cult of divinities of sky,
sun, thunder, forests, rivers, or in deities of animal origin. We come
next to evidence of a higher stage, in divinities of culture, healing,
the chase, war, and the underworld. We see divinities of Celtic
groups--gods of individuals, the family, the tribe. Sometimes war-gods
assumed great prominence, in time of war, or among the aristocracy, but
with the development of commerce, gods associated with trade and the
arts of peace came to the front. <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151)
At the same time the popular cults of agricultural districts must have
remained as of old. With the adoption of Roman civilisation, enlightened
Celts separated themselves from the lower aspects of their religion, but
this would have occurred with growing civilisation had no Roman ever
entered Gaul. In rural districts the more savage aspects of the cult
would still have remained, but that these were entirely due to an
aboriginal population is erroneous. The Celts must have brought such
cults with them or adopted cults similar to their own wherever they
came. The persistence of these cults is seen in the fact that though
Christianity modified them, it could not root them out, and in
out-of-the-way corners, survivals of the old ritual may still be found,
for everywhere the old religion of the soil dies hard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[22:1](rac06.htm#fr_52) Cæsar, *de Bell. Gall.*
vi. 17, 18.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[23:1](rac06.htm#fr_53) Bloch (Lavisse), *Hist.
de France*, i. 2, 419; Reinach, *BF* 13, 23.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[24:1](rac06.htm#fr_54) *Trans. Gaelic Soc. of
Inverness*, xxvi. p. 411 f.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[24:2](rac06.htm#fr_55) *Vallentin, Les Dieux de
la cité des Allobroges*, 15; Pliny, *HN* xxxiv. 7.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[24:3](rac06.htm#fr_56) These names are
Alaunius, Arcecius, Artaius, Arvernorix, Arvernus, Adsmerius,
Canetonensis, Clavariatis, Cissonius, Cimbrianus, Dumiatis, Magniacus,
Moccus, Tocirenus, Vassocaletus, Vellaunus, Visucius, Biausius,
Cimiacinus, Naissatis. See Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[24:4](rac06.htm#fr_57) Rhŷs, *HL* 6.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[25:1](rac06.htm#fr_58) Hübner, vii. 271; *CIL*
iii. 5773.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[25:2](rac06.htm#fr_59) Lucian, *Heracles*, 1 f.
Some Gaulish coins figure a head to which are bound smaller heads. In
one case the cords issue from the mouth (Blanchet, i. 308, 316-317).
These may represent Lucian's Ogmios, but other interpretations have been
put upon them. See Robert, *RC* vii. 388; Jullian, 84.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[26:1](rac06.htm#fr_60) The epithets and names
are Anextiomarus, Belenos, Bormo, Borvo, or Bormanus, Cobledulitavus,
Cosmis (?), Grannos, Livicus, Maponos, Mogo or Mogounos, Sianus,
Toutiorix, Vindonnus, Virotutis. See Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[26:2](rac06.htm#fr_61) Pommerol, *Ball. de Soc.
d'ant. de Paris*, ii. fasc. 4.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[26:3](rac06.htm#fr_62) See Holder, *s.v.* Many
place-names are derived from *Borvo*, *e.g.* Bourbon l'Archambaut, which
gave its name to the Bourbon dynasty, thus connected with an old Celtic
god.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[26:4](rac06.htm#fr_63) See [p.
102](rac09.htm#page_102), *infra*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[26:5](rac06.htm#fr_64) Jul. Cap. *Maxim*. 22;
Herodian, viii. 3; Tert. *Apol*. xxiv. 70; Auson. Prof. xi. 24.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[27:1](rac06.htm#fr_65) Stokes derives
*belinuntia* from *beljo*-, a tree or leaf, Irish *bile*, *US* 174.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[27:2](rac06.htm#fr_66) Holder, *s.v.*; Stokes,
US 197; Rhŷs, *HL* 23; see [p. 180](rac14.htm#page_180), *infra*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[27:3](rac06.htm#fr_67) Diod. Sic. ii. 47.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[27:4](rac06.htm#fr_68) Apoll. Rhod. iv. 609.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[27:5](rac06.htm#fr_69) Albiorix, Alator, Arixo,
Beladonnis, Barrex, Belatucadros, Bolvinnus, Braciaca, Britovis,
Buxenus, Cabetius, Camulus, Cariocecius, Caturix, Cemenelus, Cicollius,
Carrus, Cocosus, Cociduis, Condatis, Cnabetius, Corotiacus,
Dinomogetimarus, Divanno, Dunatis, Glarinus, Halamardus, Harmogius,
Ieusdrinus, Lacavus, Latabius, Leucetius, Leucimalacus, Lenus, Mullo,
<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> Medocius, Mogetius, Nabelcus, Neton,
Ocelos, Ollondios, Rudianus, Rigisamus, Randosatis, Riga, Segomo,
Sinatis, Smertatius, Toutates, Tritullus, Vesucius, Vincius, Vitucadros,
Vorocius. See Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[28:1](rac06.htm#fr_70) D'Arbois, ii. 215; Rhŷs,
*HL* 37.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[28:2](rac06.htm#fr_71) So Rhŷs, *HL* 42.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[28:3](rac06.htm#fr_72) Hubner, 61.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[28:4](rac06.htm#fr_73) Holder, *s.v.*; Lucan,
i. 444 f. The opinions of writers who take this view are collected by
Reinach, *RC* xviii. 137.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[28:5](rac06.htm#fr_74) Holder, *s.v.* The
Gaulish name Camulogenus, "born of Cumel, " represents the same idea as
in Fionn's surname, MacCumall.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[29:1](rac06.htm#fr_75) Athen. iv. 36;
Dioscorides, ii. 110; Joyce, *SH* ii. 116, 120; *IT* i. 437, 697.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[29:2](rac06.htm#fr_76) Pliny, *HN* xviii. 7.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[29:3](rac06.htm#fr_77) Gaidoz, *Le Dieu Gaulois
de Soleil*; Reinach, *CS* 98, *BF* 35; Blanchet, i. 27.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[30:1](rac06.htm#fr_78) Lucan, *Phar*. i. 444.
Another form, Tanaros, may be simply the German Donar.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[30:2](rac06.htm#fr_79) Loth, i. 270.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[30:3](rac06.htm#fr_80) Gaidoz, *RC* vi. 457;
Reinach, *CS* 65, 138; Blanchet, i. 160. The hammer is also associated
with another Celtic Dispater, equated with Sylvanus, who was certainly
not a thunder-god.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[31:1](rac06.htm#fr_81) Reinach, *BF* 137 f.;
Courcelle-Seneuil, 115 f.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[31:2](rac06.htm#fr_82) Barthelemy, *RC* i. 1 f.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[31:3](rac06.htm#fr_83) See Flouest, *Rev.
Arch.* v. 17.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[31:4](rac06.htm#fr_84) Reinach, *PC* xvii. 45.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[31:5](rac06.htm#fr_85) D'Arbois, ii. 126. He
explains Nantosvelta as meaning " She who is brilliant in war." The
goddess, however, has none of the attributes of a war-goddess. M.
D'Arbois also saw in a bas-relief of the hammer-god, a female figure,
and a child, the Gaulish equivalents of Balor, Ethne, and Lug (*RC* xv.
236). M. Reinach regards Sucellos, Nantosvelta, and a bird which is
figured with them, as the same trio, because pseudo-Plutarch (*de Fluv.*
vi. 4) says that *lougos* means "crow" in Celtic. This is more than
doubtful. In any case Ethne has no warlike traits in Irish story, and as
Lug and Balor were deadly enemies, it remains to be explained why they
appear tranquilly side by side. See *RC* xxvi. 129. Perhaps Nantosvelta,
like other Celtic goddesses, was a river nymph. *Nanto* in Gaulish is
"valley," and *nant* in old Breton is "gorge" or " brook." Her name
might mean "shining river." See Stokes, *US* 193, 324.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[32:1](rac06.htm#fr_86) *RC* xviii. 254.
Cernunnos may be the Juppiter Cernenos of an inscription from Pesth,
Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[32:2](rac06.htm#fr_87) Reinach, *BF* 186, fig.
177.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[32:3](rac06.htm#fr_88) *Rev. Arch.* xix. 322,
pl. 9.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[32:4](rac06.htm#fr_89) Bertrand, *Rev. Arch.*
xv. 339, xvi. pl. 12.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[32:5](rac06.htm#fr_90) *Ibid.* xv. pl. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[32:6](rac06.htm#fr_91) *Ibid.* xvi. 9.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[32:7](rac06.htm#fr_92) *Ibid.* pl. 12 *bis.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[33:1](rac06.htm#fr_93) Bertrand, *Rev. Arch.*
xvi.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[33:2](rac06.htm#fr_94) *Ibid.* xvi. 10f.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[33:3](rac06.htm#fr_95) *Ibid.* xv., xvi.;
Reinach, *BF* 17, 191.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[33:4](rac06.htm#fr_96) *Bull. Epig. i.* 116;
Strabo, iv. 3; Diod. Sic. v. 28.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[33:5](rac06.htm#fr_97) Diod. Sic. v. 30;
Reinach, *BF* 193.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[34:1](rac06.htm#fr_98) See [p.
212](rac17.htm#page_212), *infra*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[34:2](rac06.htm#fr_99) See [p.
166](rac13.htm#page_166), *infra*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[34:3](rac06.htm#fr_100) See, *e.g.*, Mowat,
*Bull. Epig.* i. 29; de Witte, *Rev. Arch.* ii. 387, xvi. 7; Bertrand,
*ibid.* xvi. 3.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[34:4](rac06.htm#fr_101) See pp.
[102](rac09.htm#page_102), [242](rac19.htm#page_242), *infra*; Joyce,
*SH* ii. 554; Curtin, 182; *RC* xxii. 123, xxiv. 18.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[35:1](rac06.htm#fr_102) Dom Martin, ii. 185;
Reinach, *BF* 192, 199.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[35:2](rac06.htm#fr_103) See, however, [p.
136](rac10.htm#page_136), *infra*; and for another interpretation of
this god as the equivalent of the Irish Lug slaying Balor, see D'Arbois,
ii. 287.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[36:1](rac06.htm#fr_104) See [p.
229](rac18.htm#page_229), *infra*.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[36:2](rac06.htm#fr_105) Reinach, *BF* 162,
184; Mowat, *Bull. Epig.* i. 62, *Rev. Epig.* 1887, 319, 1891, 84.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[36:3](rac06.htm#fr_106) Reinach, *BF* 141,
153, 175, 176, 181; see [p. 218](rac17.htm#page_218), *infra*. Flouest,
*Rev. Arch.* 1885, i. 21, thinks that the identification was with an
earlier chthonian Silvanus. Cf. Jullian, 17, note 3, who observes that
the Gallo-Roman assimilations were made "sur le domaine archaisant des
faits populaires et rustiques de l'Italie." For the inscriptions, see
Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[37:1](rac06.htm#fr_107) Stokes, *US* 302;
MacBain, 274 *RC* xxvi. 282.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[37:2](rac06.htm#fr_108) Gaidoz, *Rev. Arch.*
ii. 1898 Mowat, *Bull. Epig.* i. 119; Courcelle-Seneuil, 80 f.;
Pauly-Wissowa, *Real. Lex.* i. 667; Daremberg-Saglio, *Dict*. ii.,
*s.v.* "Dispater."

<span id="fn_109"></span>[38:1](rac06.htm#fr_109) Lucan, i. 444; *BC*
xviii. 254, 258.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[38:2](rac06.htm#fr_110) See [p.
127](rac10.htm#page_127), *infra*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[38:3](rac06.htm#fr_111) For a supposed
connection between this bas-relief and the myth of Geryon, see Reinach,
*BF* 120; *RC* xviii. 258 f.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[1](rac06.htm#fr_112) Evans, *Coins of the
Ancient Britons*, 386; Holder, i. 1475, 1478.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[2](rac06.htm#fr_113) For these theories see
Dom Martin, ii. 2; Bertrand, 335 f.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[3](rac06.htm#fr_114) Cf. Reinach, *BC* xviii.
149.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[4](rac06.htm#fr_115) Orelli, 2107, 2072;
Monnier, 532; Tacitus, xxi. 38.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[40:1](rac06.htm#fr_116) Holder, i. 824;
Reinach, *Rev. Arch.* xx. 262; D'Arbois, *Les Celtes*, 20. Other grouped
gods are the Bacucei, Castœci, Icotii, Ifles, Lugoves, Nervini, and
Silvani. See Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[40:2](rac06.htm#fr_117) For all these see
Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[41:1](rac06.htm#fr_118) Professor Anwyl gives
the following statistics: There are 35 goddesses mentioned once, 2
twice, 3 thrice, 1 four times, 2 six times, 2 eleven times, 1 fourteen
times (Sirona), 1 twenty-one times (Rosmerta), 1 twenty-six times
(Epona) (*Trans. Gael. Soc. Inverness*, xxvi. 413).

<span id="fn_119"></span>[41:2](rac06.htm#fr_119) Cæsar, vi. 17.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[41:3](rac06.htm#fr_120) D'Arbois, *Les
Celtes*, 54; *Rev. Arch.* i. 201. See Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[41:4](rac06.htm#fr_121) Solinus, xxii. 10;
Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[41:5](rac06.htm#fr_122) Ptolemy, ii. 2.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[41:6](rac06.htm#fr_123) See [p.
71](rac08.htm#page_71), *infra*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[42:1](rac06.htm#fr_124) Dio Cass. lxii. 7;
Amm. Marc. xxvii. 4. 4.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[42:2](rac06.htm#fr_125) Plutarch, *de Vir.
Mul.* 20; Arrian, *Cyneg*. xxxiv. 1.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[42:3](rac06.htm#fr_126) S. Greg. *Hist*. viii.
15.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[42:4](rac06.htm#fr_127) Grimm, *Teut. Myth.*
283, 933; Reinach, *RC* xvi. 261.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[42:5](rac06.htm#fr_128) Reinach, *BF* 50.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[42:6](rac06.htm#fr_129) Holder, i. 1286;
Robert, *RC* iv. 133.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[42:7](rac06.htm#fr_130) Rhŷs, *HL* 27.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[43:1](rac06.htm#fr_131) Anwyl, *Celt. Rev.*
1906, 43.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[43:2](rac06.htm#fr_132) Holder, *s.v.*;
Bulliot, *RC* ii. 22.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[43:3](rac06.htm#fr_133) Holder, i. 10, 89.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[43:4](rac06.htm#fr_134) Holder, *s.v.*; see
[p. 213](rac17.htm#page_213), *infra*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[44:1](rac06.htm#fr_135) Holder, ii. 463. They
are very numerous in South-East Gaul, where also three-headed gods are
found.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[44:2](rac06.htm#fr_136) See pp.
[274](rac21.htm#page_274)-5, *infra*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[44:3](rac06.htm#fr_137) Courcelle-Seneuil,
80-81.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[44:4](rac06.htm#fr_138) See my article
"Calendar" in *Hastings' Encyclop. of Religion and Ethics*, iii. 80.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[45:1](rac06.htm#fr_139) *CIL* v. 4208, 5771,
vii. 927; Holder, ii. 89.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[45:2](rac06.htm#fr_140) For all these titles
see Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[45:3](rac06.htm#fr_141) There is a large
literature devoted to the *Matres*. See De Wal, *Die Mœder Gottinen*;
Vallentin, *Le Culte des Matræ*; Daremberg-Saglio, Dict. *s.v.*
*Matres*; Ihm, *Jahrbuch. des Vereins von Alterth. in Rheinlande*, No.
83 Roscher, Lexicon, ii. 2464 f.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[46:1](rac06.htm#fr_142) See Maury, *Fées du
Moyen Age*; Sébillot, i. 262; Monnier, 439 f.; Wright, Celt, Roman, and
Saxon, 286 f.; Vallentin, *RC* iv. 29. The *Matres* may already have had
a sinister aspect in Roman times, as they appear to be intended by an
inscription *Lamiis Tribus* on an altar at Newcastle. Hubner, 507.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[46:2](rac06.htm#fr_143) Anwyl, *Celt. Rev.*
1906, 28. Cf. *Y Foel Famau*, "the hill of the Mothers," in the Clwydian
range.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[46:3](rac06.htm#fr_144) See [p.
73](rac08.htm#page_73), *infra*.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[46:4](rac06.htm#fr_145) Vallentin, *op. cit.*
iv. 29; Maury, *Croyances du Moyen Age*, 382.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[46:5](rac06.htm#fr_146) Holder, *s.v.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[47:1](rac06.htm#fr_147) See pp.
[69](rac08.htm#page_69), [317](rac23.htm#page_317), *infra*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[47:2](rac06.htm#fr_148) For all these see
Holder, *s.v.*; Rhŷs, *HL* 103; *RC* iv. 34.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[47:3](rac06.htm#fr_149) Florus, ii. 4.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[47:4](rac06.htm#fr_150) See the table of
identifications, [p. 125](rac09.htm#page_125), *infra*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[48:1](rac06.htm#fr_151) We need not assume
with Jullian, 18, that there was one supreme god, now a war-god, now a
god of peace. Any prominent god may have become a war-god on occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Irish Mythological Cycle](rac07)
