[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac17)  [Next](rac19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

### CHAPTER XV.

# COSMOGONY.

WHETHER the early Celts regarded Heaven and Earth as husband and wife is
uncertain. Such a conception is worldwide, and myth frequently explains
in different ways the reason of the separation of the two. Among the
Polynesians the children of heaven and earth--the winds, forests, and
seas personified--angry at being crushed between their parents in
darkness, rose up and separated them. This is in effect the Greek myth
of Uranus, or Heaven, and Gæa, or Earth, divorced by their son Kronos,
just as in Hindu myth Dyaus, or Sky, and Prithivi, or Earth, were
separated by Indra. Uranus in Greece gave place to Zeus, and, in India,
Dyaus became subordinate to Indra. Thus the primitive Heaven personified
recedes, and his place is taken by a more individualised god. But
generally Mother Earth remains a constant quantity. Earth was nearer man
and was more unchanging than the inconstant sky, while as the producer
of the fruits of the earth, she was regarded as the source of all
things, and frequently remained as an important divinity when a crowd of
other divinities became prominent. This is especially true of
agricultural peoples, who propitiate Earth with sacrifice, worship her
with orgiastic rites, or assist her processes by magic. With advancing
civilisation such a goddess is still remembered as the friend of man,
and, as in the Eleusinia, is represented sorrowing and

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

rejoicing like man himself. Or where a higher religion ousts the older
one, the ritual is still retained among the folk, though its meaning may
be forgotten.

The Celts may thus have possessed the Heaven and Earth myth, but all
trace of it has perished. There are, however, remnants of myths showing
how the sky is supported by trees, a mountain, or by pillars. A high
mountain near the sources of the Rhone was called "the column of the
sun," and was so lofty as to hide the sun from the people of the
south. <span id="fr_766"></span>[1](#fn_764) It may have been regarded
as supporting the sky, while the sun moved round it. In an old Irish
hymn and its gloss, Brigit and Patrick are compared to the two pillars
of the world, probably alluding to some old myth of sky or earth resting
on pillars. <span id="fr_767"></span>[2](#fn_765) Traces of this also
exist in folk-belief, as in the accounts of islands resting on four
pillars, or as in the legend of the church of Kernitou which rests on
four pillars on a congealed sea and which will be submerged when the sea
liquefies--a combination of the cosmogonic myth with that of a great
inundation. <span id="fr_768"></span>[3](#fn_766) In some mythologies a
bridge or ladder connects heaven and earth. There may be a survival of
some such myth in an Irish poem which speaks of the *drochet bethad*, or
"bridge of life," or in the *drochaid na flaitheanas*, or "bridge of
heaven," of Hebridean folk-lore. <span id="fr_769"></span>[4](#fn_767)

Those gods who were connected with the sky may have been held to dwell
there or on the mountain supporting it. Others, like the Celtic
Dispater, dwelt underground. Some were connected with mounds and hills,
or were supposed to have taken up their abode in them. Others, again,
dwelt in a distant region, the Celtic Elysium, which, once the Celts
reached the sea, became a far-off island. Those divinities

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

worshipped in groves were believed to dwell there and to manifest
themselves at midday or midnight, while such objects of nature as
rivers, wells, and trees were held to be the abode of gods or spirits.
Thus it is doubtful whether the Celts ever thought of their gods as
dwelling in one Olympus. The Tuatha Dé Danann are said to have come from
heaven, but this may be the mere assertion of some scribe who knew not
what to make of this group of beings.

In Celtic belief men were not so much created by gods as descended from
them. "All the Gauls assert that they are descended from Dispater, and
this, they say, has been handed down to them by the Druids." <span
id="fr_770"></span>[1](#fn_768) Dispater was a Celtic underworld god of
fertility, and the statement probably presupposes a myth, like that
found among many primitive peoples, telling how men once lived
underground and thence came to the surface of the earth. But it also
points to their descent from the god of the underworld. Thither the dead
returned to him who was ancestor of the living as well as lord of the
dead. <span id="fr_771"></span>[2](#fn_769) On the other hand, if the
earth had originally been thought of as a female, she as Earth-mother
would be ancestress of men. But her place in the myth would easily be
taken by the Earth or Under-earth god, perhaps regarded as her son or
her consort. In other cases, clans, families, or individuals often
traced their descent to gods or divine animals or plants. Classical
writers occasionally speak of the origin of branches of the Celtic race
from eponymous founders, perhaps from their knowledge of existing Celtic
myths. <span id="fr_772"></span>[3](#fn_770) Ammianus Marcellinus also
reports a Druidic tradition to the effect that some Gauls were
indigenous, some had come from distant islands, and others from beyond
the Rhine. <span id="fr_773"></span>[4](#fn_771) But this is not so much
a myth of origins, as an explanation of the presence of different
peoples in Gaul--the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

aborigines, the Celtæ, and the Belgic Gauls. M. D'Arbois assumes that
"distant islands" means the Celtic Elysium, which he regards as the land
of the dead, <span id="fr_774"></span>[1](#fn_772) but the phrase is
probably no more than a distorted reminiscence of the far-off lands
whence early groups of Celts had reached Gaul.

Of the creation of the world no complete myth has survived, though from
a gloss to the *Senchus Mór* we learn that the Druids, like the
Brāhmans, boasted that they had made sun, moon, earth, and sea--a boast
in keeping with their supposed powers over the elements. <span
id="fr_775"></span>[2](#fn_773) Certain folk-beliefs, regarding the
origin of different parts of nature, bear a close resemblance to
primitive cosmogonic myths, and they may be taken as *disjecta membra*
of similar myths held by the Celts and perhaps taught by the Druids.
Thus sea, rivers, or springs arose from the micturition of a giant,
fairy, or saint, or from their sweat or blood. Islands are rocks cast by
giants, and mountains are the material thrown up by them as they were
working on the earth. Wells sprang up from the blood of a martyr or from
the touch of a saint's or a fairy's staff. <span
id="fr_776"></span>[3](#fn_774) The sea originated from a magic cask
given by God to a woman. The spigot, when opened, could not be closed
again, and the cask never ceased running until the waters covered the
earth--a tale with savage parallels. <span
id="fr_777"></span>[4](#fn_775) In all these cases, giant, saint, or
fairy has doubtless taken the place of a god, since the stories have a
very primitive *facies*. The giant is frequently Gargantua, probably
himself once a divinity. Other references in Irish texts point to the
common cosmogonic myth of the earth having gradually

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

assumed its present form. Thus many new lakes and plains are said to
have been formed in Ireland during the time of Partholan and Nemed, the
plains being apparently built up out of existing materials. <span
id="fr_778"></span>[1](#fn_776) In some cases the formation of a lake
was the result of digging the grave of some personage after whom the
lake was then named. <span id="fr_779"></span>[2](#fn_777) Here we come
upon the familiar idea of the danger of encroaching on the domain of a
deity, *e.g.* that of the Earth-god, by digging the earth, with the
consequent punishment by a flood. The same conception is found in Celtic
stories of a lake or river formed from the overflowing of a sacred well
through human carelessness or curiosity, which led to the anger of the
divinity of the well. <span id="fr_780"></span>[3](#fn_778) Or, again, a
town or castle is submerged on account of the wickedness of its
inhabitants, the waters being produced by the curse of God or a saint
(replacing a pagan god) and forming a lake. <span
id="fr_781"></span>[4](#fn_779) These may be regarded as forms of a
Celtic deluge-myth, which in one case, that of the Welsh story of the
ship of Nevyd, which saved Dwyvan and Dwyfach and a pair of all kinds of
animals when Lake Llion overflowed, has apparently borrowed from the
Biblical story. <span id="fr_782"></span>[5](#fn_780) In other cases
lakes are formed from the tears of a god, *e.g.* Manannan, whose tears
at the death of his son formed three lochs in Erin. <span
id="fr_783"></span>[6](#fn_781) Apollonius reports that the waters of
Eridanus originated from the tears of Apollo when driven from heaven by
his father. <span id="fr_784"></span>[7](#fn_782) This story, which he
says is Celtic, has been clothed by him in a Greek form, and the god in
question may have been Belenos, equated with Apollo. Sometimes the
formation of streams was ascribed to great hail-storms--an evident
mythic rendering of the damage done by actual spates, while the Irish
myths of

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "illimitable sea-bursts," of which three
particular instances are often mentioned, were doubtless the result of
the experience of tidal waves.

Although no complete account of the end of all things, like that of the
Scandinavian Ragnarok, has survived, scattered hints tell of its former
existence. Strabo says that the Druids taught that "fire and water must
one day prevail"--an evident belief in some final cataclysm. <span
id="fr_785"></span>[1](#fn_783) This is also hinted at in the words of
certain Gauls to Alexander, telling him that what they feared most of
all was the fall of the heavens upon their heads. <span
id="fr_786"></span>[2](#fn_784) In other words, they feared what would
be the signal of the end of all things. On Irish ground the words of
Conchobar may refer to this. He announced that he would rescue the
captives and spoil taken by Medb, unless the heavens fell, and the earth
burst open, and the sea engulphed all things. <span
id="fr_787"></span>[3](#fn_785) Such a myth mingled with Christian
beliefs may underlie the prophecy of Badb after Mag-tured regarding the
evils to come and the end of the world, and that of Fercertne in the
*Colloquy of the Two Sages*. <span id="fr_788"></span>[4](#fn_786) Both
have a curious resemblance to the Sybil's prophecy of doom in the
Voluspa. If the gods themselves were involved in such a catastrophe, it
would not be surprising, since in some aspects their immortality
depended on their eating and drinking immortal food and drink. <span
id="fr_789"></span>[5](#fn_787)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_764"></span>[228:1](rac18.htm#fr_766) Avienus, *Ora
Maritima*, 644 f.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[228:2](rac18.htm#fr_767) *IT* i. 25; Gaidoz,
*ZCP* L 27.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[228:3](rac18.htm#fr_768) *Annales de
Bretagne*, x. 414.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[228:4](rac18.htm#fr_769) *IT* i. 50, cf. 184;
*Folk-Lore*, vi. 170.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[229:1](rac18.htm#fr_770) Cæsar, vi. 18.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[229:2](rac18.htm#fr_771) See [p.
341](rac25.htm#page_341), *infra*.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[229:3](rac18.htm#fr_772) Diod. Sic. v. 24;
Appian, *Illyrica*, 2.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[229:4](rac18.htm#fr_773) Amm. Marcel. xv. 9.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[230:1](rac18.htm#fr_774) D'Arbois, ii. 262,
xii. 220.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[230:2](rac18.htm#fr_775) *Antient Laws of
Ireland*, i. 23. In one MS. Adam is said to have been created thus--his
body of earth, his blood of the sea, his face of the sun, his breath of
the wind, etc. This is also found in a Frisian tale (Vigfusson-Powell,
*Corpus Poet. Bor.* i. 479), and both stories present an inversion of
well-known myths about the creation of the universe from the members of
a giant.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[230:3](rac18.htm#fr_776) Sébillot, i. 213 f.,
ii. 6, 7, 72, 97, 176, 327-328. Cf. *RC* xv. 482, xvi. 162.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[230:4](rac18.htm#fr_777) Sébillot, ii. 6.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[231:1](rac18.htm#fr_778) *LL* 56; Keating,
117, 123.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[231:2](rac18.htm#fr_779) *RC* xv. 429, xvi.
277.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[231:3](rac18.htm#fr_780) See [p.
191](rac15.htm#page_191), *supra*.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[231:4](rac18.htm#fr_781) Sébillot, ii. 41 f.,
391, 397; see [p. 372](rac27.htm#page_372), *infra*.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[231:5](rac18.htm#fr_782) *Triads* in Loth, ii.
280, 299; Rhŷs, *HL* 583, 663.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[231:6](rac18.htm#fr_783) *RC* xvi. 50, 146.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[231:7](rac18.htm#fr_784) Apoll. iv. 609 f.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[232:1](rac18.htm#fr_785) Strabo, iv. 4. 4.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[232:2](rac18.htm#fr_786) Arrian, *Anab.* i. 4.
7; Strabo, vii. 3. 8. Cf. Jullian, 85.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[232:3](rac18.htm#fr_787) *LL* 94; Miss Hull,
205.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[232:4](rac18.htm#fr_788) *RC* xii. 111, xxvi.
33.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[232:5](rac18.htm#fr_789) A possible survival
of a world-serpent myth may be found in "Da Derga's Hostel" (PC xxii.
54), where we hear of Leviathan that surrounds the globe and strikes
with his tail to overwhelm the world. But this may be a reflection of
Norse myths of the Midgard serpent, sometimes equated with Leviathan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Sacrifice, Prayer, and Divination](rac19)
