[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac15)  [Next](rac17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

# TREE AND PLANT WORSHIP.

THE Celts had their own cult of trees, but they adopted local
cults--Ligurian, Iberian, and others. The *Fagus Deus* (the divine
beech), the *Sex arbor* or *Sex arbores* of Pyrenean inscriptions, and
an anonymous god represented by a conifer on an altar at Toulouse,
probably point to local Ligurian tree cults continued by the Celts into
Roman times. <span id="fr_658"></span>[1](#fn_657) Forests were also
personified or ruled by a single goddess, like *Dea Arduinna* of the
Ardennes and *Dea Abnoba* of the Black Forest. <span
id="fr_659"></span>[2](#fn_658) But more primitive ideas prevailed, like
that which assigned a whole class of tree-divinities to a forest, *e.g.*
the *Fatæ Dervones*, spirits of the oak-woods of Northern Italy. <span
id="fr_660"></span>[3](#fn_659) Groups of trees like *Sex arbores* were
venerated, perhaps for their height, isolation, or some other
peculiarity.

The Celts made their sacred places in dark groves, the trees being hung
with offerings or with the heads of victims. Human sacrifices were hung
or impaled on trees, *e.g.* by the warriors of Boudicca. <span
id="fr_661"></span>[4](#fn_660) These, like the offerings still placed
by the folk on sacred trees, were attached to them because the trees
were the abode of spirits or divinities who in many cases had power over
vegetation.

Pliny said of the Celts: They esteem nothing more sacred

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

than the mistletoe and the tree on which it grows. But apart from this
they choose oak-woods for their sacred groves, and perform no sacred
rite without using oak branches." <span id="fr_662"></span>[1](#fn_661)
Maximus of Tyre also speaks of the Celtic (? German) image of Zeus as a
lofty oak, and an old Irish glossary gives *daur*, "oak," as an early
Irish name for "god," and glosses it by *dia*, "god." <span
id="fr_663"></span>[2](#fn_662) The sacred need-fire may have been
obtained by friction from oak-wood, and it is because of the old
sacredness of the oak that a piece of its wood is still used as a
talisman in Brittany. <span id="fr_664"></span>[3](#fn_663) Other Aryan
folk besides the Celts regarded the oak as the symbol of a high god, of
the sun or the sky, <span id="fr_665"></span>[4](#fn_664) but probably
this was not its earliest significance. Oak forests were once more
extensive over Europe than they are now, and the old tradition that men
once lived on acorns has been shown to be well-founded by the witness of
archæological finds, *e.g.* in Northern Italy. <span
id="fr_666"></span>[5](#fn_665) A people living in an oak region and
subsisting in part on acorns might easily take the oak as a
representative of the spirit of vegetation or growth. It was long-lived,
its foliage was a protection, it supplied food, its wood was used as
fuel, and it was thus clearly the friend of man. For these reasons, and
because it was the most abiding and living thing men knew, it became the
embodiment of the spirits of life and growth. Folk-lore survivals show
that the spirit of vegetation in the shape of his representative was
annually slain while yet in full vigour, that his life might benefit all
things and be passed on undiminished to his successor. <span
id="fr_667"></span>[6](#fn_666) Hence the oak or a

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

human being representing the spirit of vegetation, or both together,
were burned in the Midsummer fires. How, then, did the oak come to
symbolise a god equated with Zeus. Though the equation may be worthless,
it is possible that the connection lay in the fact that Zeus and
Juppiter had agricultural functions, or that, when the equation was
made, the earlier spirit of vegetation had become a divinity with
functions resembling those of Zeus. The fires were kindled to recruit
the sun's life; they were fed with oak-wood, and in them an oak or a
human victim representing the spirit embodied in the oak was burned.
Hence it may have been thought that the sun was strengthened by the fire
residing in the sacred oak; it was thus "the original storehouse or
reservoir of the fire which was from time to time drawn out to feed the
sun." <span id="fr_668"></span>[1](#fn_667) The oak thus became the
symbol of a bright god also connected with growth. But, to judge by folk
survivals, the older conception still remained potent, and tree or human
victim affected for good all vegetable growth as well as man's life,
while at the same time the fire strengthened the sun.

Dr. Evans argues that "the original holy object within the central
triliths of Stonehenge was a sacred tree," an oak, image of the Celtic
Zeus. The tree and the stones, once associated with ancestor worship,
had become symbols of "a more celestial Spirit or Spirits than those of
departed human beings." <span id="fr_669"></span>[2](#fn_668) But
Stonehenge has now been proved to have been in existence before the
arrival of the Celts, hence such a cult must have been pre-Celtic,
though it may quite well have been adopted by the Celts. Whether this
hypothetical cult was practised by a tribe, a group of tribes, or by the
whole people, must remain obscure, and, indeed, it may well be
questioned whether Stonehenge was ever more than the scene of some
ancestral rites.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

Other trees--the yew, the cypress, the alder, and the ash, were
venerated, to judge by what Lucan relates of the sacred grove at
Marseilles. The Irish Druids attributed special virtues to the hazel,
rowan, and yew, the wood of which was used in magical ceremonies
described in Irish texts. <span id="fr_670"></span>[1](#fn_669) Fires of
rowan were lit by the Druids of rival armies, and incantations said over
them in order to discomfit the opposing host, <span
id="fr_671"></span>[2](#fn_670) and the wood of all these trees is still
believed to be efficacious against fairies and witches.

The Irish *bile* was a sacred tree, of great age, growing over a holy
well or fort. Five of them are described in the *Dindsenchas*, and one
was an oak, which not only yielded acorns, but nuts and apples. <span
id="fr_672"></span>[3](#fn_671) The mythic trees of Elysium had the same
varied fruitage, and the reason in both cases is perhaps the fact that
when the cultivated apple took the place of acorns and nuts as a food
staple, words signifying "nut" or "acorn" were transferred to the apple.
A myth of trees on which all these fruits grew might then easily arise.
Another Irish *bile* was a yew described in a poem as "a firm strong
god," while such phrases in this poem as "word-pure man," "judgment of
origin," "spell of knowledge," may have some reference to the custom of
writing divinations in ogham on rods of yew. The other *bile* were
ash-trees, and from one of them the *Fir Bile*, "men of the tree," were
named--perhaps a totem-clan. <span id="fr_673"></span>[4](#fn_672) The
lives of kings and chiefs appear to have been connected with these
trees, probably as representatives of the spirit of vegetation embodied
in the tree, and under their shadow they were inaugurated. But as a
substitute for the king was slain, so doubtless these pre-eminent sacred
trees were too sacred, too much charged with supernatural force, to

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

be cut down and burned, and the yearly ritual would be performed with
another tree. But in time of feud one tribe gloried in destroying the
*bile* of another; and even in the tenth century, when the *bile maighe
Adair* was destroyed by Maeloeohlen the act was regarded with horror.
"But, O reader, this deed did not pass unpunished." <span
id="fr_674"></span>[1](#fn_673) Of another *bile*, that of Borrisokane,
it was said that any house in which a fragment of it was burned would
itself be destroyed by fire. <span id="fr_675"></span>[2](#fn_674)

Tribal and personal names point to belief in descent from tree gods or
spirits and perhaps to totemism. The Eburones were the yew-tree tribe
(*eburos*); the Bituriges perhaps had the mistletoe for their symbol,
and their surname Vivisci implies that they were called "Mistletoe
men." <span id="fr_676"></span>[3](#fn_675) If *bile* (tree) is
connected with the name Bile, that of the ancestor of the Milesians,
this may point to some myth of descent from a sacred tree, as in the
case of the *Fir Bile*, or "men of the tree." <span
id="fr_677"></span>[4](#fn_676) Other names like Guidgen (*Viduo-genos*,
"son of the tree"), Dergen (*Dervo-genos*, "son of the oak"), Guerngen
(*Verno-genos*, "son of the alder"), imply filiation to a tree. Though
these names became conventional, they express what had once been a
living belief. Names borrowed directly from trees are also found--Eburos
or Ebur, "yew," Derua or Deruacus, "oak," etc.

The veneration of trees growing beside burial mounds or megalithic
monuments was probably a pre-Celtic cult continued by the Celts. The
tree embodied the ghost of the person buried under it, but such a ghost
could then hardly be differentiated from a tree spirit or divinity. Even
now in Celtic districts extreme veneration exists for trees growing in
cemeteries and in other places. It is dangerous to cut them

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

down or to pluck a leaf or branch from them, while in Breton churchyards
the yew is thought to spread a root to the mouth of each corpse. <span
id="fr_678"></span>[1](#fn_677) The story of the grave of Cyperissa,
daughter of a Celtic king in the Danube region, from which first sprang
the "mournful cypress," <span id="fr_679"></span>[2](#fn_678) is
connected with universal legends of trees growing from the graves of
lovers until their branches intertwine. These embody the belief that the
spirit of the dead is in the tree, which was thus in all likelihood the
object of a cult. Instances of these legends occur in Celtic story.
Yew-stakes driven through the bodies of Naisi and Deirdre to keep them
apart, became yew-trees the tops of which embraced over Armagh
Cathedral. A yew sprang from the grave of Bailé Mac Buain, and an
apple-tree from that of his lover Aillinn, and the top of each had the
form of their heads. <span id="fr_680"></span>[3](#fn_679) The
identification of tree and ghost is here complete.

The elder, rowan, and thorn are still planted round houses to keep off
witches, or sprigs of rowan are placed over doorways--a survival from
the time when they were believed to be tenanted by a beneficent spirit
hostile to evil influences. In Ireland and the Isle of Man the thorn is
thought to be the resort of fairies, and they, Eke the woodland fairies
or "wood men" are probably representatives of the older tree spirits and
gods of groves and forests. <span id="fr_681"></span>[4](#fn_680)

Tree-worship was rooted in the oldest nature worship, and the Church had
the utmost difficulty in suppressing it. Councils fulminated against the
cult of trees, against offerings to them or the placing of lights before
them and before wells

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

or stones, and against the belief that certain trees were too sacred to
be cut down or burned. Heavy fines were levied against those who
practised these rites, yet still they continued. <span
id="fr_682"></span>[1](#fn_681) Amator, Bishop of Auxerre, tried to stop
the worship of a large pear-tree standing in the centre of the town and
on which the semi-Christian inhabitants hung animals' heads with much
ribaldry. At last S. Germanus destroyed it, but at the risk of his life.
S. Martin of Tours was allowed to destroy a temple, but the people would
not permit him to attack a much venerated pine-tree which stood beside
it--an excellent example of the way in which the more official paganism
fell before Christianity, while the older religion of the soil, from
which it sprang, could not be entirely eradicated. <span
id="fr_683"></span>[2](#fn_682) The Church often effected a compromise.
Images of the gods affixed to trees were replaced by those of the
Virgin, but with curious results. Legends arose telling how the faithful
had been led to such trees and there discovered the image of the Madonna
miraculously placed among the branches. <span
id="fr_684"></span>[3](#fn_683) These are analogous to the legends of
the discovery of images of the Virgin in the earth, such images being
really those of the *Matres*.

Representations of sacred trees are occasionally met with on coins,
altars, and *ex votos*. <span id="fr_685"></span>[4](#fn_684) If the
interpretation be correct which sees a representation of part of the
Cúchulainn legend on the Paris and Trèves altars, the trees figured
there would not necessarily be sacred. But otherwise they may depict
sacred trees.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

We now turn to Pliny's account of the mistletoe rite. The Druids held
nothing more sacred than this plant and the tree on which it grew,
probably an oak. Of it groves were formed, while branches of the oak
were used in all religious rites. Everything growing on the oak had been
sent from heaven, and the presence of the mistletoe showed that God had
selected the tree for especial favour. Rare as it was, when found the
mistletoe was the object of a careful ritual. On the sixth day of the
moon it was culled. Preparations for a sacrifice and feast were made
beneath the tree, and two white bulls whose horns had never been bound
were brought there. A Druid, clad, in white, ascended the tree and cut
the mistletoe with a golden sickle. As it fell it was caught in a white
cloth; the bulls were then sacrificed, and prayer was made that God
would make His gift prosperous to those on whom He had bestowed it. The
mistletoe was called "the universal healer," and a potion made from it
caused barren animals to be fruitful. It was also a remedy against all
poisons. <span id="fr_686"></span>[1](#fn_685) We can hardly believe
that such an elaborate ritual merely led up to the medico-magical use of
the mistletoe. Possibly, of course, the rite was an attenuated survival
of something which had once been more important, but it is more likely
that Pliny gives only a few picturesque details and passes by the
*rationale* of the ritual. He does not tell us who the "God" of whom he
speaks was, perhaps the sun-god or the god of vegetation. As to the
"gift," it was probably in his mind the mistletoe, but it may quite well
have meant the gift of growth in field and fold. The tree was perhaps
cut down and burned; the oxen may have been incarnations of a god of
vegetation, as the tree also may have been. We need not here repeat the
meaning which has been given to the ritual, <span
id="fr_687"></span>[2](#fn_686) but it may be added that if this meaning
is

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

correct, the rite probably took place at the time of the Midsummer
festival, a festival of growth and fertility. Mistletoe is still
gathered on Midsummer eve and used as an antidote to poisons or for the
cure of wounds. Its Druidic name is still preserved in Celtic speech in
words signifying "all-healer," while it is also called *sùgh an
daraich*, "sap of the oak," and *Druidh lus*, "Druid's weed." <span
id="fr_688"></span>[1](#fn_687)

Pliny describes other Celtic herbs of grace. *Selago* was culled without
use of iron after a sacrifice of bread and wine--probably to the spirit
of the plant. The person gathering it wore a white robe, and went with
unshod feet after washing them. According to the Druids, *Selago*
preserved one from accident, and its smoke when burned healed maladies
of the eye. <span id="fr_689"></span>[2](#fn_688) *Samolus* was placed
in drinking troughs as a remedy against disease in cattle. It was culled
by a person fasting, with the left hand; it must be wholly uprooted, and
the gatherer must not look behind him. <span
id="fr_690"></span>[3](#fn_689) *Vervain* was gathered at sunrise after
a sacrifice to the earth as an expiation--perhaps because its surface
was about to be disturbed. When it was rubbed on the body all wishes
were gratified; it dispelled fevers and other maladies; it was an
antidote against serpents; and it conciliated hearts. A branch of the
dried herb used to asperge a banquet-hall made the guests more
convivial. <span id="fr_691"></span>[4](#fn_690)

The ritual used in gathering these plants--silence, various tabus,
ritual purity, sacrifice--is found wherever plants are culled whose
virtue lies in this that they are possessed by a spirit. Other plants
are still used as charms by modern Celtic peasants, and, in some cases,
the ritual of gathering

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

them resembles that described by Pliny. <span
id="fr_692"></span>[1](#fn_691) In Irish sagas plants have magical
powers. "Fairy herbs" placed in a bath restored beauty to women bathing
therein. <span id="fr_693"></span>[2](#fn_692) During the *Táin*
Cúchulainn's wounds were healed with "balsams and healing herbs of fairy
potency," and Diancecht used similar herbs to restore the dead at the
battle of Mag-tured. <span id="fr_694"></span>[3](#fn_693)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_657"></span>[198:1](rac16.htm#fr_658) Sacaze, *Inscr. des
Pyren.* 255 Hirschfeld, *Sitzungsberichte* (Berlin, 1896), 448.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[198:2](rac16.htm#fr_659) *CIL* vi. 46; *CIR*
1654, 1683.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[198:3](rac16.htm#fr_660) D'Arbois, *Les
Celtes*, 52.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[198:4](rac16.htm#fr_661) Lucan, *Phar.*
Usener's ed., 32; Orosius, v. 16. 6; Dio Cass. lxii. 6.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[199:1](rac16.htm#fr_662) Pliny, xvi. 44. The
Scholiast on Lucan says that the Druids divined with acorns (Usener,
33).

<span id="fn_662"></span>[199:2](rac16.htm#fr_663) Max. Tyr. *Diss*.
viii. 8; Stokes, *RC* i. 269.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[199:3](rac16.htm#fr_664) Le Braz, ii. 18.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[199:4](rac16.htm#fr_665) Mr. Chadwick (*Jour.
Anth. Inst.* xxx. 26) connects this high god with thunder, and regards
the Celtic Zeus (Taranis, in his opinion) as a thunder-god. The oak was
associated with this god because his worshippers dwelt under oaks.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[199:5](rac16.htm#fr_666) Helbig, *Die Italiker
in der Poebene*, 16 f.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[199:6](rac16.htm#fr_667) Mannhardt,
*Baumkultus*; Frazer, *Golden Bough*, <sup>2</sup> iii. 198.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[200:1](rac16.htm#fr_668) Frazer, *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_668"></span>[200:2](rac16.htm#fr_669) Evans, *Arch. Rev.*
i. 327 f.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[201:1](rac16.htm#fr_670) Joyce, *SH* i. 236.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[201:2](rac16.htm#fr_671) O'Curry, *MC* i. 213.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[201:3](rac16.htm#fr_672) *LL* 199*b*; *Rennes
Dindsenchas*, *RC* xv. 420.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[201:4](rac16.htm#fr_673) *RC* xv. 455, xvi.
279; Hennessey, *Chron. Scot.* 76.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[202:1](rac16.htm#fr_674) Keating, 556; Joyce,
*PN* i. 499.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[202:2](rac16.htm#fr_675) Wood-Martin, ii. 159.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[202:3](rac16.htm#fr_676) D'Arbois, *Les
Celtes*, 51; Jullian, 41.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[202:4](rac16.htm#fr_677) Cook, *Folk-Lore*,
xvii. 60.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[203:1](rac16.htm#fr_678) See Sébillot, i. 293;
Le Braz, i. 259; *Folk-Lore Journal*, v. 218; *Folk-Lore Record*, 1882.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[203:2](rac16.htm#fr_679) Val. Probus, *Comm.
in Georgica*, ii. 84.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[203:3](rac16.htm#fr_680) Miss Hull, 53;
O'Curry, *MS. Mat.* 465. Writing tablets, made from each of the trees
when they were out down, sprang together and could not be separated.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[203:4](rac16.htm#fr_681) *Stat. Account*, iii.
27; Moore, 151; Sébillot, i. 262, 270.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[204:1](rac16.htm#fr_682) Dom Martin, i. 124;
*Vita S. Eligii*, ii. 16.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[204:2](rac16.htm#fr_683) *Acta Sanct.*
(Bolland.), July 31; Sulp. Sever. *Vita S. Mart.* 457.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[204:3](rac16.htm#fr_684) Grimm, *Teut. Myth.*
76; Maury, 13, 299. The story of beautiful women found in trees may be
connected with the custom of placing images in trees, or with the belief
that a goddess might be seen emerging from the tree in which she dwelt.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[204:4](rac16.htm#fr_685) De la Tour, *Atlas
des Monnaies Gaul*, 260, 286; Reinach, *Catal. Sommaire*, 29.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[205:1](rac16.htm#fr_686) Pliny, *HN* xvi. 44.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[205:2](rac16.htm#fr_687) See [p.
162](rac12.htm#page_162), *supra*.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[206:1](rac16.htm#fr_688) See Cameron, *Gaelic
Names of Plants*, 45. In Gregoire de Rostren, *Dict. françois-celt*.
1732, mistletoe is translated by *dour-dero*, "oak-water," and is said
to be good for several evils.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[206:2](rac16.htm#fr_689) Pliny, xxiv. 11.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[206:3](rac16.htm#fr_690) *Ibid.*

<span id="fn_690"></span>[206:4](rac16.htm#fr_691) *Ibid.* xxv. 9.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[207:1](rac16.htm#fr_692) See Carmichael,
*Carmina Gadelica*; De Nore, *Costumes . . . des Provinces de France*,
150 f.; Sauvé, *RC* vi. 67, *CM* ix. 331.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[207:2](rac16.htm#fr_693) O'Grady, ii. 126.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[207:3](rac16.htm#fr_694) Miss Hull, 172; see
[p. 77](rac08.htm#page_77), *supra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Animal Worship](rac17)
