[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac20)  [Next](rac22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII.

# FESTIVALS.

THE Celtic year was not at first regulated by the solstices and
equinoxes, but by some method connected with agriculture or with the
seasons. Later, the year was a lunar one, and there is some evidence of
attempts at synchronising solar and lunar time. But time was mainly
measured by the moon, while in all calculations night preceded
day. <span id="fr_889"></span>[1](#fn_887) Thus *oidhche Samhain* was
the night preceding Samhain (November 1st), not the following night. The
usage survives in our "sennight" and "fortnight." In early times the
year had two, possibly three divisions, marking periods in pastoral or
agricultural life, but it was afterwards divided into four periods,
while the year began with the winter division, opening at Samhain. A
twofold, subdivided into a fourfold division is found in Irish
texts, <span id="fr_890"></span>[2](#fn_888) and may be tabulated as
follows:--

<table data-border="" data-cellspacing="1" data-cellpadding="9" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="MIDDLE"><p>A. Geimredh (winter half)</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1st quarter, <em>Geimredh</em>, beginning with the festival of <em>Samhain</em>, November 1st.</p>
<p>2nd quarter, <em>Earrach</em>, beginning February 1st (sometimes called <em>Oimelc</em>).</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="MIDDLE"><p>B. Samhradh (summer half)</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>3rd quarter, <em>Samradh</em>, beginning with the festival of <em>Beltane</em>, May 1st (called also <em>Cét-soman</em> or <em>Cét-samain</em>, 1st day of <em>Samono-s</em>; cf. Welsh <em>Cyntefyn</em>).<br />
<span id="page_257">p. 257</span></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="MIDDLE"><p>B. Samhradh (summer half)</p></td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4th quarter, <em>Foghamhar</em>, beginning with the festival of <em>Lugnasadh</em>, August 1st (sometimes called <em>Brontroghain</em>).</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

\[paragraph continues\] These divisions began with festivals, and clear
traces of three of them occur over the whole Celtic area, but the fourth
has now been merged in S. Brigit's day. Beltane and Samhain marked the
beginning of the two great divisions, and were perhaps at first movable
festivals, according as the signs of summer or winter appeared earlier
or later. With the adoption of the Roman calendar some of the festivals
were displaced, *e.g.* in Gaul, where the Calends of January took the
place of Samhain, the ritual being also transferred.

None of the four festivals is connected with the times of equinox and
solstice. This points to the fact that originally the Celtic year was
independent of these. But Midsummer day was also observed not only by
the Celts, but by most European folk, the ritual resembling that of
Beltane. It has been held, and an old tradition in Ireland gives some
support to the theory, that under Christian influences the old pagan
feast of Beltane was merged in that of S. John Baptist on Midsummer
day. <span id="fr_891"></span>[1](#fn_889) But, though there are
Christian elements in the Midsummer ritual, denoting a desire to bring
it under Church influence, the pagan elements in folk-custom are
strongly marked, and the festival is deeply rooted in an earlier
paganism all over Europe. Without much acquaintance with astronomy, men
must have noted the period of the sun's longest course from early times,
and it would probably be observed ritually. The festivals of Beltane and
Midsummer may have arisen independently, and entered into competition
with each other. Or Beltane may have been an early pastoral festival
marking the beginning of summer when the herds went out to pasture, and
Midsummer a more purely agricultural festival.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And since their ritual aspect and purpose as
seen in folk-custom are similar, they may eventually have borrowed each
from the other. Or they may be later separate fixed dates of an earlier
movable summer festival. For our purpose we may here consider them as
twin halves of such a festival. Where Midsummer was already observed,
the influence of the Roman calendar would confirm that observance. The
festivals of the Christian year also affected the older observances.
Some of the ritual was transferred to saints' days within the range of
the pagan festival days, thus the Samhain ritual is found observed on S.
Martin's day. In other cases, holy days took the place of the old
festivals--All Saints' and All Souls' that of Samhain, S. Brigit's day
that of February 1st, S. John Baptist's day that of Midsummer, Lammas
that of Lugnasad, and some attempt was made to hallow, if not to oust,
the older ritual.

The Celtic festivals being primarily connected with agricultural and
pastoral life, we find in their ritual survivals traces not only of a
religious but of a magical view of things, of acts designed to assist
the powers of life and growth. The proof of this will be found in a
detailed examination of the surviving customs connected with them.

### SAMHAIN.

Samhain, <span id="fr_892"></span>[1](#fn_890) beginning the Celtic
year, was an important social and religious occasion. The powers of
blight were beginning their ascendancy, yet the future triumph of the
powers of growth was not forgotten. Probably Samhain had gathered up
into itself other feasts occurring earlier or later.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

Thus it bears traces of being a harvest festival, the ritual of the
earlier harvest feast being transferred to the winter feast, as the
Celts found themselves in lands where harvest is not gathered before
late autumn. The harvest rites may, however, have been associated with
threshing rather than ingathering. Samhain also contains in its ritual
some of the old pastoral cults, while as a New Year feast its ritual is
in great part that of all festivals of beginnings.

New fire was brought into each house at Samhain from the sacred
bonfire, <span id="fr_893"></span>[1](#fn_891) itself probably kindled
from the need-fire by the friction of pieces of wood. This preserved its
purity, the purity necessary to a festival of beginnings. <span
id="fr_894"></span>[2](#fn_892) The putting away of the old fires was
probably connected with various rites for the expulsion of evils, which
usually occur among many peoples at the New Year festival. By that
process of dislocation which scattered the Samhain ritual over a wider
period and gave some of it to Christmas, the kindling of the Yule log
may have been originally connected with this festival.

Divination and forecasting the fate of the inquirer for the coming year
also took place. Sometimes these were connected with the bonfire, stones
placed in it showing by their appearance the fortune or misfortune
awaiting their owners. <span id="fr_895"></span>[3](#fn_893) Others,
like those described by Burns in his "Hallowe'en," were unconnected with
the bonfire and were of an erotic nature. <span
id="fr_896"></span>[4](#fn_894)

The slaughter of animals for winter consumption which took place at
Samhain, or, as now, at Martinmas, though connected with economic
reasons, had a distinctly religious aspect, as it had among the Teutons.
In recent times in

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ireland one of the animals was offered to S.
Martin, who may have taken the place of a god, and ill-luck followed the
nonobservance of the custom. <span id="fr_897"></span>[1](#fn_895) The
slaughter was followed by general feasting. This later slaughter may be
traced back to the pastoral stage, in which the animals were regarded as
divine, and one was slain annually and eaten sacramentally. Or, if the
slaughter was more general, the animals would be propitiated. But when
the animals ceased to be worshipped, the slaughter would certainly be
more general, though still preserving traces of its original character.
The pastoral sacrament may also have been connected with the slaying and
eating of an animal representing the corn-spirit at harvest time. In one
legend S. Martin is associated with the animal slain at Martinmas, and
is said to have been cut up and eaten in the form of an ox, <span
id="fr_898"></span>[2](#fn_896) as if a former divine animal had become
an anthropomorphic divinity, the latter being merged in the personality
of a Christian saint.

Other rites, connected with the Calends of January as a result of
dislocation, point also in this direction. In Gaul and Germany riotous
processions took place with men dressed in the heads and skins of
animals. <span id="fr_899"></span>[3](#fn_897) This rite is said by
Tille to have been introduced from Italy, but it is more likely to have
been a native custom. <span id="fr_900"></span>[4](#fn_898) As the
people ate the flesh of the slain animals sacramentally, so they clothed
themselves in the skins to promote further contact with their divinity.
Perambulating the township sunwise dressed in the skin of a cow took
place until recently in the Hebrides at New Year, in order to keep off
misfortune, a piece of the hide being burned and the smoke inhaled by
each person and animal in

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

the township. <span id="fr_901"></span>[1](#fn_899) Similar customs have
been found in other Celtic districts, and these animal disguises can
hardly be separated from the sacramental slaughter at Samhain. <span
id="fr_902"></span>[2](#fn_900)

Evils having been or being about to be cast off in the New Year ritual,
a few more added to the number can make little difference. Hence among
primitive peoples New Year is often cbaracterised by orgiastic rites.
These took place at the Calends in Gaul, and were denounced by councils
and preachers. <span id="fr_903"></span>[3](#fn_901) In Ireland the
merriment at Samhain is often mentioned in the texts, <span
id="fr_904"></span>[4](#fn_902) and similar orgiastic rites lurk behind
the Hallowe'en customs in Scotland and in the licence still permitted to
youths in the quietest townships of the West Highlands at Samhain eve.

Samhain, as has been seen, was also a festival of the dead, whose ghosts
were fed at this time. <span id="fr_905"></span>[5](#fn_903)

As the powers of growth were in danger and in eclipse in winter, men
thought it necessary to assist them. As a magical aid the Samhain
bonfire was chief, and it is still lit in the Highlands. Brands were
carried round, and from it the new fire was lit in each house. In North
Wales people jumped through the fire, and when it was extinct, rushed
away to escape the "black sow" who would take the hindmost. <span
id="fr_906"></span>[6](#fn_904) The bonfire represented the sun, and was
intended to strengthen it. But representing the sun, it had all the
sun's force, hence those who jumped through it were strengthened and
purified. The Welsh reference to the hindmost and to the black sow may
point to a former human sacrifice, perhaps of any one

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

who stumbled in jumping through the fire. Keating speaks of a Druidic
sacrifice in the bonfire, whether of man or beast is not
specified. <span id="fr_907"></span>[1](#fn_905) Probably the victim,
like the scapegoat, was laden with the accumulated evils of the year, as
in similar New Year customs elsewhere. Later belief regarded the
sacrifice, if sacrifice there was, as offered to the powers of evil--the
black sow, unless this animal is a reminiscence of the corn-spirit in
its harmful aspect. Earlier powers, whether of growth or of blight, came
to be associated with Samhain as demoniac beings--the "malignant bird
flocks" which blighted crops and killed animals, the *samhanach* which
steals children, and Mongfind the banshee, to whom "women and the
rabble" make petitions on Samhain eve. <span
id="fr_908"></span>[2](#fn_906) Witches, evil-intentioned fairies, and
the dead were particularly active then.

Though the sacrificial victim had come to be regarded as an offering to
the powers of blight, he may once have represented a divinity of growth
or, in earlier times, the corn-spirit. Such a victim was slain at
harvest, and harvest is often late in northern Celtic regions, while the
slaying was sometimes connected not with the harvest field, but with the
later threshing. This would bring it near the Samhain festival. The
slaying of the corn-spirit was derived from the earlier slaying of a
tree or vegetation-spirit embodied in a tree and also in a human or
animal victim. The corn-spirit was embodied in the last sheaf cut as
well as in an animal or human being. <span
id="fr_909"></span>[3](#fn_907) This human victim may have been regarded
as a king, since in late popular custom a mock king is chosen at winter
festivals. <span id="fr_910"></span>[4](#fn_908) In other cases the
effigy of a saint is

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

hung up and carried round the different houses, part of the dress being
left at each. The saint has probably succeeded to the traditional ritual
of the divine victim. <span id="fr_911"></span>[1](#fn_909) The
primitive period in which the corn-spirit was regarded as female, with a
woman as her human representative, is also recalled in folk-custom. The
last sheaf is called the Maiden or the Mother, while, as in
Northamptonshire, girls choose a queen on S. Catharine's day, November
26th, and in some Christmas pageants "Yule's wife," as well as Yule, is
present, corresponding to the May queen of the summer festival. <span
id="fr_912"></span>[2](#fn_910) Men also masqueraded as women at the
Calends. The dates of these survivals may be explained by that
dislocation of the Samhain festival already pointed out. This view of
the Samhain human sacrifices is supported by the Irish offerings to the
Fomorians--gods of growth, later regarded as gods of blight, and to
Cromm Cruaich, in both cases at Samhain. <span
id="fr_913"></span>[3](#fn_911) With the evolution of religious thought,
the slain victim came to be regarded as an offering to evil powers.

This aspect of Samhain, as a festival to promote and assist festivity,
is further seen in the belief in the increased activity of fairies at
that time. In Ireland, fairies are connected with the Tuatha Dé Danann,
the divinities of growth, and in many folk-tales they are associated
with agricultural processes. The use of evergreens at Christmas is
perhaps also connected with the carrying of them round the fields in
older times, as an evidence that the life of nature was not
extinct. <span id="fr_914"></span>[4](#fn_912)

Samhain may thus be regarded as, in origin, an old pastoral and
agricultural festival, which in time came to be looked upon as affording
assistance to the powers of growth in their conflict with the powers of
blight. Perhaps some myth

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

describing this combat may lurk behind the story of the battle of
Mag-tured fought on Samhain between the Tuatha Dé Danann and the
Fomorians. While the powers of blight are triumphant in winter, the
Tuatha Dea are represented as the victors, though they suffer loss and
death. Perhaps this enshrines the belief in the continual triumph of
life and growth over blight and decay, or it may arise from the fact
that Samhain was both a time of rejoicing for the ingathered harvest,
and of wailing for the coming supremacy of winter and the reign of the
powers of blight.

### BELTANE.

In Cormac's *Glossary* and other texts, "Beltane" is derived from
*bel-tene*, "a goodly fire," or from *bel-dine*, because newly-born
(*dine*) cattle were offered to Bel, an idol-god. <span
id="fr_915"></span>[1](#fn_913) The latter is followed by those who
believe in a Celtic Belus, connected with Baal. No such god is known,
however, and the god Belenos is in no way connected with the Semitic
divinity. M. D'Arbois assumes an unknown god of death, Beltene (from
*beltu*, "to die"), whose festival Beltane was. <span
id="fr_916"></span>[2](#fn_914) But Beltane was a festival of life, of
the sun shining in his strength. Dr. Stokes gives a more acceptable
explanation of the word. Its primitive form was *belo-te*\[*p*\]*niâ*,
from *belo-s*, "clear," "shining," the root of the names Belenos and
Belisama, and *te*\[*p*\]*nos*, "fire." Thus the word would mean
something like "bright fire," perhaps the sun or the bonfire, or
both. <span id="fr_917"></span>[3](#fn_915)

The folk-survivals of the Beltane and Midsummer festivals show that both
were intended to promote fertility.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

One of the chief ritual acts at Beltane was the kindling of bonfires,
often on hills. The house-fires in the district were often extinguished,
the bonfire being lit by friction from a rotating wheel--the German
"need-fire." <span id="fr_918"></span>[1](#fn_916) The fire kept off
disease and evil, hence cattle were driven through it, or, according to
Cormac, between two fires lit by Druids, in order to keep them in health
during the year. <span id="fr_919"></span>[2](#fn_917) Sometimes the
fire was lit beneath a sacred tree, or a pole covered with greenery was
surrounded by the fuel, or a tree was burned in the fire. <span
id="fr_920"></span>[3](#fn_918) These trees survive in the Maypole of
later custom, and they represented the vegetation-spirit, to whom also
the worshippers assimilated themselves by dressing in leaves. They
danced sunwise round the fire or ran through the fields with blazing
branches or wisps of straw, imitating the course of the sun, and thus
benefiting the fields. <span id="fr_921"></span>[4](#fn_919) For the
same reason the tree itself was probably borne through the fields.
Houses were decked with boughs and thus protected by the spirit of
vegetation. <span id="fr_922"></span>[5](#fn_920)

An animal representing the spirit of vegetation may have been slain. In
late survivals of Beltane at Dublin, a horse's skull and bones were
thrown into the fire, <span id="fr_923"></span>[6](#fn_921) the
attenuated form of an earlier sacrifice or slaying of a divine victim,
by whom strength was transferred to all the animals which passed through
the fire. In some cases a human victim may have been slain. This is
suggested by customs surviving in Perthshire in the eighteenth century,
when a cake was broken up and distributed, and the person who received a
certain

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

blackened portion was called the "Beltane carline" or "devoted." A
pretence was made of throwing him into the fire, or he had to leap three
times through it, and during the festival he was spoken of as
"dead." <span id="fr_924"></span>[1](#fn_922) Martin says that
malefactors were burned in the fire, <span
id="fr_925"></span>[2](#fn_923) and though he cites no authority, this
agrees with the Celtic use of criminals as victims. Perhaps the victim
was at one time a human representative of the vegetation-spirit.

Beltane cakes or bannocks, perhaps made of the grain of the sacred last
sheaf from the previous harvest, and therefore sacramental in character,
were also used in different ways in folk-survivals. They were rolled
down a slope--a magical imitative act, symbolising and aiding the course
of the sun. The cake had also a divinatory character. If it broke on
reaching the foot of the slope this indicated the approaching death of
its owner. In another custom in Perthshire, part of a cake was thrown
over the shoulder with the words, "This I give to thee, preserve thou my
horses; this to thee, preserve thou my sheep; this to thee, O fox,
preserve thou my lambs, this to thee, O hooded crow; this to thee, O
eagle." Here there is an appeal to beneficial and noxious powers,
whether this was the original intention of the rite. <span
id="fr_926"></span>[3](#fn_924) But if the cakes were made of the last
sheaf, they were probably at one time eaten sacramentally, their
sacrificial use emerging later.

The bonfire was a sun-charm, representing and assisting the sun.
Rain-charms were also used at Beltane. Sacred wells were visited and the
ceremony performed with their waters, these perhaps being sprinkled over
the tree or the fields to promote a copious rainfall for the benefit of
vegetation.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The use of such rites at Beltane and at other
festivals may have given rise to the belief that wells were especially
efficacious then for purposes of healing. The custom of rolling in the
grass to benefit by May dew was probably connected with magical rites in
which moisture played an important part. <span
id="fr_927"></span>[1](#fn_925)

The idea that the powers of growth had successfully combated those of
blight may have been ritually represented. This is suggested by the
mimic combats of Summer and Winter at this time, to which reference has
already been made. Again, the May king and queen represent earlier
personages who were regarded as embodying the spirits of vegetation and
fertility at this festival, and whose marriage or union magically
assisted growth and fertility, as in numerous examples of this ritual
marriage elsewhere. <span id="fr_928"></span>[2](#fn_926) It may be
assumed that a considerable amount of sexual licence also took place
with the same magical purpose. Sacred marriage and festival orgy were an
appeal to the forces of nature to complete their beneficial work, as
well as a magical aid to them in that work. Analogy leads to the
supposition that the king of the May was originally a priest-king, the
incarnation of the spirit of vegetation. He or his surrogate was slain,
while his bodily force was unabated, in order that it might be passed on
undiminished to his successor. But the persistent place given to the May
queen rather than to the king suggests the earlier prominence of women
and of female spirits of fertility or of a great Mother-goddess in such
rites. It is also significant that in the Perthshire ritual the man
chosen was still called the *Beltane carlane* or *cailleach* ("old
woman"). And if, as Professor Pearson maintains, witch

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

orgies are survivals of old sex-festivals, then the popular belief in
the activity of witches on Beltane eve, also shows that the festival had
once been mainly one in which women took part. Such orgies often took
place on hills which had been the sites of a cult in former times. <span
id="fr_929"></span>[1](#fn_927)

### MIDSUMMER.

The ritual of the Midsummer festival did not materially differ from that
of Beltane, and as folk-survivals show, it was practised not only by the
Celts, but by many other European peoples. It was, in fact, a primitive
nature festival such as would readily be observed by all under similar
psychic conditions and in like surroundings. A bonfire was again the
central rite of this festival, the communal nature of which is seen in
the fact that all must contribute materials to it. In local survivals,
mayor and priest, representing the earlier local chief and priest, were
present, while a service in church preceded the procession to the scene
of the bonfire. Dancing sunwise round the fire to the accompaniment of
songs which probably took the place of hymns or tunes in honour of the
Sun-god, commonly occurred, and by imitating the sun's action, may have
been intended to make it more powerful. The livelier the dance the
better would be the harvest. <span id="fr_930"></span>[2](#fn_928) As
the fire represented the sun, it possessed the purifying and
invigorating powers of the sun; hence leaping through the fire preserved
from disease, brought prosperity, or removed barrenness. Hence also
cattle were driven through the fire.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But if any one stumbled as he leaped, ill-luck
was supposed to follow him. He was devoted to the *fadets* or
spirits, <span id="fr_931"></span>[1](#fn_929) and perhaps, like the
"devoted" Beltane victim, he may formerly have been sacrificed. Animal
sacrifices are certainly found in many survivals, the victims being of
ten placed in osier baskets and thrown into the fire. In other districts
great human effigies of osier were carried in procession and
burned. <span id="fr_932"></span>[2](#fn_930)

The connection of such sacrifices with the periodical slaying of a
representative of the vegetation-spirit has been maintained by Mannhardt
and Dr. Frazer. <span id="fr_933"></span>[3](#fn_931) As has been seen,
periodic sacrifices for the fertility of the land are mentioned by
Cæsar, Strabo, and Diodorus, human victims and animals being enclosed in
an osier image and burned. <span id="fr_934"></span>[4](#fn_932) These
images survive in the osier effigies just referred to, while they may
also be connected with the custom of decking the human representatives
of the spirit of vegetation in greenery. The holocausts may be regarded
as extensions of the earlier custom of slaying one victim, the
incarnation of a vegetation-spirit. This slaying was gradually regarded
as sacrificial, but as the beneficial effect of the sacrifice on growth
was still believed in, it would naturally be thought that still better
effects would be produced if many victims were offered. The victims were
burned in a fire representing the sun, and vegetation was thus doubly
benefited, by the victims and by the sun-god.

The oldest conception of the vegetation-spirit was that of a tree-spirit
which had power over rain, sunshine, and every species of fruitfulness.
For this reason a tree had a prominent place both in the Beltane and
Midsummer feasts. It was carried in procession, imparting its benefits
to each house or

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

field. Branches of it were attached to each house for the same purpose.
It was then burned, or it was set up to procure benefits to vegetation
during the year and burned at the next Midsummer festival. <span
id="fr_935"></span>[1](#fn_933) The sacred tree was probably an oak,
and, as has been seen, the mistletoe rite probably took place on
Midsummer eve, as a preliminary to cutting down the sacred tree and in
order to secure the life or soul of the tree, which must first be
secured before the tree could be cut down. The life of the tree was in
the mistletoe, still alive in winter when the tree itself seemed to be
dead. Such beliefs as this concerning the detachable soul or life
survive in *Märchen*, and are still alive among savages. <span
id="fr_936"></span>[2](#fn_934)

Folk-survivals show that a human or an animal representative of the
vegetation-spirit, brought into connection with the tree, was also slain
or burned along with the tree. <span id="fr_937"></span>[3](#fn_935)
Thus the cutting of the mistletoe would be regarded as a preliminary to
the slaying of the human victim, who, like the tree, was the
representative of the spirit of vegetation.

The bonfire representing the sun, and the victims, like the tree,
representing the spirit of vegetation, it is obvious why the fire had
healing and fertilising powers, and why its ashes and the ashes or the
flesh of the victims possessed the same powers. Brands from the fire
were carried through the fields or villages, as the tree had been, or
placed on the fields or in houses, where they were carefully preserved
for a year. All this aided growth and prosperity, just as the smoke of
the fire, drifting over the fields, produced fertility. Ashes from the
fire, and probably the calcined bones or even the flesh of the victims,
were scattered on the fields or preserved and mixed

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

with the seed corn. Again, part of the flesh may have been eaten
sacramentally, since, as has been seen, Pliny refers to the belief of
the Celts in the eating of human flesh as most wholesome.

In the Stone Age, as with many savages, a circle typified the sun, and
as soon as the wheel was invented its rolling motion at once suggested
that of the sun. In the *Edda* the sun is "the beautiful, the shining
wheel," and similar expressions occur in the *Vedas*. Among the Celts
the, wheel of the sun was a favourite piece of symbolism, and this is
seen in various customs at the Midsummer festival. A burning wheel was
rolled down a slope or trundled through the fields, or burning brands
were whirled round so as to give the impression of a fiery wheel. The
intention was primarily to imitate the course of the sun through the
heavens, and so, on the principle of imitative magic, to strengthen it.
But also, as the wheel was rolled through the fields, so it was hoped
that the direct beneficial action of the sun upon them would follow.
Similar rites might be performed not only at Midsummer, but at other
times, to procure blessing or to ward off evil, *e.g.* carrying fire
round houses or fields or cattle or round a child *deiseil* or
sunwise, <span id="fr_938"></span>[1](#fn_936) and, by a further
extension of thought, the blazing wheel, or the remains of the burning
brands thrown to the winds, had also the effect of carrying off
accumulated evils. <span id="fr_939"></span>[2](#fn_937)

Beltane and Midsummer thus appear as twin halves of a spring or early
summer festival, the intention of which was to

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

promote fertility and health. This was done by slaying the spirit of
vegetation in his representative--tree, animal, or man. His death
quickened the energies of earth and man. The fire also magically
assisted the course of the sun. Survival of the ancient rites are or
were recently found in all Celtic regions, and have been constantly
combated by the Church. But though they were continued, their true
meaning was forgotten, and they were mainly performed for luck or out of
sheer conservatism. Sometimes a Christian aspect was given to them,
*e.g.* by connecting the fires with S. John, or by associating the rites
with the service of the Church, or by the clergy being present at them.
But their true nature was still evident as acts of pagan worship and
magic which no veneer of Christianity could ever quite conceal. <span
id="fr_940"></span>[1](#fn_938)

### LUGNASAD.

The 1st of August, coming midway between Beltane and Samhain, was an
important festival among the Celts. In Christian times the day became
Lammas, but its name still survives in Irish as Lugnasad, in Gaelic as
Lunasdal or Lunasduinn, and in Manx as Laa Luanys, and it is still
observed as a fair or feast in many districts. Formerly assemblies at
convenient centres were held on this day, not only for religious
purposes, but for commerce and pleasure, both of these being of course
saturated with religion. "All Ireland" met at Taillti, just as "all
Gaul" met at Lugudunum, "Lug's town," or Lyons, in honour of Augustus,
though the feast there had formerly been in honour of the god
Lugus. <span id="fr_941"></span>[2](#fn_939) The festival was

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

here Romanised, as it was also in Britain, where its name appears as
*Goel-aoust*, *Gul-austus*, and *Gwyl Awst*, now the "August feast," but
formerly the "feast of Augustus," the name having replaced one
corresponding to Lugnasad. <span id="fr_942"></span>[1](#fn_940)

Cormac explains the name Lugnasad as a festival of Lugh mac Ethlenn,
celebrated by him in the beginning of autumn, and the *Rennes
Dindsenchas* accounts for its origin by saying that Lug's foster-mother,
Tailtiu, having died on the Calends of August, he directed an assembly
for lamentation to be held annually on that day at her tomb. <span
id="fr_943"></span>[2](#fn_941) Lug is thus the founder of his own
festival, for that it was his, and not Tailtiu's, is clear from the fact
that his name is attached to it. As Lammas was a Christian harvest
thanksgiving, so also was Lugnasad a pagan harvest feast, part of the
ritual of which passed over to Samhain. The people made glad before the
sun-god--Lug perhaps having that character--who had assisted them in the
growth of the things on which their lives depended. Marriages were also
arranged at this feast, probably because men had now more leisure and
more means for entering upon matrimony. Possibly promiscuous love-making
also occurred as a result of the festival gladness, agricultural
districts being still notoriously immoral. Some evidence points to the
connection of the feast with Lug's marriage, though this has been
allegorised into his wedding the "sovereignty of Erin." Perhaps we have
here a hint of the rite of the sacred marriage, for the purpose of
magically fertilising the fields against next year's sowing.

Due observance of the feast produced abundance of corn, fruit, milk, and
fish. Probably the ritual observed included the preservation of the last
sheaf as representing the corn-spirit, giving some of it to the cattle
to strengthen them, and mingling

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

it with next year's corn to impart to it the power of the corn-spirit.
It may also have included the slaying of an animal or human incarnation
of the corn-spirit, whose flesh and blood quickened the soil and so
produced abundance next year, or, when partaken of by the worshippers,
brought blessings to them. To neglect such rites, abundant instances of
which exist in folk-custom, would be held to result in scarcity. This
would also explain, as already suggested, why the festival was
associated with the death of Tailtiu or of Carman. The euhemerised
queen-goddess Tailtiu and the woman Carman had once been corn-goddesses,
evolved from more primitive corn-spirits, and slain at the feast in
their female representatives. The story of their death and burial at the
festival was a dim memory of this ancient rite, and since the festival
was also connected with the sun-god Lug, it was easy to bring him into
relationship with the earlier goddess. Elsewhere the festival, in its
memorial aspect, was associated with a king, probably because male
victims had come to be representatives of a corn-god who had taken the
place of the goddess.

 

Some of the ritual of these festivals is illustrated by scattered
notices in classical writers, and on the whole they support our theory
that the festivals originated in a female cult of spirits or goddesses
of fertility. Strabo speaks of sacrifices offered to Demeter and Kore,
according to the ritual followed at Samothrace, in an island near
Britain, *i.e.* to native goddesses equated with them. He also describes
the ritual of the Namnite women on an island in the Loire. They are
called Bacchantes because they conciliated Bacchus with mysteries and
sacrifices; in other words, they observed an orgiastic cult of a god
equated with Bacchus. No man must set foot on the island, but the women
left it once a year for intercourse with the other sex. Once a year the
temple of the god was unroofed, and roofed

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

again before sunset. If any woman dropped her load of materials (and it
was said this always happened), she was torn in pieces and her limbs
carried round the temple. <span id="fr_944"></span>[1](#fn_942)
Dionysius Periegetes says the women were crowned with ivy, and
celebrated their mysteries by night in honour of Earth and Proserpine
with great clamour. <span id="fr_945"></span>[2](#fn_943) Pliny also
makes a reference to British rites in which nude women and girls took
part, their bodies stained with woad. <span
id="fr_946"></span>[3](#fn_944)

At a later time, S. Gregory of Tours speaks of the image of a goddess
Berecynthia drawn on a litter through the streets, fields, and vineyards
of Augustodunum on the days of her festival, or when the fields were
threatened with scarcity. The people danced and sang before it. The
image was covered with a white veil. <span
id="fr_947"></span>[4](#fn_945) Berecynthia has been conjectured by
Professor Anwyl to be the goddess Brigindu, worshipped at Valnay. <span
id="fr_948"></span>[5](#fn_946)

These rites were all directed towards divinities of fertility. But in
harvest customs in Celtic Scotland and elsewhere two sheaves of corn
were called respectively the Old Woman and the Maiden, the corn-spirit
of the past year and that of the year to come, and corresponding to
Demeter and Kore in early Greek agricultural ritual. As in Greece, so
among the Celts, the primitive corn-spirits had probably become more
individualised goddesses with an elaborate cult, observed on an island
or at other sacred spots. The cult probably varied here and there, and
that of a god of fertility may have taken the place of the cult of
goddesses. A god was worshipped by the Namnite women, according to
Strabo, goddesses according to Dionysius. The mangled victim was
probably regarded as representative

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

of a divinity, and perhaps part of the flesh was mixed with the
seed-corn, like the grain of the Maiden sheaf, or buried in the earth.
This rite is common among savages, and its presence in old European
ritual is attested by survivals. That these rites were tabu to men
probably points to the fact that they were examples of an older general
custom, in which all such rites were in the hands of women who
cultivated the earth, and who were the natural priestesses of goddesses
of growth and fertility, of vegetation and the growing corn. Another
example is found in the legend and procession of Godiva at Coventry--the
survival of a pagan cult from which men were excluded. <span
id="fr_949"></span>[1](#fn_947)

Pliny speaks of the nudity of the women engaged in the cult. Nudity is
an essential part of all primitive agricultural rites, and painting the
body is also a widespread ritual act. Dressing with leaves or green
stuff, as among the Namnite women, and often with the intention of
personating the spirit of vegetation, is also customary. By unveiling
the body, and especially the sexual organs, women more effectually
represented the goddess of fertility, and more effectually as her
representatives, or through their own powers, magically conveyed
fertility to the fields. Nakedness thus became a powerful
magico-religious symbol, and it is found as part of the ritual for
producing rain. <span id="fr_950"></span>[2](#fn_948)

There is thus abundant evidence of the cult of fertility, vegetation,
and corn-spirits, who tended to become divinities, male or female. Here
and there, through conservatism, the cult remained in the hands of
women, but more generally it had become a ritual in which both men and
women took part

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

\[paragraph continues\] --that of the great agricultural festivals,
Where a divinity had taken the place of the vaguer spirits, her image,
like that of Berecynthia, was used in the ritual, but the image was
probably the successor of the tree which embodied the vegetation-spirit,
and was carried through the fields to fertilise them. Similar
processions of images, often accompanied by a ritual washing of the
image in order to invigorate the divinity, or, as in the similar May-day
custom, to produce rain, are found in the Teutonic cult of Nerthus, the
Phrygian of Cybele, the Hindu of Bhavani, and the Roman ritual of the
Bona Dea. The image of Berecynthia was thus probably washed also.
Washing the images of saints, usually to produce rain, has sometimes
taken the place of the washing of a divine image, and similarly the
relics of a saint are carried through a field, as was the tree or image.
The community at Iona perambulated a newly sown field with S. Columba's
relics in time of drought, and shook his tunic three times in the air,
and were rewarded by a plentiful rain, and later, by a bounteous
harvest. <span id="fr_951"></span>[1](#fn_949)

Many of these local cults were pre-Celtic, but we need not therefore
suppose that the Celts, or the Aryans as a whole, had no such
cults. <span id="fr_952"></span>[2](#fn_950) The Aryans everywhere
adopted local cults, but this they would not have done if, as is
supposed, they had themselves outgrown them. The cults were local, but
the Celts had similar local cults, and easily accepted those of the
people they conquered. We cannot explain the persistence of such
primitive cults as lie behind the great Celtic festivals, both in
classical times and over the whole area of Europe among the peasantry,
by referring them solely to a pre-Aryan folk. They were as much Aryan as
pre-Aryan. They belong to those unchanging strata of

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

religion which have so largely supplied the soil in which its later and
more spiritual growths have flourished. And among these they still
emerge, unchanged and unchanging, like the gaunt outcrops of some
ancient rock formation amid rich vegetation and fragrant flowers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_887"></span>[256:1](rac21.htm#fr_889) Pliny, xvi. 45;
Cæsar, vi. 18. See my article "Calendar (Celtic)" in Hastings'
*Encyclopædia of Rel. and Ethics*, iii. 78 f., for a full discussion of
the problems involved.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[256:2](rac21.htm#fr_890) O'Donovan, *Book of
Rights*, Intro. lii f.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[257:1](rac21.htm#fr_891) O'Donovan, li.;
Bertrand, 105; Keating, 300.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[258:1](rac21.htm#fr_892) Samhain may mean
"summer-end," from *sam*, "summer," and *fuin*, "sunset" or "end," but
Dr. Stokes (*US* 293) makes *samani*- mean "assembly," *i.e.* the
gathering of the people to keep the feast.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[259:1](rac21.htm#fr_893) Keating, 125, 300.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[259:2](rac21.htm#fr_894) See MacBain, *CM* ix.
328.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[259:3](rac21.htm#fr_895) Brand, i. 390;
Ramsay, *Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century*, ii. 437;
*Stat. Account*, xi. 621.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[259:4](rac21.htm#fr_896) Hazlitt, 297-298,
340; Campbell, *Witchcraft*, 285 f.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[260:1](rac21.htm#fr_897) Curtin, 72.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[260:2](rac21.htm#fr_898) Fitzgerald, *RC* vi.
254.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[260:3](rac21.htm#fr_899) See Chambers,
*Mediæval Stage*, App. N, for the evidence from canons and councils
regarding these.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[260:4](rac21.htm#fr_900) Tille, *Yule and
Christmas*, 96.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[261:1](rac21.htm#fr_901) Chambers, *Popular
Rhymes*, 166.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[261:2](rac21.htm#fr_902) Hutchinson, *View of
Northumberland*, ii. 45; Thomas, *Rev. de l'Hist. des Rel.* xxxviii. 335
f.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[261:3](rac21.htm#fr_903) *Patrol. Lat.* xxxix.
2001.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[261:4](rac21.htm#fr_904) *IT* i. 205; *RC* v.
331; Leahy, i. 57.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[261:5](rac21.htm#fr_905) See [p.
169](rac13.htm#page_169), *supra*.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[261:6](rac21.htm#fr_906) The writer has
himself seen such bonfires in the Highlands. See also Hazlitt, 298;
Pennant, Tour, ii. 47; Rhŷs, *HL* 515, *CFL* i. 225-226. In Egyptian
mythology, Typhon assailed Horus in the form of a black swine.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[262:1](rac21.htm#fr_907) Keating, 300.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[262:2](rac21.htm#fr_908) Joyce, *SH* ii. 556;
*RC* x. 214, 225, xxiv. 172; O'Grady, ii. 374; *CM* ix. 209.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[262:3](rac21.htm#fr_909) See Mannhardt,
*Mythol. Forschung.* 333 f.; Frazer, *Adonis*, *passim*; Thomas, *Rev.
de l'Hist. des Rel.* xxxviii. 825 f.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[262:4](rac21.htm#fr_910) Hazlitt, 35;
Chambers, *Mediæval Stage*, i. 261.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[263:1](rac21.htm#fr_911) Chambers, *Book of
Days*, ii. 492; Hazlitt, 131.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[263:2](rac21.htm#fr_912) Hazlitt, 97; Davies,
*Extracts from Munic. Records of York*, 270.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[263:3](rac21.htm#fr_913) See [p.
237](rac19.htm#page_237), *supra*; *LL* 16, 213.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[263:4](rac21.htm#fr_914) Chambers, *Med.
Stage*, i. 250 f.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[264:1](rac21.htm#fr_915) Cormac, *s.v.*
"Belltaine," "Bel"; *Arch. Rev.* i. 232.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[264:2](rac21.htm#fr_916) D'Arbois, ii. 136.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[264:3](rac21.htm#fr_917) Stokes, *US* 125,
164. See his earlier derivation, dividing the word into *belt*,
connected with Lithuan. *baltas*, "white," and *aine*, the termination
in *sechtmaine*, "week" (*TIG* xxxv.).

<span id="fn_916"></span>[265:1](rac21.htm#fr_918) Need-fire (Gael.
*Teinne-eiginn*, "necessity fire") was used to kindle fire in time of
cattle plague. See Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* 608 f.; Martin, 113; Jamieson's
*Dictionary*, *s.v.* "neidfyre."

<span id="fn_917"></span>[265:2](rac21.htm#fr_919) Cormac, *s.v.*;
Martin, 105, says that the Druids extinguished all fires until their
dues were paid. This may have been a tradition in the Hebrides.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[265:3](rac21.htm#fr_920) Joyce, *PN* i. 216;
Hone, *Everyday Book*, i. 849, ii. 595.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[265:4](rac21.htm#fr_921) Pennant, *Tour in
Scotland*, i. 291.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[265:5](rac21.htm#fr_922) Hazlitt, 339, 397.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[265:6](rac21.htm#fr_923) Hone, *Everyday
Book*, ii. 595. See [p. 215](rac17.htm#page_215), *supra*.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[266:1](rac21.htm#fr_924) Sinclair, *Stat.
Account*, xi. 620.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[266:2](rac21.htm#fr_925) Martin, 105.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[266:3](rac21.htm#fr_926) For these usages see
Ramsay, *Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century*, ii. 439 f.;
Sinclair, *Stat. Account*, v. 84, xi. 620, xv. 617. For the sacramental
and sacrificial use of similar loaves, see Frazer, *Golden Bough*
<sup>2</sup>, i. 94, ii. 78 Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* iii. 1239 f.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[267:1](rac21.htm#fr_927) *New Stat. Account*,
Wigtownshire, 208; Hazlitt, 38, 323, 340.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[267:2](rac21.htm#fr_928) See Miss Owen,
*Folk-lore of the Musquakie Indians*, 50: Frazer, *Golden Bough*
<sup>2</sup>, ii. 205.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[268:1](rac21.htm#fr_929) For notices of
Beltane survivals see Keating, 300; Campbell, *Journey from Edinburgh*,
i. 143; Ramsay, *Scotland and Scotsmen*, ii. 439 f.; *Old Stat.
Account*, v. 84, xi. 620, xv. 517; Gregor, *Folk-lore of N.E. of
Scotland*, 167. The paganism of the survivals is seen in the fact that
Beltane fires were frequently prohibited by Scottish ecclesiastical
councils.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[268:2](rac21.htm#fr_930) Meyrac, *Traditions .
. . des Ardennes*, 68.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[269:1](rac21.htm#fr_931) Bertrand, 119.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[269:2](rac21.htm#fr_932) *Ibid.* 407; Gaidoz,
21; Mannhardt, *Baumkultus*, 514, 523; Brand, i. 8, 323.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[269:3](rac21.htm#fr_933) Mannhardt, *op. cit.*
525 f.; Frazer, *Golden Bough* <sup>2</sup>, iii. 319.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[269:4](rac21.htm#fr_934) P.
[234](rac19.htm#page_234), *supra*.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[270:1](rac21.htm#fr_935) Frazer, *op. cit.* i.
74; Brand, i. 222, 237, 246, 318; Hone, *Everyday Book*, ii. 595;
Mannhardt, *op. cit.* 177; Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* 621, 777 f.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[270:2](rac21.htm#fr_936) See my *Childhood of
Fiction*, ch. v.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[270:3](rac21.htm#fr_937) Frazer, i. 82, ii.
247 f., 275; Mannhardt, 315 f.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[271:1](rac21.htm#fr_938) Martin, 117. The
custom of walking *deiseil* round an object still survives, and, as an
imitation of the sun's course, it is supposed to bring good luck or ward
off evil. For the same reason the right hand turn was of good augury.
Medb's charioteer, as she departed for the war, made her chariot turn to
the right to repel evil omens (*LU* 55). Curiously enough, Pliny
(xxviii. 2) says that the Gauls preferred the left-hand turn in their
religious rites, though Athenæus refers to the right-hand turn among
them. *Deiseil* is from *dekso-s*, "right," and *svel*, "to turn."

<span id="fn_937"></span>[271:2](rac21.htm#fr_939) Hone, i. 846;
Hazlitt, ii. 346.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[272:1](rac21.htm#fr_940) This account of the
Midsummer ritual is based on notices found in Hone, *Everyday Book*;
Hazlitt, ii. 347 f.; Gaidoz, *Le Dieu Soleil*; Bertrand; Deloche, *RC*
ix. 435; *Folk-Lore*, xii. 315; Frazer, *Golden Bough* <sup>2</sup>,
iii. 266 f.; Grimm, *Teut. Myth.* ii. 617 f.; Monnier, 186 f.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[272:2](rac21.htm#fr_941) *RC* xvi. 51;
Guiraud, *Les Assemblées provinciales dans l'Empire Romain*.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[273:1](rac21.htm#fr_942) D'Arbois, i. 215,
*Les Celtes*, 44; Loth, *Annales de Bretagne*, xiii. No. 2.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[273:2](rac21.htm#fr_943) *RC* xvi. 61.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[275:1](rac21.htm#fr_944) Strabo, iv. 4. 6.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[275:2](rac21.htm#fr_945) Dion. Per. v. 570.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[275:3](rac21.htm#fr_946) Pliny, xxii. 1.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[275:4](rac21.htm#fr_947) Greg. *de Glor.
Conf.* 477; Sulp. Sev. *Vita S. Martini*, 9; Pass. S. Symphor. Migne,
*Pat. Graec.* v. 1463, 1466. The cult of Cybele had been introduced into
Gaul, and the ritual here described resembles it, but we are evidently
dealing here with the cult of a native goddess. See, however, Frazer,
*Adonis*, 176.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[275:5](rac21.htm#fr_948) Anwyl, *Celtic
Religion*, 41.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[276:1](rac21.htm#fr_949) See Hartland,
*Science of Fairy Tales*, 84 f.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[276:2](rac21.htm#fr_950) Professor Rhŷs
suggests that nudity, being a frequent symbol of submission to a
conqueror, acquired a similar significance in religious rites (*AL*
180). But the magical aspect of nudity came first in time.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[277:1](rac21.htm#fr_951) Adamnan, *Vita S.
Col.* ii. 45.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[277:2](rac21.htm#fr_952) See Gomme, *Ethnology
in Folk-lore*, 30 f., *Village Community*, 114.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Accessories of Cult](rac22)
