[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac23)  [Next](rac25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

### CHAPTER XXI.

# MAGIC.

THE Celts, like all other races, were devoted to magical practices, many
of which could be used by any one, though, on the whole, they were in
the hands of the Druids, who in many aspects were little higher than the
shamans of barbaric tribes. But similar magical rites were also
attributed to the gods, and it is probably for this reason that the
Tuatha Dé Danann and many of the divinities who appear in the
*Mabinogion* are described as magicians. Kings are also spoken of as
wizards, perhaps a reminiscence of the powers of the priest king. But
since many of the primitive cults had been in the hands of women, and as
these cults implied a large use of magic, they may have been the
earliest wielders of magic, though, with increasing civilisation, men
took their place as magicians. Still side by side with the
magic-wielding Druids, there were classes of women who also dealt in
magic, as we have seen. Their powers were feared, even by S. Patrick,
who classes the "spells of women" along with those of Druids, and, in a
mythic tale, by the father of Connla, who, when the youth was fascinated
by a goddess, feared that he would be taken by the "spells of women"
(*brichta ban*). <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1](#fn_1091) In other tales
women perform all such magical actions as are elsewhere ascribed to
Druids. <span id="fr_1094"></span>[2](#fn_1092) And after the Druids had
passed away precisely

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

similar actions--power over the weather, the use of incantations and
amulets, shape-shifting and invisibility, etc.--were, and still are in
remote Celtic regions, ascribed to witches. Much of the Druidic art,
however, was also supposed to be possessed by saints and clerics, both
in the past and in recent times. But women remained as magicians when
the Druids had disappeared, partly because of female conservatism,
partly because, even in pagan times, they had worked more or less
secretly. At last the Church proscribed them and persecuted them.

Each clan, tribe, or kingdom had its Druids, who, in time of war,
assisted their hosts by magic art. This is reflected back upon the
groups of the mythological cycle, each of which has its Druids who play
no small part in the battles fought. Though Pliny recognises the
Priestly functions of the Druids, he associates them largely with magic,
and applies the name *magus* to them. <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1](#fn_1093) In Irish ecclesiastical literature,
*drui* is used as the translation of *magus*, *e.g.* in the case of the
Egyptian magicians, while magi is used in Latin lives of saints as the
equivalent of the vernacular *druides*. <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[2](#fn_1094) In the sagas and in popular tales
*Druidecht*, "Druidism," stands for "magic," and *slat an draoichta*,
"rod of Druidism," is a magic wand. <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[3](#fn_1095) The Tuatha Dé Danann were said to have
learned "Druidism" from the four great master Druids of the region
whence they had come to Ireland, and even now, in popular tales, they
are often called "Druids" or "Danann Druids." <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[4](#fn_1096) Thus in Ireland at least there is
clear evidence of the great magical power claimed by Druids.

That power was exercised to a great extent over the

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

elements, some of which Druids claimed to have created. Thus the Druid
Cathbad covered the plain over which Deirdre was escaping with "a
great-waved sea." <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1](#fn_1097) Druids also
produced blinding snow-storms, or changed day into night-feats ascribed
to them even in the Lives of Saints. <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[2](#fn_1098) Or they discharge "shower-clouds of
fire" on the opposing hosts, as in the case of the Druid Mag Ruith, who
made a magic fire, and flying upwards towards it, turned it upon the
enemy, whose Druid in vain tried to divert it. <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[3](#fn_1099) When the Druids of Cormac dried up all
the waters in the land, another Druid shot an arrow, and where it fell
there issued a torrent of water. <span id="fr_1102"></span>[4](#fn_1100)
The Druid Mathgen boasted of being able to throw mountains on the enemy,
and frequently Druids made trees or stones appear as armed men,
dismaying the opposing host in this way. They could also fill the air
with the clash of battle, or with the dread cries of eldritch
things. <span id="fr_1103"></span>[5](#fn_1101) Similar powers are
ascribed to other persons. The daughters of Calatin raised themselves
aloft on an enchanted wind, and discovered Cúchulainn when he was hidden
away by Cathbad. Later they produced a magic mist to discomfit the
hero. <span id="fr_1104"></span>[6](#fn_1102) Such mists occur
frequently in the sagas, and in one of them the Tuatha Dé Danann arrived
in Ireland. The priestesses of Sena could rouse sea and wind by their
enchantments, and, later, Celtic witches have claimed the same power.

In folk-survivals the practice of rain-making is connected with sacred
springs, and even now in rural France processions to shrines, usually
connected with a holy well, are common in time of drought. Thus people
and priest go to the fountain of Baranton in procession, singing hymns,
and there pray for

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

rain. The priest then dips his foot in the water, or throws some of it
on the rocks. <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1](#fn_1103) In other cases the
image of a saint is carried to a well and asperged, as divine images
formerly were, or the waters are beaten or thrown into the air. <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[2](#fn_1104) Another custom was that a virgin
should clean out a sacred well, and formerly she had to be nude. <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[3](#fn_1105) Nudity also forms part of an old
ritual used in Gaul. In time of drought the girls of the village
followed the youngest virgin in a state of nudity to seek the herb
*belinuntia*. This she uprooted, and was then led to a river and there
asperged by the others. In this case the asperging imitated the falling
rain, and was meant to produce it automatically. While some of these
rites suggest the use of magic by the folk themselves, in others the
presence of the Christian priest points to the fact that, formerly, a
Druid was necessary as the rain producer. In some cases the priest has
inherited through long ages the rain-making or tempest-quelling powers
of the pagan priesthood, and is often besought to exercise them. <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[4](#fn_1106)

Causing invisibility by means of a spell called *feth fiada*, which made
a person unseen or hid him in a magic mist, was also used by the Druids
as well as by Christian saints. S. Patrick's hymn, called *Fâed Fiada*,
was sung by him when his enemies lay in wait, and caused a glamour in
them. The incantation itself, *fith-fath*, is still remembered in
Highland glens. <span id="fr_1109"></span>[5](#fn_1107) In the case of
S. Patrick he and his followers appeared as deer, and this power of
shape-shifting was wielded both by Druids and women. The Druid Fer
Fidail carried off a maiden by taking the form of a

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

woman, and another Druid deceived Cúchulainn by taking the form of the
fair Niamh. <span id="fr_1110"></span>[1](#fn_1108) Other Druids are
said to have been able to take any shape that pleased them. <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[2](#fn_1109) These powers were reflected back upon
the gods and mythical personages like Taliesin or Amairgen, who appear
in many forms. The priestesses of Sena could assume the form of animals,
and an Irish Circe in the *Rennes Dindsenchas* called Dalb the Rough
changed three men and their wives into swine by her spells. <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[3](#fn_1110) This power of transforming others is
often described in the sagas. The children of Lir were changed to swans
by their cruel stepmother; Saar, the mother of Oisin, became a fawn
through the power of the Druid Fear Doirche when she rejected his love;
and similarly Tuirrenn, mother of Oisin's hounds, was transformed into a
stag-hound by the fairy mistress of her husband Iollann. <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[4](#fn_1111) In other instances in the sagas, women
appear as birds. <span id="fr_1114"></span>[5](#fn_1112) These
transformation tales may be connected with totemism, for when this
institution is decaying the current belief in shape-shifting is often
made use of to explain descent from animals or the tabu against eating
certain animals. In some of these Irish shape-shifting tales we find
this tabu referred to. Thus, when the children of Lir were turned into
swans, it was proclaimed that no one should kill a swan. The reason of
an existing tabu seemed to be sufficiently explained when it was told
that certain human beings had become swans. It is not impossible that
the Druids made use of hypnotic suggestion to persuade others that they
had assumed another form, as Red Indian shamans have been known to do,
or even hallucinated others into the belief that their own form had been
changed.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

By a "drink of oblivion" Druids and other persons could make one forget
even the most dearly beloved. Thus Cúchulainn was made to forget Fand,
and his wife Emer to forget her jealousy. <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[1](#fn_1113) This is a reminiscence of potent
drinks brewed from herbs which caused hallucinations, *e.g.* that of the
change of shape. In other cases they were of a narcotic nature and
caused a deep sleep, an instance being the draught given by Grainne to
Fionn and his men. <span id="fr_1116"></span>[2](#fn_1114) Again, the
"Druidic sleep" is suggestive of hypnotism, practised in distant ages
and also by present-day savages. When Bodb suspected his daughter of
lying he cast her into a "Druidic sleep," in which she revealed her
wickedness. <span id="fr_1117"></span>[3](#fn_1115) In other cases
spells are cast upon persons so that they are hallucinated, or are
rendered motionless, or, "by the sleight of hand of soothsayers,"
maidens lose their chastity without knowing it. <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[4](#fn_1116) These point to knowledge of hypnotic
methods of suggestion. Or, again, a spectral army is opposed to an
enemy's force to whom it is an hallucinatory appearance--perhaps an
exaggeration of natural hypnotic powers. <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[5](#fn_1117)

Druids also made a "hedge," the *airbe druad*, round an army, perhaps
circumambulating it and saying spells so that the attacking force might
not break through. If any one could leap this "hedge," the spell was
broken, but he lost his life. This was done at the battle of Cul Dremne,
at which S. Columba was present and aided the heroic leaper with his
prayers. <span id="fr_1120"></span>[6](#fn_1118)

A primitive piece of sympathetic magic used still by savages is recorded
in the *Rennes Dindsenchas*. In this story one man says spells over his
spear and hurls it into his

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

opponent's shadow, so that he falls dead. <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1](#fn_1119) Equally primitive is the Druidic
"sending" a wisp of straw over which the Druid sang spells and flung it
into his victim's face, so that he became mad. A similar method is used
by the Eskimo *angekok*. All madness was generally ascribed to such a
"sending."

Several of these instances have shown the use of spells, and the Druid
was believed to possess powerful incantations to discomfit an enemy or
to produce other magical results. A special posture was
adopted--standing on one leg, with one arm outstretched and one eye
closed, perhaps to concentrate the force of the spell, <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[2](#fn_1120) but the power lay mainly in the spoken
words, as we have seen in discussing Celtic formulæ of prayer. Such
spells were also used by the *Filid*, or poets, since most primitive
poetry has a magical aspect. Part of the training of the bard consisted
in learning traditional incantations, which, used with due ritual,
produced the magic result. <span id="fr_1123"></span>[3](#fn_1121) Some
of these incantations have already come before our notice, and probably
some of the verses which Cæsar says the Druids would not commit to
writing were of the nature of spells. <span
id="fr_1124"></span>[4](#fn_1122) The virtue of the spell lay in the
spoken formula, usually introducing the name of a god or spirit, later a
saint, in order to procure his intervention, through the power inherent
in the name. Other charms recount an effect already produced, and this,
through mimetic magic, is supposed to cause its repetition. The earliest
written documents bearing upon the paganism of the insular Celts contain
an appeal to "the science of Goibniu" to preserve butter, and another,
for magical healing, runs, "I admire the healing which Diancecht left in
his family, in order to bring health to those he succoured." These are
found in an eighth or ninth century MS., and, with their appeal to pagan

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

gods, were evidently used in Christian times. <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[1](#fn_1123) Most Druidic magic was accompanied by
a spell--transformation, invisibility, power over the elements, and the
discovery of hidden persons or things. In other cases spells were used
in medicine or for healing wounds. Thus the Tuatha Dé Danann told the
Fomorians that they need not oppose them, because their Druids would
restore the slain to life, and when Cúchulainn was wounded we hear less
of medicines than of incantations used to stanch his blood. <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[2](#fn_1124) In other cases the Druid could remove
barrenness by spells.

The survival of the belief in spells among modern Celtic peoples is a
convincing proof of their use in pagan times, and throws light upon
their nature. In Brittany they are handed down in certain families, and
are carefully guarded from the knowledge of others. The names of saints
instead of the old gods are found in them, but in some cases diseases
are addressed as personal beings. In the Highlands similar charms are
found, and are often handed down from male to female, and from female to
male. They are also in common use in Ireland. Besides healing diseases,
such charms are supposed to cause fertility or bring good luck, or even
to transfer the property of others to the reciter, or, in the case of
darker magic, to cause death or disease. <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[3](#fn_1125) In Ireland, sorcerers could "rime
either a man or beast to death," and this recalls the power of satire in
the mouth of *File* or Druid. It raised blotches on the face of the
victim, or even caused his death. <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[4](#fn_1126) Among primitive races powerful
internal emotion affects the body in curious ways,

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

and in this traditional power of the satire or "rime" we have probably
an exaggerated reference to actual fact. In other cases the "curse of
satire" affected nature, causing seas and rivers to sink back. <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[1](#fn_1127) The satires made by the bards of Gaul,
referred to by Diodorus, may have been believed to possess similar
powers. <span id="fr_1130"></span>[2](#fn_1128) Contrariwise, the
*Filid*, on uttering an unjust judgment, found their faces covered with
blotches. <span id="fr_1131"></span>[3](#fn_1129)

A magical sleep is often caused by music in the sagas, *e.g.*, by the
harp of Dagda, or by the branch carried by visitants from Elysium. <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[4](#fn_1130) Many "fairy" lullabies for producing
sleep are even now extant in Ireland and the Highlands. <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[5](#fn_1131) As music forms a part of all primitive
religion, its soothing powers would easily be magnified. In orgiastic
rites it caused varying emotions until the singer and dancer fell into a
deep slumber, and the tales of those who joined in a fairy dance and
fell asleep, awaking to find that many years had passed, are mythic
extensions of the power of music in such orgiastic cults. The music of
the *Filid* had similar powers to that of Dagda's harp, producing
laughter, tears, and a delicious slumber, <span
id="fr_1134"></span>[6](#fn_1132) and Celtic folk-tales abound in
similar instances of the magic charm of music.

We now turn to the use of amulets among the Celts. Some of these were
symbolic and intended to bring the wearer under the protection of the
god whom they symbolised. As has been seen, a Celtic god had as his
symbol a wheel, probably representing the sun, and numerous small wheel
discs made of different materials have been found in Gaul and

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Britain. <span id="fr_1135"></span>[1](#fn_1133)
These were evidently worn as amulets, while in other cases they were
offered to river divinities, since many are met with in river beds or
fords. Their use as protective amulets is shown by a stele representing
a person wearing a necklace to which is attached one of these wheels. In
Irish texts a Druid is called Mag Ruith, explained as *magus rotarum*,
because he made his Druidical observations by wheels. <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[2](#fn_1134) This may point to the use of such
amulets in Ireland. A curious amulet, connected with the Druids, became
famous in Roman times and is described by Pliny. This was the "serpents'
egg," formed from the foam produced by serpents twining themselves
together. The serpents threw the "egg" into the air, and he who sought
it had to catch it in his cloak before it fell, and flee to a running
stream, beyond which the serpents, like the witches pursuing Tam o'
Shanter, could not follow him. This "egg" was believed to cause its
owner to obtain access to kings or to gain lawsuits, and a Roman citizen
was put to death in the reign of Claudius for bringing such an amulet
into court. Pliny had seen this "egg." It was about the size of an
apple, with a cartilaginous skin covered with discs. <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[3](#fn_1135) Probably it was a fossil echinus, such
as has been found in Gaulish tombs. <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[4](#fn_1136) Such "eggs" were doubtless connected
with the cult of the serpent, or some old myth of an egg produced by
serpents may have been made use of to account for their formation. This
is the more likely, as rings or beads of glass found in tumuli in Wales,
Cornwall, and the Highlands are called "serpents' glass" (*glain
naidr*), and are believed to be formed in the same way as the "egg."
These, as well as old spindle-whorls called "adder stones" in

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

the Highlands, are held to have magical virtues, *e.g.* against the bite
of a serpent, and are highly prized by their owners. <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1](#fn_1137)

Pliny speaks also of the Celtic belief in the magical virtues of coral,
either worn as an amulet or taken in powder as a medicine, while it has
been proved that the Celts during a limited period of their history
placed it on weapons and utensils, doubtless as an amulet. <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[2](#fn_1138) Other amulets--white marble balls,
quartz pebbles, models of the tooth of the boar, or pieces of amber,
have been found buried with the dead. <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[3](#fn_1139) Little figures of the boar, the horse,
and the bull, with a ring for suspending them to a necklet, were worn as
amulets or images of these divine animals, and phallic amulets were also
worn, perhaps as a protection against the evil eye. <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[4](#fn_1140)

A cult of stones was probably connected with the belief in the magical
power of certain stones, like the Lia Fail, which shrieked aloud when
Conn knocked against it. His Druids explained that the number of the
shrieks equalled the number of his descendants who should be kings of
Erin. <span id="fr_1143"></span>[5](#fn_1141) This is an ætiological
myth accounting for the use of this fetich-stone at coronations. Other
stones, probably the object of a cult or possessing magical virtues,
were used at the installation of chiefs, who stood on them and vowed to
follow in the steps of their predecessors, a pair of feet being carved
on the stone to represent those of the first chief. <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[6](#fn_1142) Other stones had more musical
virtues--the "conspicuous stone" of

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Elysium from which arose a hundred strains, and
the melodious stone of Loch Láig. Such beliefs existed into Christian
times. S. Columba's stone altar floated on the waves, and on it a leper
had crossed in the wake of the saint's coracle to Erin. But the same
stone was that on which, long before, the hero Fionn had slipped. <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1](#fn_1143)

Connected with the cult of stones are magical observances at fixed rocks
or boulders, regarded probably as the abode of a spirit. These
observances are in origin pre-Celtic, but were practised by the Celts.
Girls slide down a stone to obtain a lover, pregnant women to obtain an
easy delivery, or contact with such stones causes barren women to have
children or gives vitality to the feeble. A small offering is usually
left on the stone. <span id="fr_1146"></span>[2](#fn_1144) Similar rites
are practised at megalithic monuments, and here again the custom is
obviously pre-Celtic in origin. In this case the spirits of the dead
must have been expected to assist the purposes of the rites, or even to
incarnate themselves in the children born as a result of barren women
resorting to these stones. <span id="fr_1147"></span>[3](#fn_1145)
Sometimes when the purpose of the stones has been forgotten and some
other legendary origin attributed to them, the custom adapts itself to
the legend. In Ireland many dolmens are known, not as places of
sepulture, but as "Diarmaid and Grainne's beds"--the places where these
eloping lovers slept. Hence they have powers of fruitfulness and are
visited by women who desire children. The rite is thus one of
sympathetic magic.

Holed dolmens or naturally pierced blocks are used for the magical cure
of sickness both in Brittany and Cornwall, the patient being passed
through the hole. <span id="fr_1148"></span>[4](#fn_1146) Similar rites

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

are used with trees, a slit being often made in the trunk of a sapling,
and a sickly child passed through it. The slit is then closed and bound,
and if it joins together at the end of a certain time, this is a proof
that the child will recover. <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1](#fn_1147) In
these rites the spirit in stone or tree was supposed to assist the
process of healing, or the disease was transferred to them, or, again,
there was the idea of a new birth with consequent renewed life, the act
imitating the process of birth. These rites are not confined to Celtic
regions, but belong to that universal use of magic in which the Celts
freely participated.

Since Christian writers firmly believed in the magical powers of the
Druids, aided however by the devil, they taught that Christian saints
had miraculously overcome them with their own weapons. S. Patrick
dispelled snow-storms and darkness raised by Druids, or destroyed Druids
who had brought down fire from heaven. Similar deeds are attributed to
S. Columba and others. <span id="fr_1150"></span>[2](#fn_1148) The moral
victory of the Cross was later regarded also as a magical victory. Hence
also lives of Celtic saints are full of miracles which are simply a
reproduction of Druidic magic--controlling the elements, healing,
carrying live coals without hurt, causing confusion by their curses,
producing invisibility or shape-shifting, making the ice-cold waters of
a river hot by standing in them at their devotions, or walking unscathed
through the fiercest storms. <span id="fr_1151"></span>[3](#fn_1149)
They were soon regarded as more expert magicians than the Druids
themselves. They may have laid claim to magical powers, or perhaps they
used a natural shrewdness

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

in such a way as to suggest magic. But all their power they ascribed to
Christ. "Christ is my Druid"--the true miracle-worker, said S. Columba.
Yet they were imbued with the superstitions of their own age. Thus S.
Columba sent a white stone to King Brude at Inverness for the cure of
his Druid Broichan, who drank the water poured over it, and was
healed. <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1](#fn_1150) Soon similar virtues
were ascribed to the relies of the saints themselves, and at a later
time, when most Scotsmen ceased to believe in the saints, they thought
that the ministers of the kirk had powers like those of pagan Druid and
Catholic saint. Ministers were levitated, or shone with a celestial
light, or had clairvoyant gifts, or, with dire results, cursed the
ungodly or the benighted prelatist. They prophesied, used
trance-utterance, and exercised gifts of healing. Angels ministered to
them, as when Samuel Rutherford, having fallen into a well when a child,
was pulled out by an angel. <span id="fr_1153"></span>[2](#fn_1151) The
substratum of primitive belief survives all changes of creed, and the
folk impartially attributed magical powers to pagan Druid, Celtic
saints, old crones and witches, and Presbyterian ministers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[319:1](rac24.htm#fr_1093) *IT* i. 56;
D'Arbois, v. 387.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[319:2](rac24.htm#fr_1094) See, *e.g.*, "The
Death of Muirchertach," *RC* xxiii. 394.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[320:1](rac24.htm#fr_1095) *HN* xxx. 4, 13.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[320:2](rac24.htm#fr_1096) Zimmer, *Gloss.
Hibern.* 183; Reeves, *Adamnan*, 260.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[320:3](rac24.htm#fr_1097) Kennedy, 175; cf.
*IT* i. 220.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[320:4](rac24.htm#fr_1098) See *RC* xii. 52
f.; D'Arbois, v. 403-404; O'Curry, *MS. Mat.* 505; Kennedy, 75, 196,
258.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[321:1](rac24.htm#fr_1099) D'Arbois, v. 277.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[321:2](rac24.htm#fr_1100) Stokes, *Three
Middle Irish Homilies*, 24; *IT* iii. 325.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[321:3](rac24.htm#fr_1101) *RC* xii. 83; Miss
Hull, 215; D'Arbois, v. 424; O'Curry, *MC* ii. 215.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[321:4](rac24.htm#fr_1102) Keating, 341;
O'Curry, *MS. Mat.* 271.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[321:5](rac24.htm#fr_1103) *RC* xii. 81.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[321:6](rac24.htm#fr_1104) Miss Hull, 240 f.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[322:1](rac24.htm#fr_1105) Maury, 14.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[322:2](rac24.htm#fr_1106) Sébillot, ii. 226
f., i. 101, ii. 225; Bérenger-Féraud, *Superstitions et Survivances*,
iii. 169 L; *Stat. Account*, viii. 52.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[322:3](rac24.htm#fr_1107) *Rev. des Trad.*
1893, 613; Sébillot, ii. 224.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[322:4](rac24.htm#fr_1108) Bérenger-Féraud,
iii. 218 f. Sébillot, i. 100, 109; *RC* ii. 484; Frazer, *Golden Bough*
<sup>2</sup>, i. 67.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[322:5](rac24.htm#fr_1109) D'Arbois, v. 387;
*IT* i. 52 Dixon, *Gairloch*, 165; Carmichael, *Carm. Gad.* ii. 25.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[323:1](rac24.htm#fr_1110) *RC* xvi. 152; Miss
Hull, 243.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[323:2](rac24.htm#fr_1111) D'Arbois, v. 133;
*IT* ii. 373.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[323:3](rac24.htm#fr_1112) Mela, iii. 6; *RC*
xv. 471.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[323:4](rac24.htm#fr_1113) Joyce, *OCR* 1 f.;
Kennedy, 236.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[323:5](rac24.htm#fr_1114) Bird-women pursued
by Cúchulainn; D'Arbois, v. 178; for other instances see O'Curry, *MS.
Mat.* 426; Miss Hull, 82.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[324:1](rac24.htm#fr_1115) D'Arbois, v. 215.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[324:2](rac24.htm#fr_1116) Joyce, *OCR* 279.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[324:3](rac24.htm#fr_1117) *Ibid.* 86.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[324:4](rac24.htm#fr_1118) *RC* xxiii. 394;
Jocelyn, *Vita S. Kent*. c. 1.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[324:5](rac24.htm#fr_1119) *RC* xv. 446.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[324:6](rac24.htm#fr_1120) O'Conor, *Rev. Hib.
Scrip.* ii. 142; Stokes, *Lives of Saints*, xxviii.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[325:1](rac24.htm#fr_1121) *RC* xv. 444.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[325:2](rac24.htm#fr_1122) See [p.
251](rac19.htm#page_251), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[325:3](rac24.htm#fr_1123) O'Curry, *MS. Mat.*
240.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[325:4](rac24.htm#fr_1124) See pp.
[248](rac19.htm#page_248), [304](rac23.htm#page_304), *supra*; Cæsar vi.
14.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[326:1](rac24.htm#fr_1125) Zimmer, *Gloss.
Hiber.* 271. Other Irish incantations, appealing to the saints, are
found in the *Codex Regularum* at Klosternenburg (*RC* ii. 112).

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[326:2](rac24.htm#fr_1126) Leahy, i. 137;
Kennedy, 301.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[326:3](rac24.htm#fr_1127) Sauvé, *RC* vi. 67
f.; Carmichael, *Carm. Gadel.*, *passim*; *CM* xii. 38 Joyce, *SH* i.
629 f.; Camden, *Britannia*, iv. 488; Scot, *Discovery of Witchcraft*,
iii. 15.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[326:4](rac24.htm#fr_1128) For examples see
O'Curry, *MS. Met.* 248; D'Arbois, ii. 190; *RC* xii. 71, xxiv. 279;
Stokes, *TIG* xxxvi. f.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[327:1](rac24.htm#fr_1129) Windisch, *Táin*,
line 3467.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[327:2](rac24.htm#fr_1130) Diod. Sic. v. 31.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[327:3](rac24.htm#fr_1131) D'Arbois, i. 271.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[327:4](rac24.htm#fr_1132) *RC* xii. 109;
Nutt-Meyer, i. 2; D'Arbois, v. 445.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[327:5](rac24.htm#fr_1133) Petrie, *Ancient
Music of Ireland*, i. 73; *The Gael*, i. 235 (fairy lullaby of MacLeod
of MacLeod).

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[327:6](rac24.htm#fr_1134) O'Curry, *MS. Mat.*
255.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[328:1](rac24.htm#fr_1135) *Archæologia*,
xxxix. 509; *Proc. Soc. Ant.* iii. 92; Gaidoz, *Le Dieu Gaul. du
Soleil*, 60 f.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[328:2](rac24.htm#fr_1136) *IT* iii. 409; but
see Rhŷs, *HL* 215.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[328:3](rac24.htm#fr_1137) Pliny, *HN* xxix.
3. 54.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[328:4](rac24.htm#fr_1138) *Rev. Arch.* i.
227, xxxiii. 283.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[329:1](rac24.htm#fr_1139) Hoare, *Modern
Wiltshire*, 56; Camden, *Britannia*, 815; Hazlitt, 194; Campbell,
*Witchcraft*, 84. In the Highlands spindle-whorls are thought to have
been perforated by the adder, which then passes through the hole to rid
itself of its old skin.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[329:2](rac24.htm#fr_1140) Pliny, xxxii. 2.
24; Reinach, *RC* xx. 13 f.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[329:3](rac24.htm#fr_1141) *Rev. Arch.* i.
227; Greenwell, *British Barrows*, 165; Elton, 66; Renel, 95 f., 194 f.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[329:4](rac24.htm#fr_1142) Reinach, *BF* 286,
289, 362.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[329:5](rac24.htm#fr_1143) O'Curry, *MS Mat.*
387. See a paper by Hartland, "The Voice of the Stone of Destiny,"
*Folk-lore Journal*, xiv. 1903.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[329:6](rac24.htm#fr_1144) Petrie, *Trans.
Royal Irish Acad.* xviii. pt. 2.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[330:1](rac24.htm#fr_1145) O'Curry, *MS. Mat.*
393 f.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[330:2](rac24.htm#fr_1146) Sébillot, i. 334 f.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[330:3](rac24.htm#fr_1147) Trollope,
*Brittany*, ii. 229; Bérenger-Féraud, *Superstitions et Survivances*, i.
529 f.; Borlase, *Dolmens of Ireland*, iii. 580, 689, 841 f.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[330:4](rac24.htm#fr_1148) *Rev. des Trad.*
1894, 494; Bérenger-Féraud, i. 529, ii. 367; Elworthy, *Evil Eye*, 70.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[331:1](rac24.htm#fr_1149) Bérenger-Féraud, i.
523; Elworthy, 69, 106; Reinach, *L'Anthropologie*, iv. 33.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[331:2](rac24.htm#fr_1150) Kennedy, 324;
Adamnan, *Vita S. Col.* ii. 35.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[331:3](rac24.htm#fr_1151) Life of S. Fechin
of Fore, *RC* xii. 333; Life of S. Kieran, O'Grady, ii. 13; Amra
Cholumbchille, *RC* xx. 41; Life of S. Moling, *RC* xxvii. 293; and
other lives *passim.* See also Plummer, *Vitæ Sanctorum Hiberniæ*.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[332:1](rac24.htm#fr_1152) Adamnan, ii. 34.
This pebble was long preserved, but mysteriously disappeared when the
person who sought it was doomed to die.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[332:2](rac24.htm#fr_1153) Wodrow, *Analecta*,
*passim*; Walker, *Six Saints of the Covenant*, ed. by Dr. Hay Fleming.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. The State of the Dead](rac25)
