[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rac26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV.

# ELYSIUM.

THE Celtic conception of Elysium, the product at once of religion,
mythology, and romantic imagination, is found in a series of Irish and
Welsh tales. We do not know that a similar conception existed among the
continental Celts, but, considering the likeness of their beliefs in
other matters to those of the insular Celts, there is a strong
probability that it did. There are four typical presentations of the
Elysium conception. In Ireland, while the gods were believed to have
retired within the hills or *síd*, it is not unlikely that some of them
had always been supposed to live in these or in a subterranean world,
and it is therefore possible that what may be called the subterranean or
*síd* type of Elysium is old. But other types also appear--that of a
western island Elysium, of a world below the waters, and of a world
coextensive with this and entered by a mist.

The names of the Irish Elysium are sometimes of a general character--Mag
Mór, "the Great Plain"; Mag Mell, "the Pleasant Plain"; Tír n'Aill, "the
Other-world"; Tír na m-Beo, " the Land of the Living "; Tír na n-Og,
"the Land of Youth"; and Tír Tairngiri, "the Land of Promise"--possibly
of Christian origin. Local names are Tír fa Tonn, "Land under Waves ";
I-Bresail and the Land of Falga, names of the island Elysium. The last
denotes the Isle of Man as Elysium, and it may have been so regarded by
Goidels in Britain at an

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

early time. <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1](#fn_1229) To this period may
belong the tales of Cúchulainn's raid on Falga, carried at a later time
to Ireland. Tír Tairngiri is also identified with the Isle of Man. <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[2](#fn_1230)

A brief résumé of the principal Elysium tales is necessary as a
preliminary to a discussion of the problems which they involve, though
it can give but little idea of the beauty and romanticism of the tales
themselves. These, if not actually composed in pagan times, are based
upon story-germs current before the coming of Christianity to Ireland.

I. *The síd Elysium*.--In the story of Etain, when Mider discovered her
in her rebirth, he described the land whither he would carry her, its
music and its fair people, its warm streams, its choice mead and wine.
There is eternal youth, and love is blameless. It is within Mider's
*síd*, and Etain accompanies him there. In the sequel King Eochaid's
Druid discovers the *síd*, which is captured by the king, who then
regains Etain. <span id="fr_1233"></span>[3](#fn_1231) Other tales refer
to the *síd* in similar terms, and describe its treasures, its food and
drink better than those of earth. It is in most respects similar to the
island Elysium, save that it is localised on earth.

2\. *The island Elysium*.--The story of the voyage of Bran is found
fragmentarily in the eleventh century *LU*, and complete in the
fourteenth and sixteenth century MSS. It tells how Bran heard mysterious
music when asleep. On waking he found a silver branch with blossoms, and
next day there appeared a mysterious woman singing the glory of the land
overseas, its music, its wonderful tree, its freedom from pain and
death. It is one of thrice fifty islands to the west of Erin, and there
she dwells with thousands of "motley women." Before she disappears the
branch leaps into her hand. Bran

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

set sail with his comrades and met Manannan crossing the sea in his
chariot. The god told him that the sea was a flowery plain, Mag Mell,
and that all around, unseen to Bran, were people playing and drinking
"without sin." He bade him sail on to the Land of Women. Then the
voyagers went on and reached the Isle of Joy, where one of their number
remained behind. At last they came to the Land of Women, and we hear of
their welcome, the dreamlike lapse of time, the food and drink which had
for each the taste he desired. Finally the tale recounts their
home-sickness, the warning they received not to set foot on Erin, how
one of their number leaped ashore and turned to ashes, how Bran from his
boat told of his wanderings and then disappeared for ever. <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[1](#fn_1232)

Another story tells how Connla was visited by a goddess from Mag Mell.
Her people dwell in a *síd* and are called "men of the *síd*." She
invites him to go to the immortal land, and departs, leaving him an
apple, which supports him for a month without growing less. Then she
reappears and tells Conula that "the Ever-Living Ones" desire him to
join them. She bids him come with her to the Land of Joy where there are
only women. He steps into her crystal boat and vanishes from his father
and the Druid who has vainly tried to exercise his spells against
her. <span id="fr_1235"></span>[2](#fn_1233) In this tale there is a
confusion between the *síd* and the island Elysium.

The eighteenth century poem of Oisin in Tír na n-Og is probably based on
old legends, and describes how Niam, daughter of the king of Tír na n-Og
placed *geasa* on Oisin to accompany her to that land of immortal youth
and beauty. He mounted on her steed, which plunged forwards across the
sea, and brought them to the land where Oisin spent three

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

hundred years before returning to Ireland, and there suffering, as has
been seen, from the breaking of the tabu not to set foot on the soil of
Erin. <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1](#fn_1234)

In *Serglige Conculaind*, "Cúchulainn's Sickness," the goddess Fand,
deserted by Manannan, offers herself to the hero if he will help her
sister's husband Labraid against his enemies in Mag Mell. Labraid lives
in an island frequented by troops of women, and possessing an
inexhaustible vat of mead and trees with magic fruit. It is reached with
marvellous speed in a boat of bronze. After a preliminary visit by his
charioteer Laeg, Cúchulainn goes thither, vanquishes Labraid's foes, and
remains a month with Fand. He returns to Ireland, and now we hear of the
struggle for him between his wife Emer and Fand. But Manannan suddenly
appears, reawakens Fand's love, and she departs with him. The god shakes
his cloak between her and Cúchulainn to prevent their ever meeting
again. <span id="fr_1237"></span>[2](#fn_1235) In this story Labraid,
Fand, and Liban, Fand's sister, though dwellers on an island Elysium,
are called *síd*-folk. The two regions are partially confused, but not
wholly, since Manannan is described as coming from his own land
(Elysium) to woo Fand. Apparently Labraid of the Swift Hand on the Sword
(who, though called "chief of the *síde*", is certainly a war-god) is at
enmity with Manannan's hosts, and it is these with whom Cúchulainn has
to fight. <span id="fr_1238"></span>[3](#fn_1236)

In an Ossianic tale several of the Fians were carried off to the Land of
Promise. After many adventures, Fionn, Diarmaid, and others discover
them, and threaten to destroy the land if they are not restored. Its
king, Avarta, agrees to the restoration, and with fifteen of his men
carries the Fians to Erin on one

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

horse. Having reached there, he bids them look at a certain field, and
while they are doing so, he and his men disappear. <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1](#fn_1237)

3\. *Land under Waves*.--Fiachna, of the men of the *síd*, appeared to
the men of Connaught, and begged their help against Goll, who had
abducted his wife. Loegaire and his men dive with Fiachna into Loch
Naneane, and reach a wonderful land, with marvellous music and where the
rain is ale. They and the *síd*-folk attack the fort of Mag Mell and
defeat Goll. Each then obtains a woman of the *síde*, but at the end of
a year they become homesick. They are warned not to descend from
horseback in Erin. Arrived among their own people, they describe the
marvels of Tír fa Tonn, and then return there, and are no more
seen. <span id="fr_1240"></span>[2](#fn_1238) Here, again, the *síd*
Elysium and Land under Waves are confused, and the divine tribes are at
war, as in the story of Cúchulainn.

In a section of the Ossianic tale just cited, Fionn and his men arrive
on an island, where Diarmaid reaches a beautiful country at the bottom
of a well. This is Tír fa Tonn, and Diarmaid fights its king who has
usurped his nephew's inheritance, and thus recovers it for him. <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[3](#fn_1239)

4\. *Co-extensive with this world*.--An early example of this type is
found in the *Adventures of Cormac*. A divine visitant appeared to
Cormac and gave him in exchange for his wife, son, and daughter, his
branch of golden apples, which when shaken produced sweetest music,
dispelling sorrow. After a year Cormac set out to seek his family, and
as he journeyed encountered a mist in which he discovered a strange
house. Its master and mistress--Manannan and his consort--offered him
shelter. The god brought in a pig, every quarter of which

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

was cooked in the telling of a true tale, the pig afterwards coming to
life again. Cormac, in his tale, described how he had lost his family,
whereupon Manannan made him sleep, and brought his wife and children in.
Later he produced a cup which broke when a lie was told, but became
whole again when a true word was spoken. The god said Cormac's wife had
now a new husband, and the cup broke, but was restored when the goddess
declared this to be a lie. Next morning all had disappeared, and Cormac
and his family found themselves in his own palace, with cup and branch
by their side. <span id="fr_1242"></span>[1](#fn_1240) Similarly, in
*The Champion's Ecstasy*, a mysterious horseman appears out of a mist to
Conn and leads him to a palace, where he reveals himself as the god Lug,
and where there is a woman called "the Sovereignty of Erin." Beside the
palace is a golden tree. <span id="fr_1243"></span>[2](#fn_1241) In the
story of Bran, Mag Mell is said to be all around the hero, though he
knows it not--an analogous conception to what is found in these tales,
and another instance is that of the mysterious house entered by
Conchobar and Dechtire. <span id="fr_1244"></span>[3](#fn_1242) Mag Mell
may thus have been regarded as a mysterious district of Erin. This magic
mist enclosing a marvellous dwelling occurs in many other tales, and it
was in a mist that the Tuatha Dea came to Ireland.

A certain correspondence to these Irish beliefs is found in Brythonic
story, but here the Elysium conception has been influenced by Christian
ideas. Elysium is called *Annwfn*, meaning "an abyss," "the state of the
dead," "hell," and it is also conceived of as *is elfydd*, "beneath the
earth." <span id="fr_1245"></span>[4](#fn_1243) But in the tales it
bears no likeness to these meanings of the word, save in so far as it
has been confused by their Christian redactors with hell. It is a region
on the earth's surface or

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

an over- or under-sea world, in which some of the characteristics of the
Irish Elysium are found--a cauldron, a well of drink sweeter than wine,
and animals greatly desired by mortals, while it is of great beauty and
its people are not subject to death or disease. Hence the name Annwfn
has probably taken the place of some earlier pagan title of Elysium.

In the tale of Pwyll, the earliest reference to *Annwfn* occurs. It is
ruled by Arawn, at war with Hafgan. Arawn obtains the help of Pwyll by
exchanging kingdoms with him for a year, and Pwyll defeats Hafgan. It is
a beautiful land, where merriment and feasting go on continuously, and
its queen is of great loveliness. It has no subterranean character, and
is conceived apparently as contiguous to Pwyll's kingdom. <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1](#fn_1244) In other tales it is the land whence
Gwydion and others obtain various animals. <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[2](#fn_1245) The later folk-conception of the
demoniac dogs of Annwfn may be based on an old myth of dogs with which
its king hunted. These are referred to in the story of Pwyll. <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[3](#fn_1246)

Annwfn is also the name of a land under waves or over sea, called also
*Caer Sidi*, "the revolving castle," about which "are ocean's streams."
It is "known to Manawyddan and Pryderi," just as the Irish Elysium was
ruled by Manannan. <span id="fr_1249"></span>[4](#fn_1247) Another "Caer
of Defence" is beneath the waves. <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[5](#fn_1248) Perhaps the two ideas were
interchangeable. The people of this land are free from death and
disease, and in it is "an abundant well, sweeter than white wine the
drink in it." There also is a cauldron belonging to the lord of Annwfn,
which was stolen by Arthur and his men. Such a cauldron is the property
of people belonging to a water world in the *Mabinogion*. <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[6](#fn_1249)

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

The description of the isle of Avallon (later identified with
Glastonbury), whither Arthur was carried, completes the likeness to the
Irish Elysium. No tempest, excess of heat or cold, nor noxious animal
afflicts it; it is blessed with eternal spring and with fruit and
flowers growing without labour; it is the land of eternal youth,
unvisited by death or disease. It has a *regia virgo* lovelier than her
lovely attendants; she cured Arthur of his wounds, hence she is the
Morgen of other tales, and she and her maidens may be identified with
the divine women of the Irish isle of women. Morgen is called a *dea
phantastica*, and she may be compared with Liban, who cured Cúchulainn
of his sickness. <span id="fr_1252"></span>[1](#fn_1250)

The identification of Avallon with Glastonbury is probably post-pagan,
and the names applied to Glastonbury--Avallon, *Insula Pomonum*, *Insula
vitrea*--may be primitive names of Elysium. William of Malmesbury
derives *Insula Pomonum* in its application to Glastonbury from a native
name *Insula Avalloniæ*, which he connects with the Brythonic *avalla*,
"apples," because Glastenig found an apple tree there. <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[2](#fn_1251) The name may thus have been connected
with marvellous apple trees, like those of the Irish Elysium. But be
also suggests that it may be derived from the name of Avalloc, living
there with his daughters. Avalloc is evidently the "Rex Avallon"
(Avallach) to whose palace Arthur was carried and healed by the *regia
virgo*. <span id="fr_1254"></span>[3](#fn_1252) He may therefore have
been a mythic lord of Elysium, and his daughters would correspond to the
maidens of the isle. William also derives "Glastonbury" from the name of
an eponymous founder Glastenig, or from its native name *Ynesuuitron*,
"Glass Island." This name

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

reappears in Chretien's *Eric* in the form "l'isle de verre." Giraldus
explains the name from the glassy waters around Glastonbury, but it may
be an early name of Elysium. <span id="fr_1255"></span>[1](#fn_1253)
Glass must have appealed to the imagination of Celt, Teuton, and Slav,
for we hear of Merlin's glass house, a glass fort discovered by Arthur,
a glass tower attacked by the Milesians, Etain's glass *grianan*, and a
boat of glass which conveyed Connla to Elysium. In Teutonic and Slavonic
myth and *Märchen*, glass mountains, on which dwell mysterious
personages, frequently occur.

The origin of the Celtic Elysium belief may be found in universal myths
of a golden age long ago in some distant Elysian region, where men had
lived with the gods. Into that region brave mortals might still
penetrate, though it was lost to mankind as a whole. In some mythologies
this Elysium is the land whither men go after death. Possibly the Celtic
myth of man's early intercourse with the gods in a lost region took two
forms. In one it was a joyful subterranean region whither the Celt hoped
to go after death. In the other it was not recoverable, nor was it the
land of the dead, but favoured mortals might reach it in life. The
Celtic Elysium belief, as known through the tales just cited, is always
of this second kind. We surmise, however, that the land of the dead was
a joyous underworld ruled over by a god of fertility and of the dead,
and from that region men had originally come forth. The later
association of gods with the *síd* was a continuation of this belief,
but now the *síd* are certainly not a land of the dead, but Elysium pure
and simple. There must therefore have been at an early period a tendency
to distinguish between the happy region of the dead, and the distant
Elysium, if the two were ever really connected. The subject is obscure,
but it is not impossible that another origin of the Elysium idea may

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

be found in the phenomenon of the setting sun: it suggested to the
continental Celts that far off there was a divine land where the sun-god
rested. When the Celts reached the coast this divine western land would
necessarily be located in a far-off island, seen perhaps on the horizon.
Hence it would also be regarded as connected with the sea-god, Manannan,
or by whatsoever name he was called. The distant Elysium, whether on
land or across the sea, was conceived in identical terms, and hence also
whenever the hollow hills or *síd* were regarded as an abode of the
gods, they also were described just as Elysium was.

The idea of a world under the waters is common to many mythologies, and,
generally speaking, it originated in the animistic belief that every
part of nature has its indwelling spirits. Hence the spirits or gods of
the waters were thought of as dwelling below the waters. Tales of
supernatural beings appearing out of the waters, the custom of throwing
offerings therein, the belief that human beings were carried below the
surface or could live in the region beneath the waves, are all connected
with this animistic idea. Among the Celts this water-world assumed many
aspects of Elysium, and it has names in common with it, *e.g.* it is
called Mag Mell. Hence in many popular tales it is hardly differentiated
from the island Elysium; oversea and under-waves are often synonymous.
Hence, too, the belief that such water-worlds as I-Bresail, or Welsh
fairy-lands, or sunken cities off the Breton coast, rise periodically to
the surface, and would remain there permanently, like an island Elysium,
if some mortal would fulfil certain conditions. <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1](#fn_1254)

The Celtic belief in Tír fa Tonn is closely connected with

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

the current belief in submerged towns or lands, found in greatest detail
on the Breton coast. Here there are many such legends, but most
prominent are those which tell how the town of Is was submerged because
of the wickedness of its people, or of Dahut, its king's daughter, who
sometimes still seeks the love of mortals. It is occasionally seen below
the waves or even on their surface. <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1](#fn_1255) Elsewhere in Celtic regions similar
legends are found, and the submersion is the result of a curse, of the
breaking of a tabu, or of neglect to cover a sacred well. <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[2](#fn_1256) Probably the tradition of actual
cataclysms or inroads of the sea, such as the Celts encountered on the
coasts of Holland, may account for some of these legends, which then
mingled with myths of the divine water-world.

The idea that Elysium is co-extensive with this world and hidden in a
mist is perhaps connected with the belief in the magical powers of the
gods. As the Druids could raise a mist at will, so too might the gods,
who then created a temporary Elysium in it. From such a mist, usually on
a hill, supernatural beings often emerged to meet mortals, and in
*Märchen* fairyland is sometimes found within a mist. <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[3](#fn_1257) It was already believed that part of
the gods' land was not far off; it was invisibly on or within the hills
on whose slopes men saw the mist swirling mysteriously. Hence the mist
may simply have concealed the *síd* of the gods. But there may also have
been a belief that this world was actually interpenetrated by the divine
world, for this is believed of fairyland in Welsh and

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Irish folk-lore. Men may unwittingly interfere
with it, or have it suddenly revealed to them, or be carried into it and
made invisible. <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1](#fn_1258)

In most of the tales Elysium is a land without grief or death, where
there is immortal youth and peace, and every kind of delight. But in
some, while the sensuous delights are still the same, the inhabitants
are at war, invite the aid of mortals to overcome their foes, and are
even slain in fight. Still in both groups Elysium is a land of gods and
supernatural folk whither mortals are invited by favour. It is never the
world of the dead; its people are not mortals who have died and gone
thither. The two conceptions of Elysium as a land of peace and
deathlessness, and as a land where war and death may occur, may both be
primitive. The latter may have been formed by reflecting back on the
divine world the actions of the world of mortals, and it would also be
on a parallel with the conception of the world of the dead where
warriors perhaps still fought, since they were buried with their
weapons. There were also myths of gods warring with each other. But men
may also have felt that the gods were not as themselves, that their land
must be one of peace and deathlessness. Hence the idea of the peaceful
Elysium, which perhaps found most favour with the people. Mr. Nutt
thought that the idea of a warlike Elysium may have resulted from
Scandinavian influence acting on existing tales of a peaceful
Elysium, <span id="fr_1261"></span>[2](#fn_1259) but we know that old
myths of divine wars already existed. Perhaps this conception arose
among the Celts as a warlike people, appealing to their warrior
instincts, while the peaceful Elysium may have been the product of the
Celts as an agricultural folk, for we have seen that the Celt was now a
fighter, now a farmer. In its peaceful aspect Elysium is "a familiar,
cultivated land," where the fruits of the earth are produced without

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

labour, and where there are no storms or excess of heat or cold--the
fancies which would appeal to a toiling, agricultural people. There food
is produced magically, yet naturally, and in agricultural ritual men
sought to increase their food supply magically. In the tales this
process is, so to speak, heightened. <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1](#fn_1260)

Some writers have maintained that Elysium is simply the land of the
dead, although nothing in the existing tales justifies this
interpretation. M. D'Arbois argues for this view, resting his theory
mainly on a passage in the story of Connla, interpreted by him in a way
which does not give its real meaning. <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[2](#fn_1261) The words are spoken by the goddess to
Connla, and their sense is--"The Ever-Living Ones invite thee. Thou art
a champion to Tethra's people. They, see thee every day in the
assemblies of thy fatherland, among thy familiar loved ones." <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[3](#fn_1262) M. D'Arbois assumes that Tethra, a
Fomorian, is lord of Elysium, and that after his defeat by the Tuatha
Dea, he, like Kronos, took refuge there, and now reigns as lord of the
dead. By translating *ar-dot-chiat* ("they see thee," 3rd plur., pres.
ind.) as "on t'y verra," he maintains that Connla, by going to Elysium,
will be seen among the gatherings of his dead kinsfolk. But the words,
"Thou art a champion to Tethra's people," cannot be made to mean that
Tethra is a god of the dead. It means simply that Conula is a mighty
warrior, one of those whom Tethra, a war-god, would have approved. The
phrase, "Tethra's mighty men," used elsewhere, <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[4](#fn_1263)

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

is a conventional one for warriors. The rest of the goddess's words
imply that the Immortals from afar, or perhaps "Tethra's mighty men,"
*i.e.* warriors in this world, see Connla in the assemblies of his
fatherland in Erin, among his familiar friends. Dread death awaits them,
she has just said, but the Immortals desire Connla to escape that by
coming to Elysium. Her words do not imply that he will meet his dead
ancestors there, nor is she in any sense a goddess of death. If the dead
went to Elysium, there would be little need for inviting a living person
to go there. Had Connla's dead ancestors or Tethra's people (warriors)
been in Elysium, this would contradict the picture drawn by the goddess
of the land whither she desires him to go--a land of women, not of men.
Moreover, the rulers of Elysium are always members of the Tuatha Dé
Danann or the *síd*-folk, never a Fomorian like Tethra. <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1](#fn_1264)

M. D'Arbois also assumes that "Spain" in Nennius' account of the Irish
invasions and in Irish texts means the land of the dead, and that it was
introduced in place of some such title as Mag Mór or Mag Mell by "the
euhemerising process of the Irish Christians." But in other documents
penned by Irish Christians these and other pagan titles of Elysium
remain unchanged. Nor is there the slightest proof that the words used
by Tuan MacCaraill about the invaders of Ireland, "They all died," were
rendered in an original text, now lost according to M. D'Arbois, "They
set sail for Mag Mór or Mag Mell," a formula in which Nennius saw
indications of a return to Spain. <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[2](#fn_1265) Spain, in this hypothetical text, was
the Land of the Dead or Elysium, whence the invaders

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

came. This "lost original" exists in M. D'Arbois imagination, and there
is not the slightest evidence for these alterations. Once, indeed,
Tailtiu is called daughter of Magh Mór, King of Spain, but here a
person, not a place, is spoken of. <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1](#fn_1266) Sir John Rhŷs accepts the
identification of Spain with Elysium as the land of the dead, and finds
in every reference to Spain a reference to the Other-world, which he
regards as a region ruled by "dark divinities." But neither the lords of
Elysium nor the Celtic Dispater were dark or gloomy deities, and the
land of the dead was certainly not a land of darkness any more than
Elysium. The numerous references to Spain probably point to old
traditions regarding a connection between Spain and Ireland in early
times, both commercial and social, and it is not impossible that
Goidelic invaders did reach Ireland from Spain. <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[2](#fn_1267) Early maps and geographers make
Ireland and Spain contiguous; hence in an Irish tale Ireland is visible
from Spain, and this geographical error would strengthen existing
traditions. <span id="fr_1270"></span>[3](#fn_1268) "Spain" was used
vaguely, but it does not appear to have meant Elysium or the Land of the
Dead. If it did, it is strange that the Tuatha Dé Danann are never
brought into connection with it.

One of the most marked characteristics of the Celtic Elysium is its
deathlessness. It is "the land of the living" or of "the Ever-Living
Ones," and of eternal youth. Most primitive races believe that death is
an accident befalling men who are naturally immortal; hence freedom from
such an accident naturally characterises the people of the divine land.
But, as in other mythologies, that immortality is more or less dependent
on the eating or drinking of some

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

food or drink of immortality. Manannan had immortal swine, which, killed
one day, came alive next day, and with their flesh he made the Tuatha Dé
Danann immortal. Immortality was also conferred by the drinking of
Goibniu's ale, which, either by itself or with the flesh of swine,
formed his immortal feast. The food of Elysium was inexhaustible, and
whoever ate it found it to possess that taste which he preferred. The
fruit of certain trees in Elysium was also believed to confer
immortality and other qualities. Laeg saw one hundred and fifty trees
growing in Mag Mell; their nuts fed three hundred people. The apple
given by the goddess to Connla was inexhaustible, and he was still
eating it with her when Teigue, son of Cian, visited Elysium. "When once
they had partaken of it, nor age nor dimness could. affect them." <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1](#fn_1269) Apples, crimson nuts, and rowan
berries are specifically said to be the food of the gods in the tale of
*Diarmaid and Grainne*. Through carelessness one of the berries was
dropped on earth, and from it grew a tree, the berries of which had the
effect of wine or mead, and three of them eaten by a man of a hundred
years made him youthful. It was guarded by a giant. <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[2](#fn_1270) A similar tree growing on earth--a
rowan guarded by a dragon, is found in the tale of Fraoch, who was
bidden to bring a branch of it to Ailill. Its berries had the virtue of
nine meals; they healed the wounded, and added a year to a man's
life. <span id="fr_1273"></span>[3](#fn_1271) At the wells which were
the source of Irish rivers were supposed to grow hazel-trees with
crimson nuts, which fell into the water and were eaten by salmon. <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[4](#fn_1272) If these were caught and eaten, the
eater obtained wisdom and knowledge. These wells were in Erin, but in
some instances

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

the well with its hazels and salmon is in the Other-world, <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1](#fn_1273) and it is obvious that the crimson
nuts are the same as the food of the gods in *Diarmaid and Grainne*.

Why should immortality be dependent on the eating of certain foods? Most
of man's irrational ideas have some reason in them, and probably man's
knowledge that without food life would come to an end, joined to his
idea of deathlessness, led him to believe that there was a certain food
which produced immortality just as ordinary food supported life. On it
gods and deathless beings were fed. Similarly, as water cleansed and
invigorated, it was thought that some special kind of water had these
powers in a marvellous degree. Hence arose the tales of the Fountain of
Youth and the belief in healing wells. From the knowledge of the
nourishing power of food, sprang the idea that some food conferred the
qualities inherent in it, *e.g.* the flesh of divine animals eaten
sacramentally, and that gods obtained their immortality from eating or
drinking. This idea is widespread. The Babylonian gods had food and
water of Life; Egyptian myth spoke of the bread and beer of eternity
which nourished the gods; the Hindus and Iranians knew of the divine
*soma* or *haoma*; and in Scandinavian myth the gods renewed their youth
by tasting Iduna's golden apples.

In Celtic Elysium tales, the fruit of a tree is most usually the food of
immortality. The fruit never diminishes and always satisfies, and it is
the food of the gods. When eaten by mortals it confers immortality upon
them; in other words, it makes them of like nature to the gods, and this
is doubtless derived from the widespread idea that the eating of food
given by a stranger makes a man of one kin with him. Hence to eat the
food of gods, fairies, or of the dead, binds the mortal to them and he
cannot leave their land. This might be

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

illustrated from a wide range of myth and folk-belief. When Connla ate
the apple he at once desired to go to Elysium, and he could not leave it
once he was there; he had become akin to its people. In the stories of
Bran and Oisin, they are not said to have eaten such fruit, but the
primitive form of the tales may have contained this incident, and this
would explain why they could not set foot on earth unscathed, and why
Bran and his followers, or, in the tale of Fiachna, Loegaire and his men
who had drunk the ale of Elysium, returned thither. In other tales, it
is true, those who eat food in Elysium can return to earth--Cormac and
Cúchulainn; but had we the primitive form of these tales we should
probably find that they had refrained from eating. The incident of the
fruit given by an immortal to a mortal may have borrowed something from
the wide folk-custom of the presentation of an apple as a gage of love
or as a part of the marriage rite. <span
id="fr_1276"></span>[1](#fn_1274) Its acceptance denotes willingness to
enter upon betrothal or marriage. But as in the Roman rite of
*confarreatio* with its savage parallels, the underlying idea is
probably that which has just been considered, namely, that the giving
and acceptance of food produces the bond of kinship.

As various nuts and fruits were prized in Ireland as food, and were
perhaps used in some cases to produce an intoxicant, <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[2](#fn_1275) it is evident that the trees of
Elysium were, primarily, a magnified form of earthly trees. But all such
trees were doubtless objects of a cult before their produce was
generally eaten; they were first sacred or totem-trees, and their food
eaten only occasionally and sacramentally. If so, this would explain why
they grew in Elysium and their fruit was the food of the gods. For
whatever man eats or drinks is

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

generally supposed to have been first eaten and drunk by the gods, like
the *soma*. But, growing in Elysium, these trees, like the trees of most
myths of Elysium, are far more marvellous than any known on earth. They
have branches of silver and golden apples; they have magical supplies of
fruit, they produce wonderful music which sometimes causes sleep or
oblivion, and birds perch in their branches and warble melody "such that
the sick would sleep to it." It should be noted also that, as Miss Hull
points out, in some tales the branch of a divine tree becomes a talisman
leading the mortal to Elysium; in this resembling the golden bough
plucked by Æneas before visiting the underworld. <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1](#fn_1276) This, however, is not the fundamental
characteristic of the tree, in Irish story. Possibly, as Mr. A. B. Cook
maintains, the branch giving entrance to Elysium is derived from the
branch borne by early Celtic kings of the wood, while the tree is an
imaginative form of those which incarnated a vegetation spirit. <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[2](#fn_1277) Be this as it may, it is rather the
fruit eaten by the mortal which binds him to the Immortal Land.

The inhabitants of Elysium are not only immortal, but also invisible at
will. They make themselves visible to one person only out of many
present with him. Connla alone sees the goddess, invisible to his father
and the Druid. Manannan is visible to Bran, but there are many near the
hero whom he does not see; and when the same god comes to Fand, he is
invisible to Cúchulainn and those with him. So Mider says to Etain, "We
behold, and are not beheld." <span id="fr_1280"></span>[3](#fn_1278)
Occasionally, too, the people of Elysium have the power of
shape-shifting--Fand and Liban appear to Cúchulainn as birds.

The hazel of knowledge connects wisdom with the gods' world, and in
Celtic belief generally civilisation and culture

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

were supposed to have come from the gods. The things of their land were
coveted by men, and often stolen thence by them. In Welsh and Irish
tales, often with reference to the Other-world, a magical cauldron has a
prominent place. Dagda possessed such a cauldron and it was
inexhaustible, and a vat of inexhaustible mead is described in the story
of *Cúchulainn's Sickness*. Whatever was put into such cauldrons
satisfied all, no matter how numerous they might be. <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1](#fn_1279) Cúchulainn obtained one from the
daughter of the king of Scath, and also carried off the king's three
cows. <span id="fr_1282"></span>[2](#fn_1280) In an analogous story, he
stole from Cúroi, by the connivance of his wife Bláthnat, her father
Mider's cauldron, three cows, and the woman herself. But in another
version Cúchulainn and Curoi go to Mider's stronghold in the Isle of
Falga (Elysium), and steal cauldron, cows, and Bláthnat. These were
taken from Cúchulainn by Cúdroi hence his revenge, as in the previous
tale. <span id="fr_1283"></span>[3](#fn_1281) Thus the theft was from
Elysium. In the Welsh poem "The Spoils of Annwfn," Arthur stole a
cauldron from Annwfn. Its rim was encrusted with pearls, voices issued
from it, it was kept boiling by the breath of nine maidens, and it would
not boil a coward's food. <span id="fr_1284"></span>[4](#fn_1282)

As has been seen from the story of Gwion, he was set to watch a cauldron
which must boil until it yielded "three drops of the grace of
inspiration." It belonged to Tegid Voel and Cerridwen, divine rulers of
a Land under the Waters. <span id="fr_1285"></span>[5](#fn_1283) In the
*Mabinogi* of Branwen, her brother Bran received a cauldron from two
beings, a man and a huge woman, who came from a lake. This cauldron was
given by him to the

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

king of Erin, and it had the property of restoring to life the slain who
were placed in it. <span id="fr_1286"></span>[1](#fn_1284)

The three properties of the cauldron--inexhaustibility, inspiration, and
regeneration--may be summed up in one word, fertility, and it is
significant that the god with whom such a cauldron was associated,
Dagda, was a god of fertility. But we have just seen it associated,
directly or indirectly, with goddesses--Cerridwen, Branwen, the woman
from the lake--and perhaps this may point to an earlier cult of
goddesses of fertility, later transferred to gods. In this light the
cauldron's power of restoring to life is significant, since in early
belief life is associated with what is feminine. Woman as the fruitful
mother suggested that the Earth, which produced and nourished, was also
female. Hence arose the cult of the Earth-mother who was often also a
goddess of love as well as of fertility. Cerridwen, in all probability,
was a goddess of fertility, and Branwen a goddess of love. <span
id="fr_1287"></span>[2](#fn_1285) The cult of fertility was usually
associated with orgiastic and indiscriminate love-making, and it is not
impossible that the cauldron, like the Hindu *yoni*, was a symbol of
fertility. <span id="fr_1288"></span>[3](#fn_1286) Again, the slaughter
and cooking of animals was usually regarded as a sacred act in primitive
life. The animals were cooked in enormous cauldrons, which were found as
an invariable part of the furniture of every Celtic house. <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[4](#fn_1287) The quantities of meat which they
contained may have suggested inexhaustibility to people to whom the
cauldron was already a symbol of fertility. Thus the symbolic cauldron
of a fertility cult was merged with the cauldron used in the religious

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

slaughter and cooking of animal food. The cauldron was also used in
ritual. The Cimri slaughtered human victims over a cauldron and filled
it with their blood; victims sacrificed to Teutates were suffocated in a
vat (*semicupium*); and in Ireland "a cauldron of truth" was used in the
ordeal of boiling water. <span id="fr_1290"></span>[1](#fn_1288)

Like the food of men which was regarded as the food of the gods, the
cauldron of this world became the marvellous cauldron of the
Other-world, and as it then became necessary to explain the origin of
such cauldrons on earth, myths arose, telling how they had been stolen
from the divine land by adventurous heroes, Cúchulainn, Arthur, etc. In
other instances, the cauldron is replaced by a magic vessel or cup
stolen from supernatural beings by heroes of the Fionn saga or of
*Märchen*. <span id="fr_1291"></span>[2](#fn_1289) Here, too, it may be
noted that the Graal of Arthurian romance has affinities with the Celtic
cauldron. In the *Conte du Graal* of pseudo-Chrétien, a cup comes in of
itself and serves all present with food. This is a simple conception of
the Graal, but in other poems its magical and sacrosanct character is
heightened. It supplies the food which the eater prefers, it gives
immortal youth and immunity from wounds. In these respects it presents
an unmistakable likeness to the cauldron of Celtic myth. But, again, it
was the vessel in which Christ had instituted the Blessed Sacrament; it
contained His Blood; and it had been given by our Lord to Joseph of
Arimathea. Thus in the Graal there was a fusion of the magic cauldron of
Celtic paganism and the Sacred Chalice of Christianity, with the product
made mystic and glorious in a most wonderful manner. The story of the
Graal became immensely popular, and, deepening in ethical, mystical, and
romantic import as time went on, was taken up

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

by one poet after another, who "used it as a type of the loftiest goal
of man's effort." <span id="fr_1292"></span>[1](#fn_1290)

In other ways myth told how the gifts of civilisation came from the
gods' world. When man came to domesticate animals, it was believed in
course of time that the knowledge of domestication or, more usually, the
animals themselves had come from the gods, only, in this case, the
animals were of a magical, supernatural kind. Such a belief underlies
the stories in which Cúchulainn steals cows from their divine owners. In
other instances, heroes who obtain a wife from the *síd*-folk, obtain
also cattle from the *síd*. <span id="fr_1293"></span>[2](#fn_1291) As
has been seen, the swine given too Pryderi by Arawn, king of Annwfn, and
hitherto unknown to man, are stolen from him by Gwydion, Pryderi being
son of Pwyll, a temporary king of Annwfn, and in all probability both
were lords of Elysium. The theft, in the original form of the myth, must
thus have been from Elysium, though we have a hint in "The Spoils of
Annwfn" that Gwydion (Gweir) was unsuccessful and was imprisoned in
Annwfn, to which imprisonment the later blending of Annwfn with hell
gave a doleful aspect. <span id="fr_1294"></span>[3](#fn_1292) In a late
Welsh MS., a white roebuck and a puppy (or, in the *Triads*, a bitch, a
roebuck, and a lapwing) were stolen by Amæthon from Annwfn, and the
story presents archaic features. <span id="fr_1295"></span>[4](#fn_1293)
In some of these tales the animals are transferred to earth by a divine
or semi-divine being, in whom we may see an early Celtic culture-hero.
The tales are attenuated forms of older myths which showed how all
domestic animals were at first the property of the gods, and an echo of
these is still heard in *Märchen* describing the theft of cattle from
fairyland. In

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

the most primitive form of the tales the theft was doubtless from the
underworld of gods of fertility, the place whither the dead went. But
with the rise of myths telling of a distant Elysium, it was inevitable
that some tales should connect the animals and the theft with that
far-off land. So far as the Irish and Welsh tales are concerned, the
thefts seem mainly to be from Elysium. <span
id="fr_1296"></span>[1](#fn_1294)

Love-making has a large place in the Elysium tales. Goddesses seek the
love of mortals, and the mortal desires to visit Elysium because of
their enticements. But the love-making of Elysium is "without sin,
without crime," and this phrase may perhaps suggest the existence of
ritual sex-unions at stated times for magical influence upon the
fertility of the earth, these unions not being regarded as immoral, even
when they trespassed on customary tribal law. In some of the stories
Elysium is composed of many islands, one of which is the "island of
women." <span id="fr_1297"></span>[2](#fn_1295) These women and their
queen give their favours to Bran and his men or to Maelduin and his
company. Similar "islands of women" occur in *Märchen*, still current
among Celtic peoples, and actual islands were or still are called by
that name--Eigg and Groagez off the Breton coast. <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[3](#fn_1296) Similar islands of women are known to
Chinese, Japanese, and Ainu folk-lore, to Greek mythology (Circe's and
Calypso's islands), and to ancient Egyptian conceptions of the future
life. <span id="fr_1299"></span>[4](#fn_1297) They were also

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

known elsewhere, <span id="fr_1300"></span>[1](#fn_1298) and we may
therefore assume that in describing such an island as part of Elysium,
the Celts were using something common to universal folk-belief. But it
may also owe something to actual custom, to the memory of a time when
women performed their rites in seclusion, a seclusion perhaps recalled
in the references to the mysterious nature of the island, its
inaccessibility, and its disappearance once the mortal leaves it. To
these rites men may have been admitted by favour, but perhaps to their
detriment, because of their temporary partner's extreme erotic madness.
This is the case in the Chinese tales of the island of women, and this,
rather than home-sickness, may explain the desire of Bran, Oisin, etc.,
to leave Elysium. Celtic women performed orgiastic rites, on islands, as
has been seen. <span id="fr_1301"></span>[2](#fn_1299) All this may have
originated the belief in an island of beautiful divine women as part of
Elysium, while it also heightened its sensuous aspect.

Borrowed from the delight which the Celt took in music is the recurring
reference to the marvellous music which swelled in Elysium. There, as
the goddess says to Bran, "there is nothing rough or harsh, but sweet
music striking on the ear." It sounded from birds on every tree, from
the branches of trees, from marvellous stones, and from the harps of
divine musicians. And this is recalled in the

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

ravishing music which the belated traveller hears as he passes
fairy-haunted spots--"what pipes and timbrels, what wild ecstasy!" The
romantic beauty of Elysium is described in these Celtic tales in a way
unequalled in all other sagas or *Märchen*, and it is insisted on by
those who come to lure mortals there. The beauty of its
landscapes--hills, white cliffs, valleys, sea and shore, lakes and
rivers,--of its trees, its inhabitants, and its birds,--the charm of its
summer haze, is obviously the product of the imagination of a people
keenly alive to natural beauty. The opening lines sung by the goddess to
Bran strike a note which sounds through all Celtic literature:

"There is a distant isle, around which sea-horses glisten,  
   .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .  
A beauty of a wondrous land, whose aspects are lovely,  
Whose view is a fair country, incomparable in its haze.  
It is a day of lasting weather, that showers silver on the land;  
A pure white cliff on the range of the sea,  
Which from the sun receives its heat."

\[paragraph continues\] So Oisin describes it: "I saw a country all
green and full of flowers, with beautiful smooth plains, blue hills, and
lakes and waterfalls." All this and more than this is the reflection of
nature as it is found in Celtic regions, and as it was seen by the eye
of Celtic dreamers, and interpreted to a poetic race by them.

In Irish accounts of the *síd*, Dagda has the supremacy, wrested later
from him by Oengus, but generally each owner of a *síd* is its lord. In
Welsh tradition Arawn is lord of Annwfn, but his claims are contested by
a rival, and other lords of Elysium are known. Manannan, a god of the
sea, appears to be lord of the Irish island Elysium which is called "the
land of Manannan," perhaps because it was easy to associate an oversea
world "around which sea-horses glisten" with a god whose mythic steeds
were the waves. But as it

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

lay towards the sunset, and as some of its aspects may have been
suggested by the glories of the setting sun, the sun-god Lug was also
associated with it, though he hardly takes the place of Manannan.

Most of the aspects of Elysium appear unchanged in later folk-belief,
but it has now become fairyland--a place within hills, mounds, or *síd*,
of marvellous beauty, with magic properties, and where time lapses as in
a dream. A wonderful oversea land is also found in *Märchen* and
tradition, and Tír na n-Og is still a living reality to the Celt. There
is the fountain of youth, healing balsams, life-giving fruits, beautiful
women or fairy folk. It is the true land of heart's desire. In the
eleventh century MSS. from which our knowledge of Elysium is mainly
drawn, but which imply a remote antiquity for the materials and ideas of
the tales, the *síd*-world is still the world of divine beings, though
these are beginning to assume the traits of fairies. Probably among the
people themselves the change had already begun to be made, and the land
of the gods was simply fairyland. In Wales the same change had taken
place, as is seen by Giraldus' account of Elidurus enticed to a
subterranean fairyland by two small people. <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[1](#fn_1300)

Some of the Elysium tales have been influenced by Christian conceptions,
and in a certain group, the *Imrama* or "Voyages," Elysium finally
becomes the Christian paradise or heaven. But the Elysium conception
also reacted on Christian ideas of paradise. In the *Voyage of
Maelduin*, which bears some resemblance to the story of Bran, the
Christian influence is still indefinite, but it is more marked in the
*Voyage of Snedgus and MacRiagla*. One island has become a kind of
intermediate state, where dwell Enoch and Elijah, and many others
waiting for the day of judgment. Another

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

island resembles the Christian heaven. But in the *Voyage of Brandan*
the pagan elements have practically disappeared; there is an island of
hell and an island of paradise. <span id="fr_1303"></span>[1](#fn_1301)
The island conception is the last relic of paganism, but now the voyage
is undertaken for the purpose of revenge or penance or pilgrimage.
Another series of tales of visionary journeys to hell or heaven are
purely Christian, yet the joys of heaven have a sensuous aspect which
recalls those of the pagan Elysium. In one of these, The *Tidings of
Doomsday*, <span id="fr_1304"></span>[2](#fn_1302) there are two hells,
and besides heaven there is a place for the *boni non valde*, resembling
the island of Enoch and Elijah in the *Voyage of Snedgus*. The
connection of Elysium with the Christian paradise is seen in the title
*Tír Tairngiri*, "The Land of Promise," which is applied to the heavenly
kingdom or the land flowing with milk and honey in early glosses, *e.g.*
on Heb. iv. 4, vi. 15, where Canaan and the *regnum cælorum*, are called
*Tír Tairngiri*, and in a gloss to 1 Cor. x. 4, where the heavenly land
is called *Tír Tairngiri Innambéo*, "The Land of Promise of the Living
Ones," thus likening it to the "Land of the Living" in the story of
Connla.

Sensuous as many of the aspects of Elysium are, they have yet a
spiritual aspect which must not be overlooked. The emphasis placed on
its beauty, its music, its rest and peace, its oblivion, is spiritual
rather than sensual, while the dwelling of favoured mortals there with
divine beings is suggestive of that union with the divine which is the
essence of all religion. Though men are lured to seek it, they do not
leave it, or they go back to it after a brief absence, and Laeg says
that he would prefer Elysium to the kingship of all Ireland, and his

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

words are echoed by others. And the lure of the goddess often emphasises
the freedom from turmoil, grief, and the rude alarms of earthly life.
This "sweet and blessed country" is described with all the passion of a
poetical race who dreamed of perfect happiness, and saw in the joy of
nature's beauty, the love of women, and the thought of unbroken peace
and harmony, no small part of man's truest life. Favoured mortals had
reached Elysium, and the hope that he, too, might be so favoured buoyed
up the Celt as he dreamed over this state, which was so much more
blissful even than the future state of the dead. Many races have
imagined a happy Other-world, but no other race has so filled it with
magic beauty, or so persistently recurred to it as the Celts. They stood
on the cliffs which faced the west, and as the pageant of sunset passed
before them, or as at midday the light shimmered on the far horizon and
on shadowy islands, they gazed with wistful eyes as if to catch a
glimpse of Elysium beyond the fountains of the deep and the halls of the
setting sun. In all this we see the Celtic version of a primitive and
instinctive human belief. Man refuses to think that the misery and
disappointment and strife and pain of life must always be his. He hopes
and believes that there is reserved for him, somewhere and at some time,
eternal happiness and eternal love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[363:1](rac27.htm#fr_1231) Nutt-Meyer, i. 213.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[363:2](rac27.htm#fr_1232) Joyce, *OCR* 431.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[363:3](rac27.htm#fr_1233) D'Arbois, ii. 311;
*IT* i. 113 f.; O'Curry, *MC* iii. 190.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[364:1](rac27.htm#fr_1234) Nutt-Meyer, i. 1
f., text and translation.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[364:2](rac27.htm#fr_1235) *LU* 120*a*;
Windisch, *Irische Gramm.* 120 f.; D'Arbois, v. 384 f.; *Gaelic
Journal*, ii. 307.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[365:1](rac27.htm#fr_1236) *TOS* iv. 234. See
also Joyce, *OCR* 385; Kennedy, 240.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[365:2](rac27.htm#fr_1237) *LU* 43 f.; *IT* i.
205 L; O'Curry, *Atlantis*, ii., iii.; D'Arbois, v. 170; Leahy, i. 60 f.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[365:3](rac27.htm#fr_1238) "From Manannan came
foes."

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[366:1](rac27.htm#fr_1239) Joyce, *OCR* 223 f.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[366:2](rac27.htm#fr_1240) O'Grady, ii. 290.
in this story the sea is identified with Fiachna's wife.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[366:3](rac27.htm#fr_1241) Joyce, *OCR* 253 f.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[367:1](rac27.htm#fr_1242) *IT* iii. 211 f.;
D'Arbois, ii. 185.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[367:2](rac27.htm#fr_1243) O'Curry, *MS. Mat.*
388.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[367:3](rac27.htm#fr_1244) A similar idea
occurs in many Fian tales.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[367:4](rac27.htm#fr_1245) Evans, Welsh Did.
*s.v.* "Annwfn"; Anwyl, 60; Gaidoz, *ZCP* i. 29 f.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[368:1](rac27.htm#fr_1246) Loth, i. 27 f.; see
[p. 111](rac09.htm#page_111), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[368:2](rac27.htm#fr_1247) Pp.
[106](rac09.htm#page_106), [112](rac09.htm#page_112), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[368:3](rac27.htm#fr_1248) Guest, iii. 75;
Loth, i. 29 f.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[368:4](rac27.htm#fr_1249) Skene, i. 264, 276.
Cf. the *Ille tournoiont* of the Graal romances and the revolving houses
of *Märchen*. A revolving rampart occurs in "Maelduin" (*RC* x. 81).

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[368:5](rac27.htm#fr_1250) Skene, i. 285,

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[368:6](rac27.htm#fr_1251) Pp.
[103](rac09.htm#page_103), [116](rac09.htm#page_116), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[369:1](rac27.htm#fr_1252) Chretien, *Eric*,
1933 f.; Geoffrey, *Vita Merlini*, 41; San Marte, *Geoffrey*, 425.
Another Irish Liban is called Muirgen, which is the same as Morgen. See
Girald. Cambr. *Spec. Ecel.* Rolls Series, iv. 48.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[369:2](rac27.htm#fr_1253) William of
Malmesbury, *de Ant. Glaston. Ecel*.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[369:3](rac27.htm#fr_1254) San Marte, 425.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[370:1](rac27.htm#fr_1255) *Op. cit.* iv. 49.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[371:1](rac27.htm#fr_1256) Joyce, *OCR* 434;
Rhŷs, *CFL* i. 170; Hardiman, *Irish Minst.* i. 367; Sébillot, ii. 56
f.; Girald. Cambr. ii. 12. The underworld is sometimes reached through a
well (cf. [p. 282](rac22.htm#page_282), *supra*; *TI* iii. 209).

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[372:1](rac27.htm#fr_1257) Le Braz
<sup>2</sup>, i. p. xxxix, ii. 37 f.; Albert le Grand, *Vies de Saints
de Bretagne*, 63.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[372:2](rac27.htm#fr_1258) A whole class of
such Irish legends is called *Tomhadna*, "Inundations." A typical
instance is that of the town below Lough Neagh, already referred to by
Giraldus Cambrensis, *Top. Hib.* ii. 9; of. a Welsh instance in *Itin.
Cambr.* i. 2. See Rhŷs, *CFL*, *passim*; Kennedy, 282; *Rev. des Trad.
Pop.* ix. 79.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[372:3](rac27.htm#fr_1259) Scott. *Celt. Rev.*
i. 70; Campbell, *WHT* Nos. 38, 52; Loth, i. 38.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[373:1](rac27.htm#fr_1260) Curtin, *Tales*,
158; Rhŷs, *CFL* i. 230.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[373:2](rac27.htm#fr_1261) Nutt-Meyer, i. 159.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[374:1](rac27.htm#fr_1262) In the Vedas,
Elysium has also a strong agricultural aspect, probably for the same
reasons.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[374:2](rac27.htm#fr_1263) D'Arbois, ii. 119,
192, 385, vi. 197, 219; *RC* xxvi. 173; *Les Druides*, 121.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[374:3](rac27.htm#fr_1264) For the text see
Windisch, *Ir. Gram.* 120: "Totchurethar bii bithbi at gérait do dáinib
Tethrach ar-dot-chiat cach dia i n-dálaib tathardai eter dugnathu
inmaini." Dr. Stokes and Sir John Rhŷs have both privately confirmed the
interpretation given above.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[374:4](rac27.htm#fr_1265) "Dialogue of the
Sages," *RC* xxvi. 33 f.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[375:1](rac27.htm#fr_1266) Tethra was husband
of the war-goddess Badb, and in one text his name is glossed *badb*
(Cormac, *s.v.* "Tethra"). The name is also glossed *muir*, "sea," by
O'Cleary, and the sea is called "the plain of Tethra" (*Arch. Rev.* i.
152). These obscure notices do not necessarily denote that he was ruler
of an oversea Elysium.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[375:2](rac27.htm#fr_1267) Nennius, *Hist.
Brit.* § 13; D'Arbois, ii. 86, 134, 231.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[376:1](rac27.htm#fr_1268) *LL* 8*b*; Keating,
126.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[376:2](rac27.htm#fr_1269) Both art *motifs*
and early burial customs in the two countries are similar. See Reinach,
*RC* xxi. 88; *L'Anthropologie*, 1889, 397; Siret, *Les Première Ages du
Metal dans le Sud. Est. de l'Espagne*.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[376:3](rac27.htm#fr_1270) Orosius, i. 2. 71;
*LL* 11*b*.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[377:1](rac27.htm#fr_1271) D'Arbois, v. 384;
O'Grady, ii. 385.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[377:2](rac27.htm#fr_1272) *TOS* iii. 119;
Joyce, *OCR* 314. For a folk-tale version see *Folk-Lore*, vii. 321.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[377:3](rac27.htm#fr_1273) Leahy, i. 36;
Campbell, *LF* 29; *CM* xiii. 285; *Dean of Lismore's Book*, 54.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[377:4](rac27.htm#fr_1274) O'Curry, *MC* ii.
143; Cormac, 35.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[378:1](rac27.htm#fr_1275) See [p.
187](rac15.htm#page_187), *supra*; *IT* iii. 213.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[379:1](rac27.htm#fr_1276) See Gaidoz, "La
Requisition de l'Arnour et la Symbolisme de la Pomme," *Ann. de l'École
Pratique des Hautes Études*, 1902; Fraser, *Pausanias*, iii. 67.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[379:2](rac27.htm#fr_1277) Rhŷs, *HL* 359.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[380:1](rac27.htm#fr_1278) "The Silver Bough
in Irish Legend," *Folk-Lore*, xii. 431.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[380:2](rac27.htm#fr_1279) Cook, *Folk-Lore*,
xvii. 158.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[380:3](rac27.htm#fr_1280) *IT* i. 133.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[381:1](rac27.htm#fr_1281) O'Donovan, *Battle
of Mag Rath*, 550; D'Arbois, v. 67; *IT* i. 96. Dagda's cauldron came
from Murias, probably an oversea world.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[381:2](rac27.htm#fr_1282) Miss Hull, 244.
Scath is here the Other-world, conceived, however, as a dismal abode.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[381:3](rac27.htm#fr_1283) O'Curry, *MC* ii.
97, iii. 79; Keating, 284 f.; *RC* xv. 449.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[381:4](rac27.htm#fr_1284) Skene, i. 264; cf.
*RC* xxii. 14.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[381:5](rac27.htm#fr_1285) P.
[116](rac09.htm#page_116), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[382:1](rac27.htm#fr_1286) Guest, iii. 321 f.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[382:2](rac27.htm#fr_1287) See pp.
[103](rac09.htm#page_103), [117](rac09.htm#page_117), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[382:3](rac27.htm#fr_1288) For the use of a
vessel in ritual as a symbol of deity, see Crooke, *Folk-Lore*, viii.
351 f.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[382:4](rac27.htm#fr_1289) Diod. Sic. v. 28;
Athen. iv. 34; Joyce, *SH* ii. 124; *Antient Laws of Ireland*, iv. 327.
The cauldrons of Irish houses are said in the texts to be inexhaustible
(cf. *RC* xxiii. 397).

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[383:1](rac27.htm#fr_1290) Strabo, vii. 2. 1;
Lucan, Usener's ed., p. 32; *IT* iii. 210; *Antient Laws of Ireland*, i.
195 f.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[383:2](rac27.htm#fr_1291) Curtin, *HTI* 249,
262.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[384:1](rac27.htm#fr_1292) See Villemarqué,
*Contes Pop. des anciens Bretons*, Paris, 1842; Rhŷs, *AL* and
especially Nutt, *Legend of the Holy Grail*, 1888.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[384:2](rac27.htm#fr_1293) "Adventures of
Nera, " *RC* x. 226; *RC* xvi. 62, 64.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[384:3](rac27.htm#fr_1294) P.
[106](rac09.htm#page_106), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[384:4](rac27.htm#fr_1295) P.
[107](rac09.htm#page_107), *supra*.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[385:1](rac27.htm#fr_1296) For parallel myths
see *Rig-Veda*, i. 53. 2; Campbell, *Travels in South Africa*, i. 306;
Johnston, *Uganda Protectorate*, ii. 704; Ling Roth, *Natives of
Sarawak*, i. 307; and cf. the myth of Prometheus.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[385:2](rac27.htm#fr_1297) This is found in
the stories of Bran, Maelduin, Connla, in Fian tales (O'Grady, ii. 228,
238), in the "Children of Tuirenn," and in Gaelic *Märchen*.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[385:3](rac27.htm#fr_1298) Martin, 277;
Sébillot, ii. 76.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[385:4](rac27.htm#fr_1299) Burton, *Thousand
Nights and a Night*, x. 239; Chamberlain, *Aino Folk-Tales*, 38;
*L'Anthropologie*, v. 507; Maspero, *Hist. anc. des peuples de
l'Orient*, i. 183. The lust of the women of these islands is fatal to
their lovers.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[386:1](rac27.htm#fr_1300) An island near New
Guinea is called "the land of women." On it men are allowed to land
temporarily, but only the female offspring of the women are allowed to
survive (*L'Anthrop.* v. 507). The Indians of Florida had a tradition of
an island in a lake inhabited by the fairest women (Chateaubriand,
*Autob.* 1824, ii. 24), and Fijian mythology knows of an Elysian island
of goddesses, near the land of the gods, to which a few favoured mortals
are admitted (Williams, *Fiji*, i. 114).

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[386:2](rac27.htm#fr_1301) P.
[274](rac21.htm#page_274), *supra*. Islands may have been regarded as
sacred because of such cults, as the folk-lore reported by Plutarch
suggests ([p. 343](rac25.htm#page_343), *supra*). Celtic saints retained
the veneration for islands, and loved to dwell on them, and the idea
survives in folk-belief. Cf. the veneration of Lewismen for the Flannan
islands.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[388:1](rac27.htm#fr_1302) Gir. Camb. *Itin.
Camb.* i. 8.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[389:1](rac27.htm#fr_1303) Translations of
some of these *Voyages* by Stokes are given in *RC*, vols. ix. x. and
xiv. See also Zimmer, "Brendan's Meerfahrt," *Zeits. für Deut. Alt.*
xxxiii.; cf. Nutt-Meyer, ch. 4, 8.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[389:2](rac27.htm#fr_1304) *RC* iv. 243.
