[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Next](gbos01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Casting the Circle

\(1949\)

It is most convenient to mark the circle with chalk, paint or otherwise,
to show where it is; but marks on the carpet may be utilized. Furniture
may be placed to indicate the bounds. The only circle that matters is
the one drawn before every ceremony with either a duly consecrated Magic
Sword or an Athame. The circle is usually nine feet in diameter, unless
made for some very special purpose. There are two outer circles, each
six inches apart, so the third circle has a diameter of eleven feet.

\[1\] Having chosen a place proper, take the sickle or scimitar of Art
or a Witch's Athame, if thou mayest obtain it, and stick it into the
center, then take a cord, and 'twere well to use the Cable Tow for this,
and loop it over the Instrument, four and one half feet, and so trace
out the circumference of the circle, which must be traced either with
the Sword, or the knife with the black hilt, or it be of little avail,
but ever leave open a door towards the North. Make in all 3 circles, one
within the other , and write names of power between these.

\[2\] First draw circle with Magic Sword or Athame.

\[3\] Consecrate Salt and Water: Touch water with Athame, saying, "I
exorcise thee, O creature of Water, that thou cast out from Thee all the
impurities and uncleannesses of the Spirits of the World of Phantasm, so
they may harm me not, in the names of Aradia and Cernunnos."

\[4\] Touching Salt with Athame, say, "The Blessings of Aradia and
Cernunnos be upon this creature of Salt, and let all malignity and
hindrance be cast forth hencefrom, and let all good enter herein, for
without Thee man cannot live, wherefore I bless thee and invoke thee,
that thou mayest aid me."

\[5\] Then put the Salt into the water.

\[6\] Sprinkle with exorcised water.

\[7\] Light candles; say, "I exorcise thee, O Creature of Fire, that
every kind of Phantasm may retire from thee, and be unable to harm or
deceive in any way, in the names of Aradia and Cernunnos."

\[8\] Caution initiate (if any); warn companions; enter circle and close
doors with 3 pentagrams.

\[9\] Proclaim object of working

\[10\] Circumambulate 3 times or more before commencing work.

\[11\] Summon: "I summon, stir, and Call thee up, thou Mighty Ones of
the East, South, West, and North." Salute and draw pentacle with Magic
Sword or Athame, the first stroke being from the top down to the left.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Drawing Down the Moon](gbos01.md)
