[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos37)  [Next](gbos39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Old Laws

\(1961\)

\[A\] The Law was made and Ardane of old. The law was made for the
Wicca, to advise and help in their troubles. The Wicca should give due
worship to the Gods and obey their will, which they Ardane, for it was
made for the good of the Wicca, As the \[5\] Wicca's worship is good for
the Gods, For the Gods love the Wicca. As a man loveth a woman, by
mastering her, so the Wicca should love the Gods, by being mastered by
them. And it is necessary that the Circle, which is the Temple of the
Gods, should be truly cast and purified, that it \[10\] may be a fit
place for the Gods to enter. And the Wicca should be properly prepared
and purified, to enter into the presence of the Gods. With love and
worship in their hearts they shall raise power from their bodies to give
power to the Gods, as has been taught us of old, \[15\] For in this way
only may man have communion with the Gods, for the Gods cannot help man
without the help of men.

\[B\] And the High Priestess shall rule her Coven as representative of
the Goddess, and the High Priest shall support her as the representative
of the God, And the High Priestess shall choose whom she \[20\] will, if
he have sufficient rank, to be her High Priest), For the God himself,
kissed her feet in the fivefold salute, laying his power at the feet of
the Goddess, because of her youth and beauty, her sweetness and
kindness, her wisdom and Justice, her humility and generosity. So he
resigned his lordship to her. But the Priestess should \[25\] ever mind
that all power comes from him. It is only lent when it is used wisely
and justly. And the greatest virtue of a High Priestess is that she
recognizes that youth is necessary to the representative of the Goddess,
so that she will retire gracefully in favour of a younger woman, Should
the Coven so decide in Council, For the true \[30\] High Priestess
realizes that gracefully surrendering pride of place is one of the
greatest of virtues, and t hat thereby she will return to that pride of
place in another life, with greater power and beauty.

\[C\] In the days when Witchdom extended far, we were free and
worshipped in All their Greatest Temples, but in these unhappy times
\[35\] we must hold our sacred mysteries in secret. So it be Ardane,
that none but the Wicca may see our mysteries, for our enemies are many,
And torture looseth the tongues of many. It be Ardane that each Coven
shall not know where the next Coven bide, or who its members are, save
the Priest and Priestess, \[40\] That there shall be no communication
between them, save by the Messenger of the Gods, or the Summoner. Only
if it be safe, may the Covens meet, in some safe place, for the great
festivals. And while there, none shall say whence they come, or give
their true names, to the end that, if any are tortured, in their agony,
they can \[45\] not tell if they know not. So it be Ardane that no one
may tell any not of the Craft who be of the Wicca, nor give any names,
or where they bide, or in any way tell anything which can betray any to
our foes, nor may they tell where the Covenstead be, or where is the
Covendom, \[50\] or where be the meeting s or that there have been
meetings. And if any break these laws, even under torture, The Curse of
the Goddess shall be upon them, so they never reborn on earth, And may
they remain where they belong, in the Hell of the Christians.

\[D\] Let each High Priestess govern her Coven with Justice and \[55\]
love, with the help of the advice of the elders, always heeding the
advice of the Messenger of the Gods, if he cometh. She will heed all
complaints of brothers, and strive to settle all differences among them,
but it must be recognized that there be people who will ever strive to
force others to do as they will. \[60\] They are not necessarily evil,
and they often do have good ideas, and such ideas should be talked over
in council. And if they will not agree with their brothers, or if they
say, "I will not work under this High Priestess," it hath always been
the old law to be convenient for the brethren, and to void disputes, any
of the Third \[65\] may claim to found a new Coven because they live
over a league from the Covenstead, or are about to do so. Anyone living
within the Covendom wishing to form a new Coven, to avoid strife, shall
tell the Elders of his intention and on the instant void his dwelling
and remove to the new Covendom. Members of the old Coven may join the
New one when it be formed, but if they do, must utterly void the old
Coven. The Elders of the New and the Old Covens should meet in peace and
brotherly love, to decide the new boundaries. Those of the Craft who
dwell outside both Covendoms may join either indifferent, but not both,
though all may, if the Elders \[75\] agree, meet for the Great
Festivals, if it be truly in peace and brotherly love. But splitting the
coven oft means strife, so for this reason these laws were made of old,
And may the curse of the Goddess be on any who disregard them. So be it
ardane.

\[E\] If you would Keep a book let it be in your own hand of write.
\[80\] Let brothers and sisters copy what they will, but never let the
book out of your hands, and never keep the writings of another, for if
it be found in their hand of write, they well may be taken and enjoined.
Each should guard his own writings and destroy it whenever danger
threatens. Learn as much as you may by heart, and when danger is \[85\]
past, rewrite your book an it be safe. For this reason, if any die,
destroy their book if they have not been able to, for an it be found,
'tis clear proof against them, And our oppressors well know, "Ye may not
be a witch alone" So all their kin and friends be in danger of torture.
So ever destroy anything not necessary. \[90\] If your book be found on
you. 'tis clear proof against you alone. You may be enjoined. Keep all
thoughts of the Craft from your mind. Say you had bad dreams; a devil
caused you to write it without your knowledge. Think to yourself, "I
know nothing. I remember nothing. I have forgotten everything." Drive
this \[95\] into your mind. If the torture be too great to bear, say, "I
will confess. I cannot bear this torture. What do you want me to say?
Tell me and I will say it." If they try to make you speak of the
brotherhood, Do NOT, but if they try to make you speak of \[100\]
impossibilities, such as flying through the air, consorting with the
Christian Devil, or sacrificing children, or eating men's flesh, to
obtain relief from torture, say, "I had an evil dream. I was not myself.
I was crazed." Not all Magistrates are bad. If there \[105\] be an
excuse they may show mercy. If you have confessed aught, deny it
afterwards; say you babbled under torture, you knew not what you did or
said. If you are condemned, fear not. The Brotherhood is powerful. They
may help you to escape, if you stand steadfast, but if you betray aught,
there is no hope for you, in this \[110\] life, or in that which is to
come. Be sure, if steadfast you go to the pyre, Dwale will reach you.
You will feel naught. You go but to o Death and what lies beyond, the
ecstasy of the Goddess.

\[F\] 'Tis probable that before you are enjoined, Dwale will reach you.
\[115\] Always remember that Christians fear much that any die under
torture. At the first sign of swoon, they cause it to be stopped, and
blame the tormenters. For that reason, the tormenters themselves are apt
to feign to torment, but do not, so it is best not to die at first. If
Dwale reaches you, 'tis a sign that you have a friend somewhere. \[120\]
You may be helped to escape, so despair not. If the worst comes, and you
go to the pyre, wait till the flames and smoke spring up, bend your head
over, and breath in with long breaths. You choke and die swiftly, and
wake in the arms of the Goddess.

\[G\] To void discovery, let the working tools \[125\] be as ordinary
things that any may have in their houses. Let the Pentacles be of wax,
so they may be broken at once. Have no sword unless your rank allows you
one. Have no names or signs on anything. Write the names and signs on
them in ink before consecrating them and wash it off immediately after.
Do not Bigrave them, \[130\] lest they cause discovery. Let the colour
of the hilts tell which is which.

\[H\] Ever remember, ye are the Hidden Children of the Gods. So never do
anything to disgrace them. Never boast, Never threaten, Never say you
would wish ill to anyone. If you or any not in the Circle speak of the
Craft, \[135\] say, "Speak not to me of such. It frightens me. 'Tis evil
luck to speak of it." For this reason: the Christians have spies
everywhere. These speak as if they were well affected, as if they would
come to Meetings, saying, "My mother used to go to worship the Old Ones.
I would that I could go myself." <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) To
these ever deny all knowledge. \[140\] But to others ever say, "'Tis
foolish men talk of witches flying through the air; to do so they must
be light as thistledown," and "Men say that witches all be bleared-eyed
old crones, so what pleasure can there be in witch meetings such as folk
talk on?" Say, "Many wise men now say there be no such creatures." Ever
\[145\] make it a jest, and in some future time, perhaps the persecution
will die, and we may worship safely again. Let us all pray for that
happy day.

\[I\] May the blessings of the Goddess and the God be on all who keep
these laws which are Ardane.

\[J\] If the Craft hath any Appanage, let all brothers guard it, and
help to keep it clear and good for the Craft, and let all justly guard
all monies of the Craft. But if some brothers truly wrought it, 'tis
right that they have their pay, an it be just, an this be not taking
\[5\] money for the use of the Art, but for good and honest work. And
even the Christians say, "A labourer is worthy of his hire." But if any
brotherswillingly for the good of the craft without pay, 'tis but to
their greater honour. So it be Ardane.

\[K\] If there be any disputes or quarrels among the brethren, the
\[10\] High Priestess shall straight convene the Elders and enquire into
the matter, and they shall hear both sides, first alone, then together,
and they shall decide justly, not favouring the one side or the other,
ever recognizing that there be people who can never agree to work under
others, but at the same time there be some people who \[15\] cannot rule
justly. To those who ever must be chief, there is one answer, "Void the
Coven and seek an other, or make a Coven of your own, taking with you
those who will to go." To those who cannot rule justly, the answer be,
"Those who cannot bear your rule will leave you," for none may come to
meetings with those with whom they are at \[20\] variance; so, an either
cannot agree, get hence, for the Craft must ever survive. So it be
Ardane.

\[L\] In the olden days when we had power, we could use our Arts against
any who ill-treated any of the Brotherhood, but in these evil times, we
may not do so, for our enemies have devised a burning \[25\] pit of
everlasting fire, into which they say their God casteth all the people
who worship him, except it be the very few who are released by their
priests' spells and Masses, and this be chiefly by giving money and rich
gifts to receive his favour, for their Alther Greatest God \[Greatest
God of all\] is ever i n need of Money. \[30\] But as our Gods need our
aid to make fertility for men and crops, So the God of the Christians is
ever in need of man's help to search out and destroy us. Their priests
tell them that any who get our help or our cures are damned to the Hell
forever, so men be mad for the terror of it. But they make men \[35\]
believe that they may scape this hell if they give victims to the
tormenters. So for this reason all be forever spying, thinking, "An I
can but catch one of the Wicca I will scape this fiery pit." But we have
our hidels, and men searching long and not finding say, "there be none,
or if they be, they be in a far country." \[40\] But when one of our
oppressors die, or even be sick, ever is the cry, "This be Witches
Malice," and the hunt is up again. And though they slay ten of their
people to one of ours, still they care not; they have many thousands,
while we are few indeed. So it is Ardane that none shall use the Art in
any way to do ill \[45\] to any, howevermuch they have injured us. And
for long we have obeyed this law, "Harm none" and nowtimes many believe
we exist not. So it be Ardane that this law shall still continue to help
us in our plight. No one, however great an injury or injustice they
receive, may use the Art in any to do ill or harm any. \[50\] But they
may, after great consultations with all, use the Art to prevent or
restrain Christians from harming us and others, but only to let or
constrain them and never to punish, to this end. Men say, "Such an one
is a mighty searcher out and persecutor of Old Women whom he deemeth to
be Witches, \[55\] and none hath done him Skith \[harm\], so this be
proof they cannot, o r more truly, that there be none," For all know
full well that so many folk have died because someone had a grudge
against them, or were persecuted because they had money or goods to
seize, or because they had none to bribe the searchers. And many have
died \[60\] because they were scolding old women, so much so that men
now say that only old women are witches, and this be to our advantage,
and turns suspicion away from us. In England 'tis now many a year since
a witch hath died the death, but any misuse of the power might raise the
Persecution again; so never break this law, \[65\] however much you are
tempted, and never consent to its being broken. If you know it is being
broken in the least, you must work strongly against it, and any High
Priestess or High Priest who consents to it must be immediately deposed,
for 'tis the blood of the Brethren they endanger. Do good, an it be
safe, and only if \[70\] it be safe, for any talk may endanger us.

\[M\] And strictly keep to the Old Law, never accept money for the use
of the art. It is Christian priests and sorcerers who accept money for
the use of their Arts, and they sell Dwale and evil love spells and
pardons to let men scape from their sins. \[75\] Be not as these. Be not
as these. If you accept not money, you will be free of temptation to use
the Art for evil causes.

\[N\] You may use the Art for your own advantage, or for the advantage
of the Craft, only if you be sure you harm none. But ever let the Coven
debate the matter at length. Only if all are satisfied that none may be
harmed \[80\] may the Art be used. If it is not possible to achieve your
ends one way without harming any, perchance the aim may be achieved by
acting in a different way, so as to harm none. May the Curse of the
Goddess be on any who breach this law. So it be Aredane.

\[O\] 'Tis adjudged lawful an anyone need a house or land, an none will
\[85\] sell, to incline the owner's mind to be willing to sell, provided
it harmeth him not in any way, and that the full worth is paid, without
haggling. Never bargain or cheapen anything which you buy by the Art. So
it be Ardane.

\[P\] It is the Old Law and the most important of all Laws \[90\] that
no one may do or say anything which will endanger any of the Craft, or
bring them in contact with the law of the land, or the Law of the Church
or any of our persecutors. In any disputes between the brethren, no one
may invoke any laws but those of the Craft, or any Tribunal but that of
the Priestess and the Priest and the \[95\] Elders. And may the Curse of
the Goddess be on any who so do. So it be Ardane.

\[Q\] It is not forbidden to say as Christians do, "There be Witchcraft
in the Land," because our oppressors of old made it Heresy not to
believe in Witchcraft, and so a crime to deny it, which thereby put
\[100\] you under suspicion. But ever say "I know not of it here,
perchance they may be, but afar off. I know not where." But ever speak
so you cause others to doubt they be as they are. Always speak of them
as old crones, consorting with the Devil and riding through the air. But
ever say, "But how may men ride through the air an they be not \[105\]
as light as thistledown?" But the curse of the Goddess be on any who
cast any suspicion on any of the Brotherhood, or speaks of any real
meeting place, or where any bide. So it be Ardane. \[R\] Let the Craft
keep books with the names of all Herbs which are good for man, and all
cures, that all may learn. But keep \[110\] another book with all the
Banes \[poisons\] and Apies. and let only the elders and trustworthy
people have this knowledge. So it be Ardane. \[S\] And may the Blessings
of the Gods be on all who keep these Laws and the Curses of both God and
Goddess be on all who break them So it be Ardane. \[The following two
sections were added after 1960.\] \[T\] Remember the Art is the secret
of the Gods and may only be used in earnest and never for show or
vainglory. Magicians and Christians may taunt us, saying, "You have no
power. Do magic before our eyes. Then only will we believe," seeking to
cause us to betray our Art before them. Heed them not, for the Art is
holy, and may only be used in need. And the curse of the Gods be on any
who break this law. \[U\] It ever be the way with women, and with men
also, that they ever seek new love, nor should we reprove them for this,
but it may be found to disadvantage the Craft, as so many a time it has
happened that a High Priest or High Priestess, impelled by love, hath
departed with their love; that is, they have left the coven. Now, if a
High Priestess wishes to resign, she may do so in full Coven, and this
resignation is valid. But if they should run off without resigning, who
may know if they may not return w within a few months? So the law is, if
a High Priestess leaves her coven, but returns within the space of a
year and a day, then she shall be taken back, and all shall be as
before. Meanwhile, if she has a deputy, that deputy shall act as High
Priestess for as long as the High Priestess is away. If she returns not
at the end of a year and a day, then shall the coven elect a new High
Priestess. Unless there be a good reason to the contrary. The person who
has done the work should reap the benefit of the reward, Maiden and
deputy of the High Priestess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](gbos38.htm#fr_3) My Lady Epona points out
that this is precisely what Charles Cardell had claimed; that is, this
paragraph is a response to Cardell, and so it was probably inserted into
the Craft Laws after the run-in with the Cardells and Olive Green in
1959. This again is an indication that Gardner did not promulgate the
Craft Laws as a document for the Book of Shadows until about 1960, when
Mr. Q was initiated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Verse Charge](gbos39)
