[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos04)  [Next](gbos06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Initiation: Third Degree

Magus: "Ere we proceed with this sublime degree, I must beg purification
at thy hands."

High Priestess binds Magus and ties him down to the altar. She
circumambulates three times, and scourges Magus with three, seven, nine,
and 21 strokes. She then unbinds him and helps him to his feet. Magus
now binds the High Priestess and ties her down to the altar. He
circumambulates, proclaiming to the four quarters, "Hear, ye mighty
Ones, the twice consecrate and Holy (name), High Priestess and Witch
Queen, is properly prepared and will now proceed to erect the Sacred
Altar." Magus scourges High Priestess with three, seven, nine, and 21
strokes. Cakes and wine may now be taken \[see "Cakes and Wine"\].

Magus: "Now I must reveal to you a great Mystery." \[kiss\].

Note: if High Priestess has performed this rite before, omit these
words. High Priestess assumes Osiris position.

Magus: "Assist me to erect the Ancient Altar, at which in days past all
worshipped, the Great Altar of all things. For in the old times a woman
was the Altar. Thus was the altar made and so placed \[Priestess lies
down in such a way that her vagina is approximately at the center of the
circle\], and the sacred place was the point within the center of the
circle, as we of old times have been taught, that the point within the
center is the origin of all things. Therefore should we adore it."
\[kiss\]

"Therefore, whom we adore, we also invoke, by the power of the lifted
lance." Invokes. "O circle of stars \[kiss\], whereof our Father is but
the younger brother \[kiss\], "Marvel beyond imagination, soul of
infinite space, before whom time is ashamed, the mind bewildered and
understanding dark, not unto thee may we attain unless thine image be of
love \[kiss\].

"Therefore, by seed and root, and stem and bud and leaf and flower and
fruit do we invoke thee, O, Queen of space, O dew of light, O continuous
one of the Heavens \[kiss\]. "Let it be ever thus, that men speak not of
Thee as one, but as none, and let them not speak of thee at all, since
thou art continuous, for thou art the point within the circle \[kiss\],
which we adore \[kiss\], the fount of life without which we would not be
\[kiss\]. "And in this way truly are erected the Holy Twin Pillars Boaz
and Joachim \[kisses breasts\]. In beauty and strength were they
erected, to the wonder and glory of all men."

(Eightfold Kiss: 3 points, Lips, 2 Breasts and back to lips; 5 points)

"O Secrets of secrets that art hidden in the being of all lives. Not
thee do we adore, for that which adoreth is also thou. Thou art that and
That am I \[kiss\].

"I am the flame that burns in every man, and in the core of every star
\[kiss\].

"I am Life and the giver of Life, yet therefore is the knowledge of me
the Knowledge of Death \[kiss\].

"I am alone, the Lord within ourselves whose name is Mystery of
Mysteries \[kiss\].

"Make open the path of intelligence between us. For these truly are the
5 points of fellowship \[on the right appears an illuminated diagram of
the point-up triangle above the pentacle, the symbol for the third
degree\], feet to feet, knee to knee, groin to groin, breast to breast,
arms around back, lips to lips, by the Great and Holy Names Abracadabra,
Aradia, and Cernunnos.

Magus and High Priestess: "Encourage our hearts, Let thy Light
crystallize itself in our blood, fulfilling us of Resurrection, for
there is no part of us that is not of the Gods."

(Exchange Names.)

Closing the Circle High Priestess Circumambulates, proclaiming, "The
twice consecrate High Priestess greets ye Mighty Ones, and dismisseth ye
to your pleasant abodes. Hail and Farewell."

She draws the banishing pentacle at each quarter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cakes and Wine](gbos06.md)
