[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos29)  [Next](gbos31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Autumn Equinox

The altar should be decorated with symbols of autumn, pine cones, oak
sprigs, acorns, or ears of corn, and should have fire or burning incense
on it as usual. After usual purification, the people stand round, men
and women alternately. Magus at west of altar in God position.

High Priestess stands at east of altar, facing him, and reads the
incantation.

"Farewell, O Sun, ever returning light. The hidden god, who ever yet
remains. He departs to the land of youth, through the gates of death, to
dwell enthroned, the judge of gods and man. The horned leader of the
hosts of air. Yet, even as stand unseen about the circle the forms of
the Mighty Lords of the Outer Spaces,. So dwelleth he, 'the lord within
ourselves'. So dwelleth he within the secret seed, the seed of new
reaped grain, the seed of flesh, hidden in the earth, the marvellous
seed of the stars.

'In him is life, and life is the light of men \[John 1:4\],' that which
was never born and never dies. Therefore the Wicca weep not, but
rejoice."

The High Priestess goes to the Magus with a kiss. He lays aside Athame
and scourge, and kisses her. The High Priestess hands him her wand,
which should be Phallic, or a branch tipped with a pinecone, Or a riding
pole, or a broomstick (anciently the thyrsus). They lead the dance, she
with a systrum or rattle, he with wand, the people falling in behind
them, dancing three times round the altar. Then the candle game is
played.

Cakes and wine.

Great Rite if possible.

Dances and games.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sabbat Rituals: Winter Solstice](gbos31.md)
