[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos14)  [Next](gbos16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Warning

\(1953\)

Keep this book in your own hand of write. Let brothers and Sisters copy
what they will, but never let this book out of your hands, and never
keep the writings of another, for if it be found in their hand of write,
they may well be taken and tortured. Each should guard his own writings
and destroy them whenever danger threatens. Learn as much as you may by
heart, and when the danger is past, rewrite your book. For this reason,
if any die, destroy their book if they have not been able to, for, if it
be found nd, 'tis clear proof against them. "Ye may not be a Witch
alone"; so all their friends be in danger of the torture. So destroy
everything not necessary. If your book be found on you, 'tis clear proof
against you. You may be tortured. Keep all thought of the cult from your
mind. Say you had bad dreams, that a Devil caused you to write this
without your knowledge. Think to yourself, "I Know Nothing. I Remember
nothing. I have forgotten all." Drive this into your mind. If the
torture be too great to bear, say, "I will confess. I cannot bear this
torment. What do you want me to say? Tell me and I will say it." If they
try to make you talk of the broth , do not, but if they try to make you
speak of impossibilities, such as flying through the air, consorting
with the Devil, sacrificing children, or eating men's flesh, say, "I had
an evil dream. I was not myself. I was crazed." Not all Magistrates are
bad. If there be an excuse, they may show you mercy. If you have
confessed aught, deny it afterwards. Say you babbled under the torture;
you knew not what you did or said. If you be condemned, fear not. The
Brotherhood is powerful. They may help you to escape if you are
steadfast. If you betray aught, there is no hope for you, in this life,
or in that which is to come. But, 'tis sure, that if steadfast you go to
the pyre, drugs will reach you. You will feel naught, and you go but to
Death and what lies beyond, the ecstasy of the Goddess. The same with
the working Tools. Let them be as ordinary things that anyone may have
in their homes. The Pentacles shall be of wax that they may be melted or
broken at once. Have no sword unless your rank allows you one. Have no
names or signs on anything. Write them on in ink before consecrating
them and wash it off at once when finished. Never boast, never threaten,
never say you wish ill to anyone. If any speak of the craft, say, "Speak
not to me of such, it frightens me, 'tis evil luck to speak of it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Ordeal of the Art Magical](gbos16)
