[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gbos24)  [Next](gbos26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Gardnerian Book of Shadows*, by Gerald Gardner, at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A Revision of the Casting Procedure

\(1957\)

ALL ARE PURIFIED

\[1\] Magus consecrates salt and water.

\[2\] High Priestess kneels at Altar, takes up Sword, says, "I conjure
thee, O Sword of Steel, to serve me as a defence in all Magical
Operations. Guard me at all times against mine enemies, both visible and
invisible. Grant that I may obtain what I desire in all things wherein I
may use Thee, Wherefore do I bless Thee and invoke Thee in the names of
Aradia and Cernunnos." Gives Sword to Magus.

\[3\] Magus kneeling hands her vessel of consecrated Water and
Aspergillum. He Casts the Circle, three circles, on the lines marked
out, starting at the East and returning to the East. High Priestess
follows, Asperging Circle (sprinkling it to purify it) and all present
and finally herself. Then she goes round again censing it. (Everyone in
the circle must be sprinkled and censed.) She returns vessel, etc., to
Magus, who places them on altar, or convenient place, and hands her
Sword \[handwritten\].

\[4\] She walks slowly round Circle, saying, "I conjure Thee, O Circle
of Space, that thou be a Boundary and a Protection and a meeting place
between the world of Men and that of the Dread Lords of the OUTER
SPACES, that Thou be cleansed, Purified, and strengthened to be a

Guardian and a Protection that shall preserve and contain THAT POWER
which we so earnestly desire to raise within thy bounds this night,
wherefore do I bless thee and entreat thee to aid me in the endeavor, in
the names of Aradia and Cernun nos." Hands sword to Magus
\[handwritten\].

\[5\] Magus then summons the Mighty Ones as usual.

\[6\] High Priestess stands in front of Altar (which may be pushed back
for this). High Priestess assumes Goddess position (arms crossed). Magus
kneeling in front of her, draws pentacle on her body with Phallus-headed
Wand, Invokes (Drawing down the Moon), "I Invoke and beseech Thee, O
mighty MOTHER of all life and fertility. 'By seed and root, by stem and
bud, by leaf and flower and fruit, by Life and Love, do I invoke Thee'
to descend into the body of thy servant and High Priestess (name)." (The
Moon hav ing been drawn down, i.e., link established, Magus and all male
officers give fivefold kiss; all others bow.)

\[7\] High Priestess in Goddess position says, arms crossed,

"Mother, Darksome and Divine,Mine the Scourge and Mine the Kiss,The
Five-point Star of Love and Bliss; Here I charge ye in this Sign. (Opens
out Arms to pentacle position)

Bow before my Spirit bright (All bow) Aphrodite, Arianrhod,Lover of the
Horned God, Queen of Witchery and Night.

Diana, Brigid, Melusine, Am I named of old by men, Artemis and
Cerridwen, Hell's dark mistress, Heaven's Queen.

Ye who ask of me a boon, Meet ye in some hidden shade, Lead my dance in
greenwood glade By the light of the full moon.

Dance about mine altar stone, Work my holy magistry, Ye who are fain of
sorcery, I bring ye secrets yet unknown.

No more shall ye know slavery who tread my round the Sabbat night. Come
ye all naked to the rite In sign that ye are truly free.

Keep ye my mysteries in mirth, Heart joined to heart and lip to lip.
Five are the points of fellowship That bring ye ecstasy on Earth.

No other law but love I know; By naught but love may I be known, And all
that liveth is my own: From me they come, to me they go.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Prose Charge](gbos26.md)
