[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft08)  [Next](pft10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Story of Kanag

*Tinguian*

When the rice  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](pft68.htm#fn_59) had grown
tall and it was near the time for it to ripen, Aponitolau and
Aponibolinayen grew fearful lest the wild pigs should break in and
destroy all their crop, so they sent their son, Kanag, to the field to
guard the grain. Kanag willingly went to the place, but when he found
that the fences were all strong so that the pigs could not get in, and
he was left with nothing to do, life in the little watch-house  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](pft68.htm#fn_60) grew lonely, and the boy became
very unhappy.

Each day Aponitolau carried cooked rice and meat to his son in the
field, but Kanag could not eat and always bade his father hang it in the
watch-house until he should want it Each time Aponitolau found the food
of the day before still untouched, and he began to suspect that the boy
was unhappy at having to guard the grain. But he said nothing of his
fears to Aponibolinayen.

One day after his father had returned home, Kanag was so lonely that he
used his magical power and became a little bird and flew up into the top
of a tree. The next day when Aponitolau came to the field he looked
everywhere for his son, and when he could not find him he called, and
from the top of a bamboo tree a little bird answered him. Realizing what
had happened, the father was very sad and begged his son to come back
and be a boy again, but Kanag only answered:

"I would rather be a bird  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](pft68.htm#fn_61)
and carry the messages of the spirits to the people."

At last the father went home alone, and he and the boy's mother were
filled with grief that they had lost their son.

Some time after this, Aponitolau prepared to go out to fight. He took
his spear and shield and head-ax and started early one morning, but when
he reached the gate of the town, Kanag flew over him, giving him a bad
sign, so he turned back. The next morning he started again, and this
time the little bird gave him a good sign, and knowing that nothing
would injure him, he went on.

After a long journey he reached a hostile town where the people said
they were glad to see him, and added that because he was the first of
his people who had dared to enter their town they intended to keep him
there.

"Oh," said Aponitolau, "if you say that I cannot return home, call all
your people together and we will fight."

"You are very brave," answered his enemies, "if you wish to fight us
all."

And when the people had gathered together they laughed at him and said,
"Why, one of our fingers would fight you."

Nevertheless, Aponitolau prepared to fight, and when the bravest of the
enemy threw his spear and head-ax at him he jumped and escaped. They
noticed that he jumped very high, so they all ran at him, throwing their
spears and trying to kill him.

But Aponitolau caught all their weapons, and then while they were
unarmed he threw his own spear, and it flew about among them until it
had killed them all. Then he sent his head-ax, and it cut off all the
heads of the enemy; and he used magical power so that these heads went
to his home in Kadalayapan.

After that Aponitolau sat down by the gate of the town to rest, and the
little bird, flying over his head, called down:

"The sign that I gave you was good, Father, and you have killed all your
enemies."

"Yes," said the man, and as he started on the home-ward journey the
little bird always flew near him. When he reached home, he stuck the
heads around the town,  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](pft68.htm#fn_62)
and commanded the people to go out all over the world and invite
everyone and especially the pretty girls to come to a party in
celebration of his victory.

The people came from all parts of the world, and while they played on
the gongs and danced, Aponitolau called to Kanag and said:

"Come down, my son; do not stay always in the tops of the trees. Come
and see the pretty girls and see which one you want to marry. Get the
golden cup and give them basi to drink."

But Kanag answered, "I would rather stay in the tops of the trees and
give the signs when anyone goes to fight."

Then the father and mother pleaded with him to become a boy once more,
begging his forgiveness and promising never again to send him to guard
the rice. But he would not listen to them, and only flew away.

Finding that they could not win him that way, Aponitolau and
Aponibolinayen called the spirit servants, and commanded them to follow
Kanag wherever he went, and to find a girl whom he would want to marry.
So the spirit servants went after him, and wherever he went they
followed.

By and by they stopped near a well, and there the spirit servants used
magic so that all the pretty girls nearby felt very hot; and in the
early morning, they came to the well to bathe. One among them was so
beautiful that she looked like a flame of fire  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](pft68.htm#fn_63) among the betel-nut blossoms,
and when the servants saw her washing her hair they ran to Kanag and
begged him to come and see her. At first he would not listen to them,
but after a while he flew into the top of a betel-nut tree near by, and
when he caught sight of her, he flew into the tree above her head.

"But," said he to the servants, "what can I do if I become a man now,
for I have no clothes and no head-band?"

"Do not worry about that," said the spirit servants, "for we have
everything here for you."

So Kanag became a man and put on the clothes and head-band, and he went
to speak to the girl. He gave her betel-nut, and they chewed together,
and he said:

"My name is Kanag and I am the son of Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen."

Then the girl said: "My name is Dapilisan and I am the daughter of
Bangan and Dalonagan."

When Dapilisan went home Kanag followed her, and he told her parents his
name and how he had changed into a little bird. And when he had finished
he asked if he might marry their daughter. Bangan and his wife were
greatly pleased that Kanag wanted Dapilisan for his wife, but they were
afraid that his parents might object, so they sent a messenger to invite
Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen to come to visit them.

As soon as Kanag's parents heard that their son had become a man they
were very happy and started at once to go to him, carrying many fine
presents. Before arrangements for the wedding could be made, it was
necessary to decide on the price to be paid for the girl. A long
discussion took place. Bangan and Dalonagan finally said that the spirit
house must be filled nine times with different kinds of jars.

When this was done Dalonagan raised her eyebrows, and half of the jars
disappeared. Aponibolinayen used her magical power and the spirit house
was filled again, and then Dalonagan said to her:

"Now the web of the spider shall be put around the town and you must put
gold beads on it. If it does not break, Kanag may marry Dapilisan."

When Aponibolinayen had put the gold beads on the thread, Dalonagan hung
on it to see if it would hold. As it did not break, she declared that
the sign was good; and Kanag and Dapilisan were married.

Then the people played on the copper gongs, danced, and made merry for a
long time, and when they returned to their homes Kanag and his bride
went with Aponitolau and Aponibolinayen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of the Tikgi](pft10)
