[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft02)  [Next](pft04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# TINGUIAN

### INTRODUCTION

The dim light of stars filtered through the leafy canopy above us, and
the shadowy form of our guide once more appeared at my horse's head. It
was only for an instant, however, and then we were plunged again into
the inky darkness of a tropical jungle.

We had planned to reach the distant Tinguian village in the late
afternoon, but had failed to reckon with the deliberateness of native
carriers. It was only by urging our horses that we were able to ford the
broad Abra ere the last rays of the sun dropped behind the mountains.
And then, in this land of no twilights, night had settled quickly over
us.

We had made our way up the mountain-side, through the thick jungle, only
to find that the trail, long imperceptible to us, had escaped even the
keen eyes of our guide. For several hours we wandered about, lost in the
darkness.

On and on we went, through narrow paths, steep in places, and made rough
and dangerous by sharp rocks as well as by those long creepers of the
jungle whose thorny fingers are ever ready to seize horse or rider.
Occasionally we came out of the forest, only to cross rocky mountain
streams; or perhaps it was the same stream that we crossed many times.
Our horses, becoming weary and uncertain of foot, grew more and more
reluctant to plunge into the dark, swiftly flowing water. And our
patience was nearly exhausted when we at last caught sight of dim lights
in the valley below. Half an hour later we rode into Manabo.

I shall never forget that first picture. It was a weird spectacle.
Coming out of the darkness, we were almost convinced that we had entered
a new world. Against the blackness of the night, grass-roofed houses
stood outlined in the dim light of a bonfire; and squatting around that
fire, unclad save for gay blankets wrapped about their shoulders, were
brown-skinned men smoking long pipes, while women bedecked with bright
beads were spinning cotton. As they worked in the flickering light, they
stretched their distaffs at arm's length into the air like witches
waving their wands; and with that the elfland picture was complete.

In the stillness of the night a single voice could be heard reciting
some tale in a singsong tone, which was interrupted only when peals of
laughter burst forth from the listeners, or when a scrawny dog rose to
bark at an imaginary noise until the shouts of the men quieted him and
he returned to his bed in the warm ashes. Later we learned that these
were the regular social gatherings of the Tinguian, and every night
during the dry season one or more of these bonfires were to be seen in
the village.

After we had attained to the footing of welcome guests in these circles,
we found that a good story-teller was always present, and, while the men
smoked, the women spun, and the dogs slept, he entertained us with tales
of heroes who knew the magic of the betel-nut, or with stories of
spirits and their power over the lives of men.

The following are some of the tales heard first around the camp fire of
the distant mountain village.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Aponibolinayen and the Sun](pft04)
