[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft13)  [Next](pft15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MAGSAWI

*Tinguian*

A great many years ago some Tinguian left their little village in the
valley early one morning and made their way toward the mountains. They
were off on a deer hunt,  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](pft68.htm#fn_76)
and each carried his spear and head-ax, while one held in leash a string
of lean dogs eager for the chase.

Part way up the mountainside the dogs were freed, and the men separated,
going different ways in search of game. But ere long the sharp barking
of a dog called all in his direction, for they believed that he had a
deer at bay. As they approached the spot, however, the object did not
look like a deer, and as they drew nearer they were surprised to find
that it was a large jar.  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](pft68.htm#fn_77)

Filled with curiosity they pressed on, but the jar evaded them. Faster
and faster they ran, but the object, disappearing at times and then
coming into view again, always escaped them. On and on they went until
at last, tired out, they sat down on a wooded hill to rest and to
refresh themselves with betel-nut which they took from brass boxes
attached to their belts.

As they slowly cut the nuts and wrapped them in the lime and leaf ready
for chewing, they talked of nothing but the wonderful jar and the
mysterious power it possessed. Then just as they were about to put the
tempting morsels into their mouths they stopped, startled by a strange
soft voice which seemed to be near them. They turned and listened, but
could see no person.

"Find a pig which has no young," said the voice, "and take its blood,
for then you will be able to catch the jar which your dog pursued."

The men knew then that the mysterious jar belonged to a spirit, so they
hastened to do as the voice commanded, and when they had secured the
blood the dog again brought the jar to bay. The hunters tried to seize
it, but it entered a hole in the ground and disappeared. They followed,
and found themselves in a dark cave  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](pft68.htm#fn_78) where it was easy to catch the
jar, for there was no outlet save by the hole through which they had
entered.

Though that was many years ago, the jar still lives, and its name is
Magsawi. Even now it talks; but some years ago a crack appeared in its
side, and since then its language has not been understood by the
Tinguian.  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](pft68.htm#fn_79)

Sometimes Magsawi goes on long journeys alone when he visits his wife, a
jar in Ilocos Norte, or his child, a small jar in San Quintin; but he
always returns to Domayco on the hillside near the cave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tree with the Agate Beads](pft15)
