[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft26)  [Next](pft28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CREATION

*Igorot*

In the beginning there were no people on the earth. Lumawig,  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](pft68.htm#fn_92) the Great Spirit, came down from
the sky and cut many reeds.  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](pft68.htm#fn_93) He divided these into pairs
which he placed in different parts of the world, and then he said to
them, "You must speak." Immediately the reeds became people, and in each
place was a man and a woman who could talk, but the language of each
couple differed from that of the others.

Then Lumawig commanded each man and woman to marry, which they did. By
and by there were many children, all speaking the same language as their
parents. These, in turn, married and had many children. In this way
there came to be many people on the earth.

Now Lumawig saw that there were several things which the people on the
earth needed to use, so he set to work to supply them. He created salt,
and told the inhabitants of one place to boil it down and sell it to
their neighbors. But these people could not understand the directions of
the Great Spirit, and the next time he visited them, they had not
touched the salt.

Then he took it away from them and gave it to the people of a place
called Mayinit.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](pft68.htm#fn_94) These did
as he directed, and because of this he told them that they should always
be owners of the salt, and that the other peoples must buy of them.

Then Lumawig went to the people of Bontoc and told them to get clay and
make pots. They got the clay, but they did not understand the moulding,
and the jars were not well shaped. Because of their failure, Lumawig
told them that they would always have to buy their jars, and he removed
the pottery to Samoki.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](pft68.htm#fn_95)
When he told the people there what to do, they did just as he said, and
their jars were well shaped and beautiful. Then the Great Spirit saw
that they were fit owners of the pottery, and he told them that they
should always make many jars to sell.

In this way Lumawig taught the people and brought to them all the things
which they now have.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Flood Story](pft28)
