[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft32)  [Next](pft34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TILIN, THE RICE BIRD  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](pft68.htm#fn_111)

*Igorot*

One day when a mother was pounding out rice to cook for supper, her
little girl ran up to her and cried:

"Oh, Mother, give me some of the raw rice to eat."

"No," said the mother, "it is not good for you to eat until it is
cooked. Wait for supper."

But the little girl persisted until the mother, out of patience, cried:

"Be still. It is not good for you to talk so much!"

When she had finished pounding the rice, the woman poured it into a rice
winnower and tossed it many times into the air. As soon as the chaff was
removed she emptied the rice into her basket and covered it with the
winnower. Then she took the jar upon her head, and started for the
spring to get water.

Now the little girl was fond of going to the spring with her mother, for
she loved to play in the cool water while her mother filled the jars.
But this time she did not go, and as soon as the woman was out of sight,
she ran to the basket of rice. She reached down to take a handful of the
grain. The cover slipped so that she fell, and was covered up in the
basket.

When the mother returned to the house, she heard a bird crying, "King,
king, nik! nik! nik!" She listened carefully, and as the sound seemed to
come from the basket, she removed the cover. To her surprise, out hopped
a little brown rice bird, and as it flew away it kept calling back:

"Goodbye, Mother; goodbye, Mother. You would not give me any rice to
eat."

# WILD TRIBES OF MINDANAO

### INTRODUCTION

About one thousand miles to the south and east of the Tinguian and
Igorot is the Island of Mindanao, which is inhabited by mortals and
immortals entirely unknown to the mountain tribes of the north.

In the northern part of this great island are the Bukidnon—timid, wild
people who, attacked from time to time by the Moro on one side and the
Manobo on the other, have drawn back into scattered homes in the hills.
Here they live in poor dwellings raised high from the ground. Some even
build in trees, their sheltered and secret positions making them less
subject to attack.

They are not a warlike people, and their greatest concern is for the
good will of the numerous spirits who watch over their every act. At
times they gather a little hemp or coffee from the hillside or along the
stream bank and carry it to the coast to exchange for the bright cloth
which they make into gay clothes. But they do not love work, and the
most of their time is spent in resting or attending ceremonies made to
gain the good will of the immortals.

In this country the belief prevails that there are spirits in the
stones, in the baliti trees, in the vines, the cliffs, and even the
caves. And never does a man start on a journey or make a clearing on the
mountain side until he has first besought these spirits not to be angry
with him but to favor him with prosperity and bring good crops.

The greatest of the spirits is Diwata Magbabaya, who is so awe-inspiring
that his name is never mentioned above a whisper. He lives in the sky in
a house made of coins, and there are no windows in this building, for if
men should look upon him they would melt into water.

About the Gulf of Davao, in the southeastern part of this island, are a
number of small tribes, each differing somewhat from the other in
customs and beliefs. Of these the most influential are the Bagobo who
dwell on the lower slopes of Mt. Apo, the highest peak in the
Philippines. They are very industrious, forging excellent knives,
casting fine articles in brass, and weaving beautiful hemp cloth which
they make into elaborate garments decorated with beads and shell disks.

The men are great warriors, each gaining distinction among his people
according to the number of human lives he has taken. A number of them
dress in dark red suits and peculiar headbands which they are permitted
to wear only after they have taken six lives. Notwithstanding their
bravery in battle, these people fear and have great respect for the
numerous spirits who rule over their lives.

From a great fissure in the side of Mt. Apo, clouds of sulphur fumes are
constantly rising, and it is believed to be in this fissure that
Mandarangan and his wife Darago live—evil beings who look after the
fortunes of the warriors. These spirits are feared and great care is
taken to appease them with offerings, while once a year a human
sacrifice is made to them.

The following tales show something of the beliefs of these and the
neighboring tribes in Mindanao.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Moon and the Stars Came to Be](pft34)
