[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pft37)  [Next](pft39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1426464215/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by Mabel Cook Cole, \[1916\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BULANAWAN AND AGUIO

*Bukidnon* (*Mindanao*)

Langgona and his wife had twin boys named Bulanawan and Aguio. One day,
when they were about two years old, the mother took Bulanawan to the
field with her when she went to pick cotton. She spread the fiber she
had gathered the day before on the ground to dry near the child, and
while she was getting more a great wind suddenly arose which wound the
cotton around the baby and carried him away. Far away to a distant land
the wind took Bulanawan, and in that place he grew up. When he was a
man, he became a great warrior.  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](pft68.htm#fn_120)

One day while Bulanawan and his wife were walking along the seashore,
they sat down to rest on a large, flat rock, and Bulanawan fell asleep.
Now Aguio, the twin brother of Bulanawan, had become a great warrior
also, and he went on a journey to this distant land, not knowing that
his brother was there. It happened that he was walking along the
seashore in his war-dress  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](pft68.htm#fn_121) on this same day, and when he
saw the woman sitting on the large, flat rock, he thought her very
beautiful, and he determined to steal her.

As he drew near he asked her to give him some of her husband's betel-nut
to chew, and when she refused he went forward to fight her husband, not
knowing they were brothers. As soon as his wife awakened him Bulanawan
sprang up, seized her, put her in the cuff of his sleeve,  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](pft68.htm#fn_122) and came forth ready to
fight. Aguio grew very angry at this, and they fought until their
weapons were broken, and the earth trembled.

Now the two brothers of the rivals felt the earth tremble although they
were far away, and each feared that his brother was in trouble. One was
in the mountains and he started at once for the sea; the other was in a
far land, but he set out in a boat for the scene of the trouble.

They arrived at the same time at the place of battle, and they
immediately joined in it. Then the trembling of the earth increased so
much that Langgona, the father of Aguio and Bulanawan, sought out the
spot and tried to make peace. But he only seemed to make matters worse,
and they all began fighting him. So great did the disturbance become
that the earth was in danger of falling to pieces.

Then it was that the father of Langgona came and settled the trouble,
and when all were at peace again they discovered that Aguio and
Bulanawan were brothers and the grandsons of the peacemaker.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin](pft39)
