[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0510)  [Next](sbe0512) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

0\. On the formation of the luminaries.

1\. Aûharmazd produced illumination between the sky and the earth, the
constellation stars and those also not of the constellations <span
id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72), then the moon, and afterwards the sun, as
I *shall* relate.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

2\. First he produced, the *celestial* sphere, and the constellation
stars are assigned to it by him; especially these twelve whose names
*are* Varak (the Lamb), Tôrâ (the Bull), Dô-patkar (the Two-figures or
Gemini), Kala*k*ang (the Crab), *S*êr (the Lion), Khû*s*ak (Virgo),
Tarâ*z*ûk (the Balance), Gazdûm (the Scorpion), Nîmâsp (the Centaur or
Sagittarius), Vahîk <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) (Capricornus),
Dûl (the Waterpot), and Mâhîk (the Fish); 3. which, from their original
creation, *were divided* into the twenty-eight subdivisions of the
astronomers <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74), of which the names are
Padêvar, Pêsh-Parvîz, Parviz, Paha, Avêsar, Be*s*n, Rakhva*d*, Taraha,
Avra, Nahn, Miyân, Avdem, Mâshâha, Spûr, Husru, Srob, Nur, Gêl,
Garaf*s*a, Vara*n*t, G*a*u, Goî, Muru, Bunda, Kahtsar, Vaht, Miyân,
Kaht <span id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_75). 4. And all his original
creations,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

residing in the world, are committed to them <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76); so that when the destroyer arrives they
overcome the adversary and their own persecution, *and* the creatures
are saved from those adversities.

5\. *As* a specimen of a warlike army, which is destined for battle,
they have ordained every single constellation of those 6480 thousand
small stars as assistance; and among those constellations four
chieftains, appointed on the four sides, are leaders. 6. On the
recommendation of those chieftains the many unnumbered stars are
specially assigned to the various quarters and various places, as the
united strength *and* appointed power of those constellations. 7. As it
is said that Tî*s*tar is the chieftain of the east, Satavês the
chieftain of the west, Vanand the chieftain of the south, *and*
Haptôk-rîng the chieftain of the north <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77). 8. The great one which they

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

call a Gâh (period of the day), which they say is the great *one* of the
middle of the sky, till *just* before the destroyer came was the midday
(or south) *one* of the five, that is, the Rapîtvîn <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78).

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

9\. Aûharmazd performed the spiritual Ya*z*i*s*n *ceremony* with the
archangels (ameshêspendân) in the Rapîtvîn Gâh, and in the Ya*z*i*s*n he
supplied every means necessary for overcoming the adversary <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79). 10. He deliberated with the consciousness
(bôd) *and* guardian spirits (fravâhar) of men <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80), and the omniscient wisdom, brought
forward among men, spoke thus: 'Which seems to you the more
advantageous, when <span id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_81) I shall present
you to the world? *that* you shall contend in a bodily form with the
fiend (drû*g*), and the fiend shall perish, and in the end I *shall*
have you prepared again perfect and immortal, and in the end give you
back to the world, *and* you *will* be wholly immortal, undecaying, and
undisturbed; or *that* it be always necessary to provide you protection
from the destroyer?'

11\. Thereupon, the guardian spirits of men became of the same opinion
with the omniscient wisdom about going to the world, on account of the
evil *that* comes upon them, in the world, from the fiend (drû*g*)
Aharman, and *their* becoming, at last, again unpersecuted by the
adversary, perfect, and immortal, in the future existence, for ever and
everlasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[10:3](sbe0511.htm#fr_72) The word akhtar is the
usual term in Pahlavi for a constellation of the zodiac; but the term
apâkhtar, 'away from the akhtar,' means not only 'the north,' or away
from the zodiac, but also 'a, <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> planet,'
which is in the zodiac, but apart from the constellations. The meaning
of akhtar, most suitable to the context here, appears to be the general
term 'constellation.'

<span id="fn_73"></span>[11:1](sbe0511.htm#fr_73) Written Nahâ*z*îk
here, both in K20 and M6, which may be compared with Pers. nahâz, 'the
leading goat of a flock;' but the usual word for 'Capricornus' is Vahîk,
as in Chap. V, 6. None of the other names of the signs of the zodiac are
written here in Pâzand, but it may be noted that if the ah in Vahîk were
written in Pâzand (that is, in Avesta characters), the word would become
the same as Nahâ*z*îk in Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[11:2](sbe0511.htm#fr_74) Literally, 'fragments
of the calculators,' khur*d*ak-i hâmârikân. These subdivisions are the
spaces traversed daily by the moon among the stars, generally called
'lunar mansions.'

<span id="fn_75"></span>[11:3](sbe0511.htm#fr_75) All these names are
written in Pâzand, which accounts for their eccentric orthography, in
which both K20 and M6 agree very closely. The subdivision Parviz is
evidently the Pers. parvên, which includes the Pleiades, and corresponds
therefore to the Sanskrit Nakshatra K*ri*ttikâ. This correspondence
leads to the identification of the first subdivision, Padêvar, with the
Nakshatra A*s*vinî. The Pâzand names are so corrupt that no reliance can
be placed upon them, and the first step towards recovering the true
<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> Pahlavi names would be to transliterate
the Pâzand back into Pahlavi characters. The ninth subdivision is
mentioned in Chap. VII, 1 by the name Avrak.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[12:1](sbe0511.htm#fr_76) That is, to the
zodiacal constellations, which are supposed to have special charge of
the welfare of creation.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[12:2](sbe0511.htm#fr_77) Of these four
constellations or stars, which are said to act as leaders, there is no
doubt that Haptôk-rîng, the chieftain of the north, is Ursa Major; and
it is usually considered that Tî*s*tar, the chieftain of the east, is
Sirius; but the other two chieftains are not so well identified, and
there may be some doubt as to the proper stations of the eastern and
western chieftains. It is evident, however, that the most westerly
stars, visible at any one time of the year, are those which set in the
dusk of the evening; and east of these, all the stars are visible during
the night as far as those which rise at daybreak, which are the most
easterly stars visible at that time of the year. Tî*s*tar or Sirius can,
therefore, be considered the chieftain of the eastern stars only when it
rises before daybreak, which it does at the latter end of summer; and
Haptôk-rîng or Ursa Major is due north at midnight (on the meridian
below the pole) at about the same time of the year. These stars,
therefore, <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> fulfil the conditions
necessary for being chieftains of the east and north at the end of
summer, and we must look for stars capable of being chieftains of the
south and west at the same season. Now, when Ursa Major is near the
meridian below the pole, Fomalhaut is the most conspicuous star near the
meridian in the far south, and is probably to be identified with Vanand
the chieftain of the south. And when Sirius rises some time before
daybreak, Antares (in Scorpio) sets some time after dusk in the evening,
and may well be identified with Satavês the chieftain of the west
assuming that there has been a precession of the equinoxes equivalent to
two hours of time, since the idea of these chieftains (which may perhaps
be traced to Avesta times) was first formed, it may be calculated that
the time of year when these leading stars then best fulfilled that idea
was about a month before the autumnal equinox, when Ursa Major would be
due north three-quarters of an hour after midnight, and Fomalhaut due
south three-quarters of an hour before midnight, Sirius would rise three
hours before the sun, and Antares would set three hours after the sun.
In the Avesta these leading stars are named Ti*s*trya, Satavaêsa,
Vana*n*t, and Haptôi-ri*n*ga (see Tî*s*tar Yt. 0, 8, 9, 12, 32, &c.,
Rashnu Yt. 26-28, Sîrôz. 13).

<span id="fn_78"></span>[13:1](sbe0511.htm#fr_78) This translation,
though very nearly literal, must be accepted with caution. If the word
mas be not a name it can hardly mean anything but 'great;' and that it
refers to a constellation appears from Chap. V, 1. The word khômsâk is
an irregular form of the Huz. khôm*s*yâ, 'five,' and may refer either
too the five chieftains (including 'the great one') or to the five Gâhs
or periods of the day, of which Rapîtvîn is the midday one (see Chap.
XXV, 9). The object of the text seems to be to connect the Rapîtvîn Gâh
with some great mid-sky and midday constellation or star, possibly
Regulus, which, about B. C. 960, must have been more in the daylight
than any other important star during the seven months of summer, the
only time that the Rapîtvîn Gâh can be celebrated (see Chap. XXV, 7-14).
Justi has, 'They call that the great one of the place, which is great in
the middle of the sky; they say that before the enemy came it was always
midday, that is, Rapîtvîn.' <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> Windischmann
has nearly the same, as both follow the Pâzand MSS. in reading hômî*s*ak
(as a variant of hamî*s*ak), 'always,' instead of khômsâk.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[14:1](sbe0511.htm#fr_79) Or 'adversity.'

<span id="fn_80"></span>[14:2](sbe0511.htm#fr_80) These were among the
fravashis already created (see Chap. I, 8).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[14:3](sbe0511.htm#fr_81) Reading amat, 'when,'
instead of mûn, 'which' (see note to Chap. I, 7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sbe0512)
