[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0505)  [Next](sbe0507.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 5. THE BAHMAN YA*S*T.

The Bahman Ya*s*t, usually called the 'Zand of the Vohûman Ya*s*t,'
professes to be a prophetical work, in which Aûharmazd gives Zaratû*s*t
an account of what was to happen to the Iranian nation and religion in
the future.

It begins with an introduction (Chap. I) which states that, according to
the Stû*d*gar Nask, Zaratû*s*t having asked Aûharmazd for immortality,
was supplied temporarily with omniscient wisdom, and had a vision of a
tree with four branches of different metals which were explained to him
as symbolical of four different periods, the times of Vi*s*tâsp, of
Ar*d*akhshîr the Kayânian, of Khûsrô Nôshirvân, and of certain demons or
idolators who were to appear at the end of a thousand years. It states,
further, that the commentaries of the Vohûman, Horvada*d*, and Â*s*tâ*d*
Ya*s*ts mentioned the heretic Mazdak, and that Khûsrô Nôshirvân summoned
a council of high-priests and commentators, and ordered them not to
conceal these Ya*s*ts, but to teach the commentary only among their own
relations.

The text then proceeds (Chap. II) to give the details of the commentary
on the Vohûman Ya*s*t as follows:—Zaratû*s*t, having again asked
Aûharmazd for immortality, is refused, but is again supplied with
omniscient wisdom for a week, during which time he sees, among other
things, a tree with seven branches of different metals, which are again
explained to him as denoting the seven ages of the religion, its six
ages of triumph in the reigns of Vi*s*tâsp, of Ar*d*akhshîr the
Kayânian, of one of the A*s*kânian kings, of Ar*d*akhshîr Pâpakân and
Shahpûr I and II, of Vâhrâm Gôr, and of Khûsrô Nôshirvân, and its
seventh age of adversity when

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Iran is to be
invaded from the east by hordes of demons or idolators with dishevelled
hair, who are to work much mischief, so as to destroy the greater part
of the nation and mislead the rest, until the religion becomes nearly
extinct. The details of this mischief, written in a tone of lamentation,
constitute the greater part of the text, which also notices that the
sovereignty will pass from the Arabs, Romans, and these leathern-belted
demons (Tûrks) to other Tûrks and non-Tûranians who are worse than
themselves.

Distressed at this narrative Zaratû*s*t asks Aûharmazd (Chap. III, 1)
how the religion is to be restored, and these demons destroyed? He is
informed that, in the course of time, other fiends with red banners, red
weapons, and red hats, who seem to be Christians, will appear in the
northwest, and will advance either to the Arvand (Tigris) or the
Euphrates, driving back the former demons who will assemble all their
allies to a great conflict, one of the three great battles of the
religions of the world, in which the wicked will be so utterly destroyed
that none will be left to pass into the next millennium.

Zaratû*s*t enquires (III, 12) how so many can perish, and is informed
that, after the demons with dishevelled hair appear, Hûshê*d*ar, the
first of the last three apostles, is born near Lake Frazdân; and when he
begins to confer with Aûharmazd a Kayân prince is born in the direction
of *K*înistân (Samarkand), who is called Vâhrâm the Var*g*âvand, and
when he is thirty years old he collects a large army of Hindu (Bactrian)
and *K*înî (Samarkandian) troops, and advances into Iran, where he is
reinforced by a numerous army of Iranian warriors, and defeats the demon
races with immense slaughter, in the great conflict already mentioned,
so that there will be only one man left to a thousand women.

The writer then proceeds to describe the supernatural agencies employed
to produce this result: how the evil spirit (III, 24) comes to the
assistance of the demon-worshippers; how Aûharmazd sends his angels to
Kangde*z*, to summon Pêshyôtanû, the immortal son of Vi*s*tâsp, with his
disciples, to re-establish the sacred fires and restore the

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

religious ceremonies; and how the angels assist them against the evil
spirits, so that Vâhrâm the Var*g*âvand is enabled to destroy the
fiendish races, as already detailed, and Pêshyôtanû becomes supreme
high-priest of the Iranian world.

Finally, the writer. gives some details regarding the missions of the
last three apostles, returning for that purpose (III, 44) to the birth
of Hûshê*d*ar, the first of the three, whose millennium witnesses both
the invasion and the destruction of the fiendish races. Hûshê*d*ar
proves his apostolic authority, to the satisfaction of Var*g*âvand and
the people, by making the sun stand still for ten days and nights. His
mission is to 'bring the creatures back to their proper state;' and it
is not till near the end of his millennium that Pêshyôtanû appears, as
before described. As this millennium begins with the invasion of the
fiendish races and the fall of the Sasanian dynasty, it must have
terminated in the seventeenth century, unless it was to last more than a
thousand years. A very brief account is then given of the millennium of
Hûshê*d*ar-mâh, the second of the three apostles, whose mission is to
make 'the creatures more progressive' and to destroy 'the fiend of
serpent origin' (A*z*-i Dahâk). During his millennium (which appears to
be now in progress) mankind become so skilled in medicine that they do
not readily die; but owing to their toleration of heretics the evil
spirit once more attains power, and releases A*z*-i Dahâk, from his
confinement in Mount Dimâvand, to work evil in the world, till Aûharmazd
sends his angels to rouse Keresâsp the Sâmân, who rises from his trance
and kills A*z*-i Dahâk with his club at the end of the millennium.
Afterwards, Sôshyans, the last apostle, appears to 'make the creatures
again pure;' when the resurrection takes place and the future existence
commences.

Whether this text, as now extant, be the original commentary or zand of
the Vohûman Ya*s*t admits of doubt, since it appears to quote that
commentary (Chap. II, 1) as an authority for its statements; it is,
therefore, most probably, only an epitome of the original commentary.
Such an epitome would naturally quote many passages verbatim

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

from the original work, which ought to bear traces of translation from
an Avesta text, as its title zand implies a Pahlavi translation from the
Avesta (see [p. x](sbe0502.htm#page_x).md). There are, in fact, many such
traces in this epitome, as indicated by the numerous sentences beginning
with a verb, the mode of addressing Aûharmazd, the quotation of
different opinions from various commentators, and other minor
peculiarities. Some of these might be the result of careful imitation of
other commentaries, but it seems more likely that they are occasioned by
literal translation from an original Avesta text. In speculating,
therefore, upon the contents of the Bahman Ya*s*t it is necessary to
remember that we are most probably dealing with a composite work, whose
statements may be referred to the three different ages of the Avesta
original, the Pahlavi translation and commentary, and the Pahlavi
epitome of the latter; and that this last form of the text is the only
old version now extant.

With regard to the age of the work we have the external evidence that a
copy of it exists in a manuscript (K20) written about five hundred years
ago, and that this copy is evidently descended from older manuscripts as
it contains several clerical blunders incompatible with any idea of its
being the original, manuscript, as witness the omissions noted in Chaps.
II, 10, 13, 14, 22, 27, 45, III, 30, 32, the misplacement of II, 18, and
many miswritings of single words. Owing to the threefold character of
the work, already noticed, the internal evidence of its age can only
apply to its last recension in the form of an epitome, as an oriental
editor (to say nothing of others) generally considers himself at liberty
to alter and add to his text, if he does not understand it, or thinks he
can improve it. That this liberty has been freely exercised, with regard
to these professed prophecies, is shown by the identification of the
four prophetical ages of the Stû*d*gar Nask in the first chapter of the
Bahman Ya*s*t being different from that given in the Dînkar*d*. The
Dînkar*d* quotes the Stû*d*gar Nask (that is, its Pahlavi version) as
identifying the iron age with some period of religious indifference
subsequent to the time of Âtarô-pâ*d* son of Mâraspend, the supreme
high-priest and

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

prime minister of Shahpûr II (A.D. 309-379); but the Bahman Ya*s*t
(Chap. I, 5) quotes the Nask as identifying the same age with the reign
of an idolatrous race subsequent to the time of Khûsrô Nôshirvân (A.D.
531-579). This example is sufficient to show that the compiler of the
extant epitome of the Bahman Ya*s*t commentary largely availed himself
of his editorial license, and it indicates the difficulty of
distinguishing his statements from those of the former editors. At the
same time it proves that the epitome could not have been compiled till
after Iran had been overrun by a foreign race subsequent to the reign of
Khûsrô Nôshirvân. It is remarkable that the compiler does not mention
any later Sasanian king, that he does not allude to Muhammadanism, and
speaks of the foreign invaders as Turanians and Christians, only
mentioning Arabs incidentally in later times; at the same time the
foreign invasion (which lasts a thousand years) is of too permanent a
character to allow of its having reference merely to the troublous times
of Nôshirvân's successor.

Perhaps the most reasonable hypotheses that can be founded upon these
facts are, first, that the original zand or commentary of the Bahman
Ya*s*t was written and translated from the Avesta in the latter part of
the reign of Khûsrô Nôshirvân, or very shortly afterwards, which would
account for no later king being mentioned by name; and, secondly, that
the epitome now extant was compiled by some writer who lived so long
after the Arab invasion that the details of their inroad had, become
obscured by the more recent successes of Turanian rulers, such as the
Ghaznavîs and Sal*g*ûqs of the eleventh and twelfth centuries. It is
hardly possible that the epitomist could have lived as late as the time
of *G*ingîz Khân, the great Mongol conqueror (A.D. 1206-1227), as that
would bring him within 150 years of the date of the extant manuscript of
his work, which has no appearance of being an immediate copy of the
original; but the rule of the Sal*g*ûqs would certainly have afforded
him sufficient materials for his long description of the iron age. The
Avesta of the Bahman Ya*s*t was probably compiled from older sources
(like the rest of the Avesta) during

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

the reigns of the earlier Sasanian monarchs but it was, no doubt, very
different in its details from the epitome of its commentary which still
exists.

These hypotheses, regarding the threefold origin of the present form of
this Ya*s*t, derive some confirmation from the inconsistencies in its
chronological details; especially those relating to the periods of the
invaders’ reign and of Hûshê*d*ar's birth. The Zoroastrians have for
ages been expecting the appearance of Hûshê*d*ar, the first of their
last three apostles, but have always had to postpone their expectations
from time to time, like the Jews and other interpreters of prophecy; so
that they are still looking forward into the future for his advent,
although his millennium has long since expired according to the
chronology adopted in the Bahman Ya*s*t. This chronology, of course,
represents the expectations of Zoroastrians in past times, and seems to
express three different opinions. First, we have the statement that the
last great battle of the demon-races is to take place at the end of
Zaratû*s*t's millennium (see Chap. III, 9), when the wicked will be so
destroyed (compare III, 22, 23) that none will pass into the next
millennium (III, 11), which is that of Hûshê*d*ar (III, 43). And that
the reign of evil is to precede the end of Zaratû*s*t's millennium is
evidently assumed also in Chap. II, 41, 63. Such opinions may reasonably
be traced to the original Avesta writer, who must have expected only a
short reign of evil to arise and fall near the latter end of
Zaratû*s*t's millennium, which was still far in the future, and to be
followed by the appearance of Hûshê*d*ar to restore the 'good' religion.
Secondly, we are told (I, 5, II, 22, 24, 31) that the invasion of the
demon-races, with its attendant evils, is to take place when
Zaratû*s*t's millennium is ended; on their appearance Hûshê*d*ar is born
(III, 13), and when he is thirty years old (compare III, 14 with III,
44) Vâhrâm the Var*g*âvand is also born, who at the age of thirty (III,
17) advances into Iran with an innumerable army to destroy the invaders.
Such statements may be attributed to the original Pahlavi translator and
commentator who, writing about A.D. 570-590, would have before his eyes
the disastrous

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

reign of Aûharmazd IV, the son and successor of Khûsrô Nôshirvân,
together with the prowess of the famous Persian general Bahrâm *K*ôpîn,
which drove out all invaders. This writer evidently expected the reign
of the demon-races to last less than a century, but still at some period
in the near future; merely illustrating his theme by details of the
disasters and wars of his own time. Thirdly, we find it stated (III, 44)
that Hûshê*d*ar will be born in 1600, which seems to mean the sixteen
hundredth year of Zaratû*s*t's millennium, or six hundredth of his own
(say A.D. 1193-1235),—also that the reign of the demon-races is to last
a thousand years (III, 34), and that Pêshyôtanû does not come to restore
the religion till near the end of the millennium (III, 51); it also
appears (III, 49) that Var*g*âvand occupies a prominent position when
Hûshê*d*ar comes from his conference with Aûharmazd at thirty years of
age (III, 44, 45). Such details were probably inserted by the compiler
of the epitome, who had to admit the facts that the reign of the
demon-races had already lasted for centuries, and that Hûshê*d*ar had
not yet appeared. To get over these difficulties he probably adopted the
opinions current in his day, and postponed the advent of Hûshê*d*ar till
the beginning of the next century in his millennium, and put off the
destruction of the wicked, as a more hopeless matter, till near the end
of the millennium. Both these periods are now long since past, and the
present Zoroastrians have still to postpone the fulfilment of the
prophecies connected with their last three apostles, or else to
understand them in a less literal fashion than heretofore.

For the Pahlavi text, of the Bahman Ya*s*t the translator has to rely
upon the single old manuscript K20, already described ([p.
xxvii](sbe0504.htm#page_xxvii).md), in which it occupies the 131 folios
immediately following the Bundahi*s*; these folios are much worn, and a
few words have been torn off some of them, but nearly all of these
missing-words can be restored by aid of the Pâzand version. The Pahlavi
text is also found in the modern copies of K20 at Paris and Kopenhagen,
but these copies (P7 and K21) have no authority independent of K20. In
India this text has long been exceedingly rare,

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

and whether any copy of it exists, independent of K20, is doubtful.

The Pâzand version is more common in Parsi libraries, but contains a
very imperfect text. Of this version two modern copies, have been
consulted; one of these occupies fols. 38-62 of a small manuscript, No.
22 of the Haug collection in the State Library at Munich; the other is a
copy of a manuscript in the library of the high-priest of the Parsis in
Bombay. Both these MSS. are evidently descended from the same original,
which must have been a very imperfect transliteration of a Pahlavi text
closely resembling that of K20, but yet independent of that MS., as a
few words omitted in K20 are supplied by these Pâzand MSS. (see B.Yt.
II, 13, 14, 22, &c.) To a certain extent, therefore, these Pâzand MSS.
are of some assistance in settling the text of a few sentences, but the
greater part of their contents is so imperfect as to be utterly
unintelligible; they not only omit Chaps. I, 1-8, II, 17, 30-32, 40,
III, 9, 12, 17-44, 58-63 entirely, but also words and phrases from
nearly every other section of the text. Adhering scrupulously to the
Pahlavi original for a few consecutive words, and then widely departing
from it by misreading or omitting all difficult words and passages, this
Pâzand version is a complete contrast to the Pâzand writings of
Nêryôsang, being of little use to the reader beyond showing the
extremely low ebb to which Pahlavi learning must have fallen, among the
Parsis, before such unintelligible writings could have been accepted as
Pâzand texts.

There is also a Persian version of the Bahman Ya*s*t, a copy of which,
written A.D. 1676, is contained in a large Rivâyat MS. No. 29, belonging
to the University Library at Bombay. According to the colophon of this
Persian version it was composed in A.D. 1496 by Rustam Isfendiyâr of
Yazd, from an Avesta (Pâzand) MS. belonging to his brother Jamshêd. This
Persian version contains less than three per cent of Arabic words, and
is more of a paraphrase than a translation, but it adheres very closely
to the meaning of the Pahlavi text from Chaps. I, 1 to III, 9, where a
dislocation occurs, evidently owing either to the displacement

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

of two folios in an older MS., or to the second page of a folio being
copied before the first, so that §§ 10-14 follow §§ 15-22. From the
middle of § 22 the folios of the older MS. seem to have been lost as far
as the end of Hûshê*d*ar's millennium (§ 51), to which point the Persian
version leaps, but the remainder of this paraphrase is much more diffuse
than the Bahman Ya*s*t, and is evidently derived from some other Pahlavi
work.

This conclusion of the Persian version describes how adversity departs
from the world, and ten people are satisfied with the milk of one cow,
when Hûshê*d*ar-mâh appears and his millennium commences. On his coming
from his conference with Aûharmazd the sun stands still for twenty days
and nights, in consequence of which two-thirds of the people in the
world believe in the religion. Meat is no longer eaten, but only milk
and butter, and a hundred people are satisfied with the milk of one cow.
Hûshê*d*ar-mâh destroys the terrible serpent, which accompanies
apostasy, by means of the divine glory and Avesta formulas; he clears
all noxious creatures out of the world, and wild animals live harmlessly
among mankind; the fiends of apostasy and deceit depart from the world,
which becomes populous and delightful, and mankind abstain from
falsehood. After the five-hundredth year of Hûshê*d*ar-mâh has passed
away, Sôshyans (Sâsân) appears, and destroys the fiend who torments
fire. The sun stands still for thirty days and nights, when all mankind
believe in the religion, and the year becomes exactly 360 days. Dahâk
escapes from his confinement, and reigns for a day and a half in the
world with much tyranny; when Sôshyans, rouses Sâm Narîmân, who accepts
the religion and becomes immortal. Sâm calls upon Dahâk to accept the
religion, but the latter proposes that they should together seize upon
heaven for themselves, whereupon Sâm kills him. All evil having departed
from the world mankind become like the archangels, and the resurrection
takes place, which is described with many of the same details as are
mentioned in Bund. XXX.

Accompanying this Persian version in B29 is another

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

fragment from the same source, which treats of the same subjects as the
third chapter of the Bahman Ya*s*t, but is differently arranged. It
confines itself to the millennium of Hûshê*d*ar, and may possibly be
some modification of the contents of the folios missing from the version
described above. After some introductory matter this fragment contains a
paraphrase (less accurate than the preceding) of Chap. III, 23-49 of the
Bahman Ya*s*t; it then proceeds to state that Hûshê*d*ar destroys the
wolf race, so that wolves, thieves, highway robbers, and criminals cease
to exist. When Hûshê*d*ar's three-hundredth year has passed away the
winter of Malkôs arrives and destroys all animals and vegetation, and
only one man survives out of ten thousand; after which the world is
repeopled from the enclosure made by Yim. Then comes the gathering of
the nations to the great battle on the Euphrates, where the slaughter is
so great that the water of the river becomes red, and the survivors wade
in blood up to their horses’ girths. Afterwards, the Kayân king,
Var*g*âvand, advances from the frontiers of India and takes possession
of Iran to the great delight of the inhabitants, but only after a great
battle; and then Pêshyôtanû is summoned from Kangde*z* to restore the
religious ceremonies.

A German translation of some passages in the Bahman Ya*s*t, with a brief
summary of the greater part of the remainder, was published in 1860 in
Spiegel's Traditionelle Literatur der Parsen, pp. 128-135.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Shâyast lâ-Shâyast](sbe0507.md)
