[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0567)  [Next](sbe0569) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII.

1\. Sin which *affects* accusers <span id="fr_1513"></span>[3](#fn_1502)
is to be atoned for (vi*g*âri*s*n) among the accusers, and that
*relating* to

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

the soul is to be atoned for among the high-priests (ra*d*ân), and when
they do whatever the high-priests of the religion command the sin will
depart, and the good works which they may thenceforth do will attain
completion (avaspôrik). 2. The sin of him who is worthy of death
(marg-ar*g*ân), is to be confessed (gar*z*i*s*nŏ) unto the high-priests,
*and he* is to deliver up *his* body <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1](#fn_1503); except *to* the high-priests he is
not to deliver up *his* body.

3\. On account of the dexterity (farhâng) of horsemen it is not *their*
business to hunt (nakh*k*îr kar*d*anŏ); and it is not allowable for any
one else to hunt for game, except *for him* whose wealth is less *than*
three hundred stîrs <span id="fr_1515"></span>[2](#fn_1504).

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

4\. The ceremonial worship (ya*z*i*s*n) of those worthy of death, which
they do not perform by way of renunciation *of sin* <span
id="fr_1516"></span>[1](#fn_1505), is the ceremonial *which* is demon
worship; and when the *officiating* priest (aêrpat) does not know *it*
the merit (kirfak) of the ceremonial goes to the store (gan*g*) of the
angels, and they give the enjoyment which *arises* from that merit in
the spiritual *existence* to the soul of that person who *has* at once
(aêvâ*k*) become righteous in mind.

5 . When the mortal sinner (marg-ar*g*ânŏ) *has* delivered his body and
wealth at once to the high-priests, and engages mentally in renunciation
as to the sin which *has* occurred, and the high-priests give him
*their* decision (dastôbarîh) as to duty and good works, the duty and
good works which *were* before performed by him come back *to him*; and
when they inflict punishment for three nights <span
id="fr_1517"></span>[2](#fn_1506), he does not enter hell. 6. And if the
high-priest orders the cutting off of *his* head *he* is righteous on
the spot <span id="fr_1518"></span>[3](#fn_1507), and the three
*nights’* (satûîh) *ceremony* is to be celebrated for *him*, and the
account of the

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

three *nights* (satûîh) does not affect him <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1](#fn_1508). 7. And if *he does* not *engage* in
renunciation *he is* in hell till the future existence; and in *his*
future body they will bring *him* from hell, and for every mortal *sin*
they will cut off *his* head once, and the last time they *will* make
*him* alive again, and will inflict (numâyend) three nights’ severe
punishment <span id="fr_1520"></span>[2](#fn_1509).

8\. However a man engages in renunciation of sin the duty of his state
of renunciation (patîtîh) is to be engaged therein openly and mentally
in renunciation; the duty of openness is this, that the sin which he
knows *has* assailed him <span id="fr_1521"></span>[3](#fn_1510), is to
be specially confessed (barâ gôbi*s*nŏ) by him; *and* the mental duty is
this, that he engages in renunciation with this thought, that
'henceforth I *will* not commit sin.' 9. And that which occurs before
the renunciation, except pious alms, it is well for him not to be
overlooked <span id="fr_1522"></span>[4](#fn_1511) by him, *and* not to
be kept <span id="fr_1523"></span>[5](#fn_1512) secret by him; for when
he shall overlook <span id="fr_1524"></span>[6](#fn_1513), or shall keep
secret, about sin committed, it becomes for him as

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

much, some say, as three Srôshô-*k*aranâms <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1](#fn_1514); some say that when he keeps secret
about a sin of three Srôshô-*k*aranâms he is worthy of death; some say
much otherwise <span id="fr_1526"></span>[2](#fn_1515). 10. Âtarô-pâ*d*
son of Zaratû*s*t <span id="fr_1527"></span>[3](#fn_1516) had remarked
(pe*d*âkînî*d*) *to* a disciple, about this duty, thus: 'Conform to the
renunciation *of sin!*' and one <span id="fr_1528"></span>[4](#fn_1517)
time a secret was kept by him, and he ordered him thus: 'Henceforth be
thou never apparent in this duty!' and after that he looked upon the
supplication (avakhshîh) and much repentance of that disciple, and even
then he did not become the high-priest (dastôbar) over him.

11\. *The rule is* <span id="fr_1529"></span>[5](#fn_1518) this, that
*of those* who would be proper for this priestly duty (dastôbarîh), that
person is proper who is perfect in (narm) the commentary (*z*and) of the
law, and the punishment of sin is easy for him, and he has controlled
himself; some say thus: 'By whom a course of priestly studies
(aêrpatastân) is performed.' 12. And the punishment of sin *being* easy
for him, and his *having* controlled himself are proper; and when, in
danger before a menstruous woman, he engages in renunciation it is
proper.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

13\. Nêryôsang <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1](#fn_1519) said thus: 'Thou
deemest *it* most surprising that, of the renunciation *of sin* with
energy, whatever may be its efficacy, they have been *so much* of the
same <span id="fr_1531"></span>[2](#fn_1520) opinion, so that whenever
they perform renunciation, however they perform *it*, and before
whomever they perform *it*, whenever *a sin* is not even mentally
originating with one <span id="fr_1532"></span>[3](#fn_1521) a
renunciation should be performed by him; and when very many mortal sins
(marg-ar*g*ân) are committed by him, and he engages mentally in
renunciation of every one separately, he is not on <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[4](#fn_1522) the way to hell, owing to his
renunciation; and if there be one of which he is not in renunciation the
way to hell <span id="fr_1534"></span>[5](#fn_1523) is not closed to
him, for he does not rely upon the beneficence (sû*d*) of Aûharmazd, and
it is allowable to appoint a priestly retribution (ra*d* tô*g*i*s*n) to
fully atone for it, and when thou appointest a priestly retribution for
it, and dost not fully atone, it is allowable to inflict *it* justly and
strongly (drûbô).'

14\. When his sin is committed against (dên)

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

accusers <span id="fr_1535"></span>[1](#fn_1524) it will be necessary to
act so that the head of the family (mîrak) shall not become
evil-minded <span id="fr_1536"></span>[2](#fn_1525), and shall not
divorce the wife from matrimony, and they shall not bring <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[3](#fn_1526) *him* on unto him; before his accusers
*he* is to be engaged in renunciation, and when not, *he* is to be
engaged in renunciation *of the sin* before the high-priests (ra*d*ân),
and it will become debts, and debt does not make a man wicked <span
id="fr_1538"></span>[4](#fn_1527); its effect is this, that in the
future existence they may quite forsake him, and this becomes a great
shame, and they disturb (kâ*v*ênd) his enjoyment. 15. *As to* the sin
which *affects* the accusers, when the female *has* atoned for it, its
stem (pâyak) is atoned for; some say that the stem (pâyakgâhîh) has no
root; some say that *it is* just like a tree whose leaves wither away.

16\. Sin *relating* to the soul <span id="fr_1539"></span>[5](#fn_1528)
when *one* engages in renunciation, stays away *from* him; when it shall
be fully atoned for *it* is well, and when he does not fully atone they
will make him righteous by the three *nights’* (satûîh) punishment. 17.
Kûshtanŏ-bû*g*ê*d* <span id="fr_1540"></span>[6](#fn_1529) said that
even that which *affects* accusers, when *one* engages in renunciation,
stays away *from* him.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

18\. Nôsâî Bûr*z*-Mitrô <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1](#fn_1530) spoke
these three sayings, that is, 'Next-of-kin marriage will extirpate
mortal sins (marg-ar*g*ânân), and the *sacred* twigs when their ablution
is *such* as *renders them* improper for firewood, and a man when his
wife *becomes* pregnant by him.'

19\. Whoever commits a sin against (dên) water, *and* kills a lizard, or
other noxious water-creature, has atoned for it; also when thou atonest
to (dên) fire for that *against* water it is proper <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[2](#fn_1531), *and* when thou atonest to water for
that *against* fire it is proper; some say that even a scorpion is
proper *to be killed*. 20. And when a sin of one Tanâpûhar <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[3](#fn_1532) is committed by him, and he shall
consecrate a sacred cake (drôn), or shall accomplish a good work of one
Tanâpûhar <span id="fr_1545"></span>[4](#fn_1533), it has atoned for it.

21\. When he has committed a mortal *sin* (marg-ar*g*ân), and engages
mentally in renunciation, and the high-priest (ra*d*) knows that, though
he ought to give up his body, he *will* not give *it* up, it is
allowable when he shall kill him; that is, because he relies upon the
beneficence (sû*d*) of Aûharmazd. 22. Moreover, from the rule (mank)
'yazemna <span id="fr_1546"></span>[5](#fn_1534) ka*d* nâ haka*d*'
('through being worshipped what then at

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

once,' &c.) it is evident, and it becomes his through *ceremonial*
ablution of the hands; it amounts to a whole quarry (kânŏ) of good
works, and the worship of God (ya*z*i*s*n-i yazdânŏ) is to be performed
for him <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1](#fn_1535). 23. Âtarô-pâ*d* <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[2](#fn_1536) son of Mâraspend said that it is
always necessary to be more diligent in performing one's worship of God
*at* the time that many mortal *sins* are committed; all sins *being*
admissible into renunciation, when thou shalt atone by complete
self-sacrifice (pûr-*g*ân-dâ*d*îhâ), *and* when *one* engages in
renunciation of the sin from *its* root, he becomes *free* from the sin
in renunciation of which sin he engaged; for Aûharmazd will not leave
his own creatures unto the evil spirit, unless on the path of
non-renunciation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[300:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1513) Vinâs-i
hamêmâlân, 'sin relating to adversaries.' Sins appear to be divided into
two great classes, hamêmâl and rûbânîk. A hamêmâl sin seems to be any
secular offence which injures some person or animal who, thereupon,
becomes a hamêmâl, 'accuser' (Av. hameretha, 'opponent,' Yas. LVI, X,
10), and who must first be satisfied by atonement, before confession to
the high-priest, or renunciation of sin, can be of any avail for
removing the sin (compare Matthew V. 23-26). The Rivâyats assert that if
a person dies without atoning for a hamêmâl sin, his soul will be
stopped at the *K*inva*d* bridge (see Bund. XII, 7) on its way to the
other world, and kept in a state of torment until the arrival of the
'accuser,' and after he is satisfied the sinner's soul will be disposed
of, in the usual manner, according to the balance of its good and bad
actions. It is also probable that only a man of 'the good religion,' or
an animal of the good creation, can be an 'accuser.' A rûbânîk sin, on
the other hand, seems to be one which affects only the sinner's own
soul, and for which the high-priest can prescribe a sufficient
atonement. It is doubtful, however, whether the Parsis nowadays have any
very clear notions of the exact distinction between these two classes of
sins, although aware of their names, which are mentioned in their Patit,
or renunciation of sin. The explanations given in some editions of their
Khurdah Avesta, or prayer-book, are confined to mentioning certain
special instances of each class of sin; thus, <span id="page_301">p.
301</span> murder, seduction, unnecessary slaughter of cattle,
embezzlement, slander, seizing land by force, and a few other evil deeds
are stated to be hamêmâl sins; while unnatural offences and intercourse
with women of another race and religion are said to be rûbânîk sins. In
the Pahlavi Vendidad these classes of sins are rarely mentioned, but
hamêmâlân occurs in Pahl. Vend. III, 151, IV, 23, XIII, 38; hamêmâlîh in
III, 119; and rûbânîk in XIII, 38; although, perhaps, not always in the
sense of sin.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[301:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1514) By committing a
marg-ar*g*ân or mortal sin, that is, a sin worthy of death, he has
forfeited his life, and ought to place it at the disposal of the ra*d*,
or high-priest.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[301:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1515) This section,
intended to preserve game for the poor, is evidently out of place here,
as it has no connection with the context. With reference to the property
qualification for hunting, it appears, from a passage in the Persian MS.
M5 about the proper dowry for a privileged wife, that 2000 dirhams of
silver were worth 2300 rûpîs, and that 2 dirhams were 2¼ tolas; this was
written in A.D. 1723, when neither the rûpî nor the tola were of uniform
amount, though now the rûpî is exactly a tola weight of silver. As the
stîr was four dirhams (see Chap. I, 2), three hundred stîrs would have
been 1380 rûpîs or 1350 tolas of silver, according to the standards,
mentioned in M5; so that hunting was intended to be confined to those
whose property was less than 1350-1380 rûpîs; but how <span
id="page_301">p. 301</span> this limitation is to be reconciled with the
fact that hunting was a favourite pursuit of kings and nobles does not
appear, unless it be considered as a sacerdotal protest against that
practice.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[302:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1516) That is, in those
cases when they do not have the ya*z*i*s*n performed as an atonement for
sin, by order of the high-priest after confession.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[302:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1517) This appears to
refer to temporal punishment, inflicted by order of the high-priest, for
the purpose of saving him from the 'punishment of the three nights' in
the other world, mentioned in Bund. XXX, 16.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[302:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1518) Reading pavan
*g*înâk; but M6 marks the phrase as pavan dînâk (for dînâ), 'through the
decree,' which is probably an error.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[303:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1519) That is, the
usual ceremonies after death are not to be withheld in this world, and
his soul is able to pass through the usual investigation, as to his sins
and good works, on its way to the other world, without delay. This
period of three nights (satûîh, 'the triplet'), which Pâzand writers
miscall sedô*s* or sadis, is the time during which the soul is supposed
to hover about the body, before finally departing for the other world
(see Mkh. II, 114, 158-160, AV. IV, 9-14, XVII, 2-9).

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[303:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1520) The same
statement is made in nearly the same words in Pahl. Vend. VII, 136. This
is the future three nights’ punishment for impenitent sinners, mentioned
in Bund. XXX, 16.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[303:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1521) Literally, 'which
he knows thus: "It assailed me."'

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[303:4](sbe0568.htm#fr_1522) Reading
avêni*s*nŏ, but the word can also be read khunîni*s*nŏ, 'to be made
celebrated, to be boasted of.'

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[303:5](sbe0568.htm#fr_1523) Literally,
'carried on, home away.'

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[303:6](sbe0568.htm#fr_1524) Reading avênê*d*,
but it may be khunînê*d*, 'boast of.'

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[304:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1525) Probably the same
as a Farmân sin (see Chaps. I, 1, 2, IV, 14).

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[304:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1526) Or 'many other
*things*.'

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[304:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1527) This
Âtarô-pâ*d*-i Zaratû*s*tân is mentioned in a manuscript about 500, years
old, belonging to Dastûr Jâmâspji, in Bombay, as having lived for 160
years, and having been supreme high-priest for ninety years: he is also
mentioned in the sixth book of the Dînkar*d*. He may, possibly, have
been the Âtarô-pâ*d* mentioned in B. Yt. I, 7, but it is hazardous to
identify an individual by a single name so common as Âtarô-pâ*d* used to
be.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[304:4](sbe0568.htm#fr_1528) Reading aê,
'one,' instead of hanâ, 'this' (see p. 218, note 3).

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[304:5](sbe0568.htm#fr_1529) Assuming that the
word âînak has been omitted at the beginning of this section (see Chap.
X, x).

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[305:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1530) This cannot be
the learned Parsi translator of several Pahlavi texts into Sanskrit, who
bore the same name, and is supposed to have lived in the fifteenth
century. Being quoted in the Pahlavi Vendidad (see Chap. I, 4, note) he
must have been one of the old commentators.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[305:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1531) K20 has hômanam,
'I am,' instead of ham, 'the same;' a mistake arising from reading am,
'I am,' for ham.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[305:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1532) This applies to
all cases of merely imputed sin, such as those committed by children,
which are imputed to the father, and for which he is spiritually, as
well as temporally, responsible.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[305:4](sbe0568.htm#fr_1533) Reading pavan,
'on,' instead of barâ, 'out of,' (see [p. 176](sbe0552.htm#page_176),
note [5](sbe0552.htm#fn_989)).

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[305:5](sbe0568.htm#fr_1534) Most of this
clause is omitted in K20 by mistake.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[306:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1535) Hamêmâlân (see §
1); the particular instance of hamêmâl sin here referred to is
seduction.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[306:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1536) Reading
dû*s*mînân instead of the unmeaning dû*s*mîyân of the MSS.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[306:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1537) Reading
yâîtyûnã <span id="fr_1541"></span>[5](#fn_1528), instead of the
unmeaning yâîtam of the MSS; ã being often written very much like m in
Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[306:4](sbe0568.htm#fr_1538) This clause about
the hamêmâl sin becoming a debt, to be settled with the 'accuser,'
either here or hereafter, is taken from Pahl. Vend. III, 151.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[306:5](sbe0568.htm#fr_1541) That is,
rûbânîk-sin (see § 1, note).

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[306:6](sbe0568.htm#fr_1540) See Chap. I, 4,
note.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[307:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1542) See Chap. I, 4,
note.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[307:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1543) A blank space is
left for this verb in M6, indicating that that MS. was, copied from an
original already old and not very legible.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[307:3](sbe0568.htm#fr_1544) See Chap. I, 1,
2.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[307:4](sbe0568.htm#fr_1545) Consecrating a
sacred cake is a Tanâpûhar good work (see Chap. XVI, 6). The theory of
counterbalancing sins by good works of the same weight is here clearly
enunciated.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[307:5](sbe0568.htm#fr_1546) Written izimn in
the MSS. This quotation appears to be, from some part of the Avesta, no
longer extant, and being only the first words of the passage its exact
meaning is very uncertain. The section, generally, seems to refer to the
beneficence of Aûharmazd.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[308:1](sbe0568.htm#fr_1547) It seems that the
execution of the sinner after repentance is here considered as
furnishing him with a store of good works, so that it is allowable to
perform such ceremonies for him, after death, as are usually performed
for righteous men; the reason being given in § 23. The end of this
section and beginning of the next are omitted in K20.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[308:2](sbe0568.htm#fr_1548) Whether the prime
minister of Shâpûr II, or the last editor of the Dînkar*d* (see Bund.
XXXIII, 3, 11), is not clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](sbe0569)
