[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0577)  [Next](sbe0579) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVIII <span id="fr_1915"></span>[3](#fn_1903).

1\. It is said in revelation that Aêshm <span
id="fr_1916"></span>[4](#fn_1904) rushed into the presence of
Aharman <span id="fr_1917"></span>[5](#fn_1905), and exclaimed thus: 'I
*will* not go into the world, because Aûharmazd, the lord, has produced
three things in the world, *to* which it is not possible *for* me to do
anything whatever.'

2\. Aharman exclaimed thus: 'Say which are those three things.'

3\. Aêshm exclaimed thus: 'The season-festival

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (gâsânbâr) <span
id="fr_1918"></span>[1](#fn_1906), the *sacred* feast (myazd), and
next-of-kin marriage (khvêtûk-das).'

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

4\. Aharman exclaimed thus: 'Enter into the season-festival! if one of
those *present* shall steal a single thing the season-festival is
violated, and the affair is *in accordance* with <span
id="fr_1919"></span>[1](#fn_1907) thy wish; enter into the *sacred*
feast <span id="fr_1920"></span>[2](#fn_1908)! if only one of those
*present* shall chatter the *sacred* feast is violated, and the affair
is *in accordance* with thy wish; *but* avoid next-of-kin marriage <span
id="fr_1921"></span>[3](#fn_1909)! because I do not know a remedy for
it; for whoever *has* gone four times near to *it will* not become
parted from the possession of Aûharmazd and the archangels <span
id="fr_1922"></span>[4](#fn_1910).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[387:3](sbe0578.htm#fr_1915) Both this chapter
and the next are also found in K20, the first being placed before the
first part of Sls., and the second before the second part. Chap. XVIII
also occurs in Dastûr Jâmâspji's MS. of the Bundahi*s*, just after Chap.
XXXIV of that text (see Introduction, p. xxx), and a Pâzand version of
it occupies the same position in L7 and L22, and is translated by Justi
as the last chapter of the Bundahi*s*, in his German translation of that
work (see Introduction, [p. xxvi](sbe0504.htm#page_xxvi)).

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[387:4](sbe0578.htm#fr_1916) The demon of
wrath (see Bund. XXVIII, 15-17).

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[387:5](sbe0578.htm#fr_1917) See Bund. I, 3.
Aêshm, as the chief agent of the evil spirit in his machinations against
mankind, rushes into his master's presence in hell to complain of the
difficulties he encounters.

<span id="fn_1906"></span>[388:1](sbe0578.htm#fr_1918) See Bund. XXV, 1,
3, 6. The six Gâhanbârs or season-festivals are held, respectively, on
the 45th, 105th, 180th, 210th, 290th, and 365th days of the Parsi year.
An explanation of the cause of the inequality of these intervals has
been proposed by Mr. Khurshedji Rustamji Cama, which is well worthy of
attention, and appears to have been first published in 1867 in Nos. 7
and 8 of his Zarto*s*ti Abhyas. His view is that the mediæval
Zoroastrians, beginning their year at the vernal equinox (Bund. XXV, 6,
13, 21), recognised originally only two seasons, a summer of seven
months and a winter of five (Bund. XXV, 7), and they held a festival,
not only at the end of each season, that is, on the 210th and 365th days
of their year, but also in the middle of each season, that is, on the
105th and 290th days of their year. That these two latter were
mid-season festivals is proved by their Avesta names, Maidhyô-shema and
Maidhyâirya, beginning with the word maidhya, 'middle.' Later on, the
Zoroastrians divided their year into four equal seasons, spring, summer,
autumn, and winter (Bund. XXV, 20), and without interfering with their
old festivals, they would, no doubt, have wished to celebrate the end
and middle of each of their new seasons. The ends of these four seasons
occur on the 90th, 180th, 270th, and 365th days of the year, and their
midpoints are the 45th, 135th, 225th, and 320th days; but the
Zoroastrians already held a festival on the 365th day, and celebrated
midsummer and midwinter (the 135th and 320th days of their new calendar)
on the 105th and 290th days of their year, and they would consider the
90th, 225th, and 270th days too close to their old festivals of the
105th, 210th, and 290th days to allow of the former being held as new
festivals; so that they would have only the midspring festival, on the
45th day, and that of the end of summer, on the 180th day, to add to
their old festivals. It may be objected that the end of summer was
already celebrated on the 210th day, and, for this reason, it is more
probable that the festivals were intended to celebrate the beginnings
and mid-points of the seasons, rather than their ends and mid-points.
According to this view, the six season-festivals were intended,
respectively, to celebrate midspring, midsummer, the beginning of
autumn, the beginning of winter, midwinter, and the beginning of spring.
That they were also intended to commemorate, respectively, the <span
id="page_389">p. 389</span> creations of the sky, water, earth,
vegetation, animals, and man, is a belief of later times, derived
probably from a foreign source.

<span id="fn_1907"></span>[389:1](sbe0578.htm#fr_1919) Reading pavan,
'with,' instead of barâ, 'beyond,' as in the next clause of the sentence
(see [p. 176](sbe0552.htm#page_176), note [5](sbe0552.htm#fn_989)).

<span id="fn_1908"></span>[389:2](sbe0578.htm#fr_1920) By the sacred
feast is meant the consecration of sacred cakes, with meat-offerings and
the recital of the Âfrîngâns or blessings (see Chaps. III, 32, Xl, 4).

<span id="fn_1909"></span>[389:3](sbe0578.htm#fr_1921) By next-of-kin
marriage Parsis nowadays understand the marriage of first cousins, which
they consider a specially righteous act; and the passages in Pahlavi
texts, which appear to approve of marriages between brother and sister,
father and daughter, and mother and son, they explain as referring to
the practices of heretics (see Dastûr Pêshôtan's English translation of
the Dînkar*d*, p. 96, note). How far this explanation may be correct has
not been ascertained, for the passages in question are rather obscure,
and have not been thoroughly examined. But it is quite conceivable that
the Parsi priesthood, about the time of the Muhammadan conquest (when
the practice of next-of-kin marriage was most extolled), were anxious to
prevent marriages with strangers, in order to hinder conversions to the
foreign faith; and that they may, therefore, have extended the range of
marriage among near relations beyond the limits now approved by their
descendants.

<span id="fn_1910"></span>[389:4](sbe0578.htm#fr_1922) The object of
this chapter is evidently to extol the religious merit of next-of-kin
marriage. A Persian version of the passage, contained in M5, fols. 54,
55, adds the following details: 'Therefore it is necessary to
understand, that the chief next-of-kin marriage is that of a sister's
daughter and brother's son; a medium <span id="page_390">p. 390</span>
next-of-kin marriage is that of a brother's son and a younger (dîgar)
brother's daughter, or of a sister's son and a younger sister's
daughter; and inferior to a medium next-of-kin marriage is that of a
sister's son and a younger brother's daughter. It is necessary to know
that any person who contracts a next-of-kin marriage, if *his* soul be
*fit* for hell, will arrive among the ever-stationary (see Chap. VI, 2),
if it is one of the ever-stationary it will arrive at heaven. Another
particular is to he added; if any one, in departing settles and strives
for the next-of-kin marriage betrothal (paîvand) of a next brother it is
a good work of a thousand Tanâpûhars; if any one strives to break off a
next-of-kin marriage betrothal he is worthy of death.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](sbe0579)
