[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0552)  [Next](sbe0554) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

1\. As he (Aharman) came fifthly to cattle—which struggled against him
with all the animals—and likewise as the primeval ox <span
id="fr_997"></span>[1](#fn_990) passed away, from, the nature of the
vegetable principle it possessed, fifty-five <span
id="fr_998"></span>[2](#fn_991) species of grain and twelve species of
medicinal plants grew from *its* various members; *and* forasmuch as
they should see from which member each one *proceeds*, it is declared in
the Dâmdâ*d* *Nask* <span id="fr_999"></span>[3](#fn_992). 2. And every
plant grown from a member

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

promotes that member, as it is said that there *where* the ox scattered
*its* marrow <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1](#fn_993) on to the earth,
grain afterwards grew up, corn <span id="fr_1001"></span>[2](#fn_994)
and sesame, vetches <span id="fr_1002"></span>[3](#fn_995) *and* peas;
so sesame, on account of <span id="fr_1003"></span>[4](#fn_996) *its*
marrow quality, is itself a great thing for developing marrow. 3. And it
is also said that from the blood is the vine <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[5](#fn_997), a great vegetable thing—as wine itself
is blood—for more befriending the sound quality of the blood. 4. And it
is said that from the nose is the pulse (mây*s* or mâsah) which is
called dônak, and was a variety of sesame (*s*amagâ) <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[6](#fn_998), *and it is* for other noses.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

5\. And it is also said that from the lungs are the rue-like herbs <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1](#fn_999) *which* heal, and are for the
lung-disease of cattle. 6. This, rooted amid the heart, is thyme, from
which is Vohûman's thorough withstanding of the stench of Akôman <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[2](#fn_1000), and *it is* for that which *proceeds*
from the sick and yawners.

7\. Afterwards, the brilliance of the seed, seized upon, by strength,
from the seed *which* was the ox's, they would carry *off* from it,
*and* the brilliance was intrusted to the angel of the moon <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[3](#fn_1001); in a place therein that seed was
thoroughly purified by the light of the moon, and was restored in its
many qualities, and made fully infused with life (*g*ânvar-hômand). 8.
Forth from there it produced for Aîrân-vê*g*, first, two oxen, a pair,
male and female <span id="fr_1009"></span>[4](#fn_1002), *and*,
afterwards, other species, until the completion of the 282 species <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[5](#fn_1003); and they were discernible as far as
two long leagues *on* the earth. 9. Quadrupeds walked forth on the land,
fish swam in the water, *and* birds flew *in* the atmosphere; *in* every
two, at the time good eating is enjoyed, a longing (â*v*dahân) arose
therefrom, and pregnancy and birth.

10\. Secondly, their subdivision is thus:—First, they are divided into
three, that is, quadrupeds walking on the earth, fish swimming in the
water,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

*and* birds flying in the atmosphere. 11. Then, into five classes <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1](#fn_1004), that is, the quadruped which is
round-hoofed, the double-hoofed, the five-clawed, the bird, *and* the
fish, whose dwellings are in five places, *and* which are called
aquatic, burrowing, oviparous, wide-travelling, *and* suitable for
grazing. 12. The aquatic are fish *and* every beast of burden, cattle,
wild beast, dog, *and* bird which enters the water; the burrowing are
the marten (samûr) and musk *animals*, and all other dwellers and movers
in holes; the oviparous are birds of every kind; the wide-travelling
sprang away for help, and are also those of a like kind; those suitable
for grazing are whatever are kept grazing in a flock.

13\. And, afterwards, they were divided into genera, as the round-hoofed
are one, *which* is all called 'horse;' the double-hoofed are many, as
the camel and ox, the sheep and goat, *and* others double-hoofed; the
five-clawed are the dog, hare, musk *animals*, marten, *and* others;
then are the birds, and then the fish. 14. And then they were divided
into species <span id="fr_1012"></span>[2](#fn_1005), as eight species
of horse, two species of camel, ten <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[3](#fn_1006) species of ox, five species of sheep,
five species of goat, ten of the dog, five of the hare, eight of the
marten, eight of the musk *animals*, 110 of the birds, and ten of the
fish; some are counted for the pigs, and with all those declared *and*
all those undeclared *there were*, at first, 282 species <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[4](#fn_1007); *and* with the species within species
*there were* a thousand varieties.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

15\. The birds are distributed <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1](#fn_1008)
into eight groups (rîstakŏ), and from that which is largest to that
which is smallest *they* are so spread about as *when* a man, who is
sowing grain, first scatters abroad *that of* heavy weight, then that
which is middling, *and* afterwards that which is small.

16\. And of the whole of the species, as enumerated a second time in the
Dâmdâ*d* *Nask* <span id="fr_1016"></span>[2](#fn_1009), and written by
me in the manuscript (nipîk) of 'the summary enumeration of races <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[3](#fn_1010)'—this is a lordly <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[4](#fn_1011) summary—the matter which is shown is,
about the species of horses, the first is the Arab, and the chief of
them <span id="fr_1019"></span>[5](#fn_1012) is white *and*
yellow-eared, and secondly the Persian, the mule, the ass, the wild ass,
the water-horse, *and* others. 17. Of the camel *there are* specially
two, *that for* the plain, *and* the mountain *one which* is
double-humped. 18. Among the species of ox are the white, mud-coloured,
red, yellow, black, and dappled, the elk, the buffalo, the
camel-leopard <span id="fr_1020"></span>[6](#fn_1013), the ox-fish,
*and* others. 19. Among sheep are those having tails and those which are
tailless, also the wether and the Kûri*s*k *which*, because of its
trampling the hills, *its* great horn, and also being suitable

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

for ambling, became the steed of Mânû*sk*îhar. 20. Among goats are the
ass-goat, the Arab, the fawn (varîkŏ), the roe, *and* the mountain goat.
21. Among martens are the white ermine, the black marten, the squirrel,
the beaver (khaz), and others. 22. Of musk *animals* with a bag, one is
the Bîsh-musk—which eats the Bîsh poison and does not die through
it,—and it is created for the great advantage that it should eat the
Bîsh, *and* less *of it* should succeed in poisoning the creatures—*and*
one is a musk *animal* of a black colour which they desired (ayûftŏ) who
were bitten *by* the fanged serpent—as the serpent of the mountain
water-courses (makŏ) is called—which is numerous on the river-banks;
*one* throws the same unto it for food, which it eats, *and* then the
serpent enters its body, when his <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1](#fn_1014) serpent, at the time *this* happens,
feeds upon the same belly in which the serpent is, and he will become
clear from that malady. 23. Among birds two were produced of a different
character from the rest, and those are the griffon bird *and* the bat,
which have teeth *in* the mouth, *and* suckle *their* young with animal
milk from the teat.

24\. This is the fifth contest, as to animals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_990"></span>[177:1](sbe0553.htm#fr_997) See Chaps. II, 6,
III, 1, and Bund. IV, 1, X, 1, XIV, 1.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[177:2](sbe0553.htm#fr_998) The MS. has
'fifty-seven' in ciphers, but Bund. X, 1, XIV, 1, XXVII, 2, have,
'fifty-five' in words.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[177:3](sbe0553.htm#fr_999) This was the fourth
nask or 'book' of the complete Mazdayasnian literature, according to the
Dînka*r*d, which gives a very short and superficial account of its
contents. But, according to the Dînî-va*g*arkard and the Rivâyats of
Kâmah Bahrah, Narîmân Hôshang, and Barzû Qiyâmu-d-dîn, it was the fifth
nask, and was called Dvâzdah-hâmâst (or homâst). For its contents, as
given by the Dînî-va*g*arkard, see Haug's Essays, p. 127. The Rivâyat of
Kâmah Bahrah, which has a few more words than the other Rivâyats, gives
the following account (for the Persian text of which, see 'Fragmens
relatifs à la religion de Zoroastre,' par Olshausen et Jules Mohl):—

'Of the fifth the name is Dvâzdah-homâst, and the interpretation of this
is "the book about help" (dar imdâd, but this is probably a corruption
of dâmdâd). And this book has thirty-two sections (kardah) that the
divine and omnipotent creator sent down, in remembrance of the beginning
of the creatures of the superior world and inferior world, and *it is* a
description of the whole of them and of that which God, the most holy
and omnipotent, mentioned about the sky, earth, and water, vegetation
and <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> fire, man and quadrupeds, grazing
and flying *animals*, and what he produced for their advantage and use,
and the like. Secondly, the resurrection and *heavenly* path, the
gathering and dispersion, and the nature of the circumstances of the
resurrection, as regards the virtuous and evil-doers, through the weight
of every action they perform for good and evil.'

This description corresponds very closely with what the Bundahi*s* must
have been, before the addition of the genealogical and chronological
chapters at the end; and Dâ*d*-sparam mentions in his text here, and
again in § 16, particulars regarding the Dâmdâ*d* which also occur in
the Bundahi*s* (XIV, 2, 14-18, 21-24). There can be very little doubt,
therefore, that the Bundahi*s* was originally a translation of the
Dâmdâ*d*, though probably abridged; and the text translated in this
volume is certainly a further abridgment of the original Bundahi*s*, or
Zand-âkâs. Whether the Avesta text of the Dâmdâd was still in existence
in the time of Dâ*d*-sparam is uncertain, as he would apply the name to
the Pahlavi text. At the present time it is very unusual for a copyist
to write the Pahlavi text without its Avesta, when the latter exists,
but this may not always have been the case.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[178:1](sbe0553.htm#fr_1000) Or 'brains.'

<span id="fn_994"></span>[178:2](sbe0553.htm#fr_1001) Supposing the MS.
galôlag is a corruption of gallak (Pers. ghallah).

<span id="fn_995"></span>[178:3](sbe0553.htm#fr_1002) Assuming the MS.
alûhŏ or arvanŏ to be a corruption of alûm or ar*z*anŏ.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[178:4](sbe0553.htm#fr_1003) Reading râî
instead of lâ.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[178:5](sbe0553.htm#fr_1004) Compare Bund. XIV,
2.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[178:6](sbe0553.htm#fr_1005) Either this
sentence is very corrupt in the MS. or it cannot be <span
id="page_179">p. 179</span> reconciled with the corresponding clause of
Bund. XIV, 2. Altering dônak and gûnak into gandanak, and *s*amagâ into
*s*ama*s*dar, we might read, 'from the nose is mây*s*, which is called
the leek, and the leek was an onion;' but this is doubtful, and leaves
the word mây*s* unexplained.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[179:1](sbe0553.htm#fr_1006) The MS. has
gôspendânŏ, 'cattle,' instead of sipandânŏ, 'rue, herbs.'

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[179:2](sbe0553.htm#fr_1007) See Bund. I, 24,
27, XXVIII, 7, XXX, 29.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[179:3](sbe0553.htm#fr_1008) Bund. X, 2, XIV,
3.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[179:4](sbe0553.htm#fr_1009) Bund. X, 3, XIV,
4.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[179:5](sbe0553.htm#fr_1010) Bund. X, 3, XIV,
13.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[180:1](sbe0553.htm#fr_1011) Bund, XIV, 8-12.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[180:2](sbe0553.htm#fr_1012) Bund. XIV, I, 3-2
3, 26, 27.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[180:3](sbe0553.htm#fr_1013) Bund. XIV, 17
says, 'fifteen,' which is probably correct.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[180:4](sbe0553.htm#fr_1014) Only 181 species
are detailed or 'declared' here.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[181:1](sbe0553.htm#fr_1015) Bund. XIV, 25.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[181:2](sbe0553.htm#fr_1016) See § 1; the
particulars which follow are also found in Bund. XIV, 14-18, 21-24,
showing that the Bundahi*s* must be derived from the Dâmdâ*d*.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[181:3](sbe0553.htm#fr_1017) The title of this
work, in Pahlavi, is Tôkhm-au*s*mari*s*-nîh-i hangar*d*îkŏ, but it is
not known to be extant.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[181:4](sbe0553.htm#fr_1018) Reading marâk
(Chaldee ‏מָרֵא‎), but this is doubtful, though the Iranian final k is
often added to Semitic Huzvâri*s* forms ending with â. It may be minâk,
'thinking, thoughtful,' or a corruption of manîk, 'mine,' in which last
case we should translate, 'this is a summary of mine.'

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[181:5](sbe0553.htm#fr_1019) Bund. XXIV, 6.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[181:6](sbe0553.htm#fr_1020) Literally,
'camel-ox-leopard.'

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[182:1](sbe0553.htm#fr_1021) This appears to
be the meaning here of amat zak gar*z*akŏ, but the whole sentence is a
fair sample of Dâ*d*-sparam's most involved style of writing. By feeding
the black musk animal with snakes the effect of a snake-bite,
experienced by the feeder, is supposed to be neutralized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](sbe0554)
