[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0501)  [Next](sbe0503.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION

##### TO

#### PAHLAVI TEXTS.

##  

THOUGH we must look to the Avesta for information regarding the main
outlines of the Parsi religion, it is to Pahlavi writings we must refer
for most of the details relating to the traditions, ceremonies, and
customs of this ancient faith, which styles itself emphatically 'the
good religion of the Mazdayasnians,' and calls its laity bahdînân, or
'those of the good religion.' In the fragments of the Avesta which still
exist, we may trace the solid foundations of the religion, laid by
philosophic bards and lawgivers of old, with many a mouldering column
and massive fragment of the superstructure. erected upon them by the
ancient priesthood. These are the last remnants of the faith held by
Cyrus, the anointed of the Lord (Isaiah xlv. 1), the righteous one (Is.
xli. 2), or eagle (Is. xlvi. 11), whom He called from the east, and the
shepherd who performed His pleasure (Is. xliv. 28); scattered fragments
of the creed professed by Darius in his inscriptions, when he attributes
his successes to 'the will of Aûramazdâ;' and mouldering ruins of the
comparatively pure religion of oriental 'barbarism,' which Alexander and
his civilising Greek successors were unable wholly to destroy, and
replace by their own idolatrous superstitions. While in the Pahlavi
texts we, find much of the mediaeval edifice built by later Persian
priest craft upon the old foundations, with a strange mixture of old and
new materials, and exhibiting the usual symptom of declining powers, a
strong insistence upon complex forms and minute details, with little of
the freedom of treatment and simplicity of outline characteristic of the
ancient bards.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

To understand the relationship between these two classes of Parsi sacred
writings, it must be observed that the Avesta and Pahlavi of the same
scripture, taken together, form its Avesta and Zand, terms which are
nearly synonymous with 'revelation and commentary.' Both words are
derived from verbal roots implying 'knowledge;' Avesta being the Pahlavi
avistâk, which may most probably be traced to the past participle of â,
'to,' + vid, 'to know,' with the meaning of 'what is announced' or
'declaration;' and Zand, being the Pahlavi form of Av. zai*n*ti
(traceable in the word âzai*n*ti*s*), must be referred to the root zan,
'to know,' with the meaning of 'knowledge, understanding <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md).' European scholars, misled probably by
Muhammadan writers, have converted the phrase 'Avesta and Zand' into
'Zend-Avesta,' and have further identified Zand with the language of the
Avesta. This use of the word Zand is, however, quite at variance with
the practice of all Parsi writers who have been independent of European
influence, as they apply the term Zand only to the Pahlavi translations
and explanations of their sacred books, the original text of which they
call Avesta. So that when they use the phrase 'Avesta and Zand' they
mean the whole of any scripture, both the Avesta text and Pahlavi
translation and commentary. And the latter, being often their only means
of understanding the former, has now become of nearly equal authority
with the Avesta itself. It is probable, indeed, that the first Zand was
really written in the Avesta language, as we find many traces of such
Avesta commentaries interpolated both in the Avesta and Pahlavi texts of
the Parsi scriptures; but this is rather a matter of, European inference
than of Parsi belief. The later (or Pahlavi) Zand appears also, in many
places, to be merely a translation of this earlier (or Avesta) Zand,
with additional explanations offered by the Pahlavi translators.

Regarding the sacredness of these Pahlavi translations, in the eyes of
the Parsis, there can be no manner of doubt, so far as they cannot be
shown to be inconsistent with the

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

original Avesta text. But besides these translations there is another
class of Pahlavi religious writings whose authority is more open to
dispute. These writings are either translations and Zands of Avesta
texts no longer extant, or they contain the opinions and decisions of
high-priests of later times, when the Pahlavi language was on the
decline. Such writings would hardly be considered of indisputable
authority by any Parsi of the present day, unless they coincided with
his own preconceived opinions. But for outsiders they have the
inestimable value either of supplying numerous details of religious
traditions and customs which would be vainly sought for elsewhere, or of
being contemporary records of the religious ideas of the Parsis in the
declining days of their Mazdayasnian faith. It is with a few of such
writings this volume has to deal; but before describing them more
minutely it will be desirable to give some account of the Pahlavi
language in which they are written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[x:1](sbe0502.htm#fr_0.md) See Haug's Essays, on the
Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the Parsis, second edition,
London, 1878; pp. 121, 122.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Pahlavi Language and Literature](sbe0503.md)
