[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0506)  [Next](sbe0508.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 6. THE SHÂYAST LÂ-SHÂYAST.

Another treatise which must be referred to about the same age as the
Bundahi*s*, though of a very different character, is the Shâyast
lâ-shâyast or 'the proper and improper.' It is a compilation of
miscellaneous laws and customs regarding sin and impurity, with other
memoranda about ceremonies and religious subjects in general. Its name
has, no doubt, been given to it in modern times <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md), and has probably

<span id="page_lx">p. lx</span>

arisen from the frequent use it makes of the words shâya*d*, 'it is fit
or proper,' and lâ shâya*d*, 'it is not fit or proper.' And, owing to
its resemblance to those Persian miscellanies of traditional memoranda
called Rivâyats, it has also been named the Pahlavi Rivâyat, though
chiefly by Europeans.

It consists of two parts, which are often put together in modern MSS.,
and bear the same name, but are widely separated in the oldest MSS.
These two parts, consisting respectively of Chaps. I-X and XI-XIV in the
present translation, are evidently two distinct treatises on the same
and similar subjects, but of nearly the same age. That they were
compiled by two different persons, who had access to nearly the same
authorities, appears evident from Chaps. XI, 1, 2, XII, 11, 13-16, 18,
20 being repetitions of Chaps. I, 1, 2, X, 4, 20-23, 7, 31, with only
slight alterations; such repetitions as would hardly be made in a single
treatise by the same writer. Minor repetitions in the first part, such
as those of some phrases in Chaps. II, 65, IV, 14, repeated in Chap. X,
24, 33, might readily be made by the same writer in different parts of
the same treatise. To these two parts of the Shâyast lâ-shâyast a third
part has been added in the present translation, as an appendix,
consisting of a number of miscellaneous passages of a somewhat similar
character, which are found in the same old MSS. that contain the first
two parts, but which cannot be attributed either to the same writers or
the same age as those parts.

The first part commences with the names and amounts of the various
degrees of sin, and the names of the chief commentators on the Vendidad.
It then gives long details regarding the precautions to be taken with
reference to corpses and menstruous women, and the impurity they
occasion; besides mentioning (Chap. II, 33-35) the pollution

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

caused by a serpent. It next describes the proper size and materials of
the sacred thread-girdle and shirt, giving some details about the sins
of running about uncovered and walking with one boot, and thence
proceeding to the sin of unseasonable chatter. Details are then given
about good works, and those who can and cannot perform them; in which
reference is made to Christians, Jews, and those of other persuasions
(Chap. VI, 7). The next subjects treated of are reverencing the sun and
fire, the sin of extinguishing fire, confession and renunciation of sin,
atonement for sins, especially mortal sins, both those affecting others
and those only affecting one's own soul; with a digression (Chap. VIII,
3) prohibiting the rich from hunting. The remainder of this first
treatise is of a miscellaneous character, referring to the following
subjects:—The Hâsar of time, priests passing away in idolatry, the
discussion of religion, ceremonies not done aright, throwing a corpse
into the sea, evil of eating in the dark, the four kinds of worship,
when the angels should be invoked in worship, the ephemeral nature of
life, proper looseness for a girdle, when the sacred cake set aside for
the guardian spirits can be used, maintaining a fire where a woman is
pregnant, providing a tank for ablution, the Gâthas not to be recited
over the dead, food and drink not to be thrown away to the north at
night, unlawful slaughter of animals, how the corpse of a pregnant woman
should be carried, forgiveness of trespasses, evil of walking without
boots, when the sacred girdle is to be assumed, breaking the spell of an
inward prayer, ten women wanted at childbirth, and how the infant is to
be treated, sin of beating an innocent person, evil of a false judge,
men and women who do not marry, a toothpick must be free from bark,
acknowledging the children of a handmaid, advantage of offspring and of
excess in almsgiving, prayer on lying down and getting up, Avesta not to
be mumbled, doubtful actions to be avoided or consulted about, evil of
laughing during prayer, crowing of a hen, treatment of a hedgehog, after
a violent death corruption does not set in immediately, necessity of a
dog's gaze, putrid meat and hairy cakes or butter unfit for ceremonies,
when a woman can do priestly duty, &c.

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

The second part also commences with the names and amounts of the various
degrees of sin, followed by the proper meat-offerings for various angels
and guardian spirits. Next come miscellaneous observations on the
following subjects:—The simplest form of worship, necessity of
submitting to a high-priest, advantage of a fire in the house, sin of
clothing the dead, presentation of holy-water to the nearest fire after
a death, nail-parings to be prayed over, advantage of light at
childbirth, offerings to the angels, maintaining a fire where a woman is
pregnant and a child is born, a toothpick must be free from bark,
acknowledging the children of a handmaid, advantage of offspring and of
excess in almsgiving, evil of drawing well-water at night, food not to
be thrown away to the north at night, advantage of prayer at feasts,
treatment of a hedgehog, praying when washing the face, the proper
choice of a purifying priest, no one should be hopeless of heaven,
necessity of a wife being religious as well as her husband, the
ceremonies which are good works, and the cause of sneezing, yawning, and
sighing. These are followed by a long account of the mystic
signification of the Gâthas, with some information as to the errors
which may be committed in consecrating the sacred cakes, and how the
beginning of the morning watch is to be determined.

The third part, or appendix, commences with an account of how each of
the archangels can be best propitiated, by a proper regard for the
particular worldly existence which he specially protects. This is
followed by a statement of the various degrees of sin, and of the amount
of good works attributed to various ceremonies. Then come some account
of the ceremonies after a death, particulars of those who have no part
in the resurrection, the duty of submission to the priesthood, whether
evil may be done for the sake of good, the place where people will rise
from the dead, Aêshm's complaint to Aharman of the three things he could
not injure in the world, the occasions on which the Ahunavar formula
should be recited, and the number of recitals that are requisite, &c.
And, finally, statements of the lengths of midday and afternoon shadows,
blessings invoked

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

from the thirty angels and archangels who preside over the days of the
month, and the special epithets of the same.

With regard to the age of this treatise we have no precise information.
All three parts are found in a MS. (M6) which was written in A.D. 1397
(see [p. xxix](sbe0504.htm#page_xxix).md), and nearly the whole is also
found in the MS. K20, which may be a few years older (see [p.
xxvii](sbe0504.htm#page_xxvii).md), and in which the first part of the
Shâyast lâ-shâyast is, followed by a Persian colophon dated A.Y. 700
(A.D. 1331), copied probably from an older MS. The text in both these
old MSS. seems to have been derived almost direct from the same
original, which must have been so old when M6 was written that the
copyist found some words illegible (see notes on Chaps. VIII, 19, X, 34,
XII, 14, 15, &c.) Now it is known from a colophon that a portion of M6,
containing the book of Ar*d*â-Vîrâf and the tale of Gô*s*t-i Fryânô, was
copied from a MS. written in A.D. 1249; and we may safely conclude that
the Shâyast lâ-shâyast was copied, either from the same MS., or from one
fully as old. So far, therefore, as external evidence goes, there is
every reason to suppose that the whole of the Shâyast lâ-shâyast, with
its appendix <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md), was existing in a MS.
written about 630 years ago.

But internal evidence points to a far higher antiquity for the first two
parts, as the compilers of those treatises evidently had access, not
only to several old commentaries, but also to many of the Nasks, which
have long been lost. Thus, the first treatise contains quotations from
the commentaries of Afarg, Gôgô*s*asp, Kûshtanŏ-bû*g*ê*d*, Mê*d*ôk-mâh,
Rôshan, and Sôshyans, which are all frequently quoted in the Pahlavi
translation of the Vendidad (see Sls. I, 3, 4, notes); besides
mentioning the opinions of Mar*d*-bû*d*, Nêryôsang, Nôsâî Bûr*z*-Mitrô,
and Vand-Aûharmazd, who are rarely or never mentioned in the Pahlavi
Vendidad. It also quotes no less than eleven of the twenty Nasks or
books of the complete Mazdayasnian literature which are no longer
extant, besides the Vendidad, the only Nask that still survives in the
full extent it had in Sasanian times.

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Nasks quoted
are the Stû*d*gar (Sls. X, 8), the Bagh (X, 26), the Dâmdâ*d* (X, 22),
the Pâ*z*ôn (IX, 9), the Ratû*s*tâîtîh (X, 29), the *K*î*d*ra*s*t (X,
28), the Spend (X, 4), the Nihâ*d*ûm (X, 3, 22, 23), the Dûbâsrûgê*d*
(X, 13), the Hûspâram (X, 21), and the Sakâ*d*ûm (X, 25), very few of
which are mentioned even in the Pahlavi Vendidad. The second treatise
mentions only one commentator, Vand-Aûharmazd, but it quotes eight of
the Nasks no longer extant; these are the Stû*d*gar (Sls. XII, 32), the
Dâmdâ*d* (XII, 5, 15), the Spend (XII, 3, 11, 15, 29), the Bâg-yasnô
(XII, 17), the Nihâ*d*ûm (XII, 15, 16), the Hûspâram (XII, 1, 7, 14, 31,
XIII, 17), the Sakâ*d*ûm (XII, 2, 10, 12, XIII, 30), and the Hâ*d*ôkht
(XII, 19, 30, XIII, 6, 10).

Of two of these Nasks, the Bagh and Hâ*d*ôkht, a few fragments may still
survive (see notes on Sls. X, 26, Haug's Essays, p. 134, B.Yt. III, 25),
but those of the latter Nask do not appear to contain the passages
quoted in the Shâyast lâ-shâyast. With regard to the rest we only know
that the Dâmdâ*d*, Hûspâram, and Sakâ*d*ûm must have been still in
existence about A.D. 881, as they are quoted in the writings of
Zâ*d*-sparam and Mânû*sk*îhar, sons. of Yûdân-Yim, who lived at that
time (see pp. [xlii](sbe0504.htm#page_xlii.md),
[xlvi](sbe0505.htm#page_xlvi).md); and the Nihâ*d*ûm and Hûspâram are also
quoted in the Pahlavi Vendidad. It is true that the Dînkar*d* gives
copious information about the contents of all the Nasks, with two or
three exceptions; and the Dînkar*d* seems to have assumed its present
form about A.D. 900 (see Bund. XXXIII, 11, notes); but its last editor
was evidently merely a compiler of old fragments, so there is no
certainty that many of the Nasks actually existed in his time.

Thus far, therefore, the internal evidence seems to prove that the two
treatises called Shâyast lâ-shâyast, which constitute the first two
parts of the present translation, are more than a thousand years old. On
the other band, they cannot be more than three centuries older, because
they frequently quote passages from the Pahlavi Vendidad which, as we
have seen ([p. xlvi](sbe0505.htm#page_xlvi.md), note
[1](sbe0505.htm#fn_43).md), could not have assumed its present form before
the time of Khûsrô Nôshirvân (A.D. 531-579). As they contain no
reference to any

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

interference of the governing powers with the religion or priesthood, it
is probable that they were written before the Muhammadan conquest (A.D.
636-651), although they do not mention the existence of any 'king of the
kings,' the usual title of the Sasanian monarchs. And this probability
is increased by there being no direct mention of Muhammadanism among the
contemporary religions named in Chap. VI, 7, unless we assume that
passage to be a quotation from an earlier book. We may, therefore,
conclude, with tolerable certainty, that the Pahlavi text of the first
two parts of the present translation of the Shâyast lâ-shâyast was
compiled some time in the seventh century; but, like the Bundahi*s* and
Bahman Ya*s*t, it was, for the most part, a compilation of extracts and
translations from far older writings, and may also have been rearranged
shortly after the Muhammadan conquest.

The fragments which are collected in the appendix, or third part of the
present translation, are probably of various ages, and several of them
may not be more than seven centuries old. The commentator Bakht-âfrî*d*,
whose work (now lost) is quoted in Chap. XX, 11, may have lived in the
time of Khûsrô Nôshirvân (see B.Yt. I, 7). And Chap. XXI must certainly
have been written in Persia, as the lengths of noonday shadows which it
mentions are only suitable for 32° north latitude. As regards the last
two chapters we have no evidence that they are quite five centuries old.

For the Pahlavi text of the Shâyast lâ-shâyast and its appendix we have
not only the very old codex M6 (see p. xxix) for the whole of it, but
also the equally old codex K20 (see p. xxvii) for all but Chaps.
XV-XVII, XX, XXII, and XXIII in the appendix. In M6 the first two parts
are separated by twenty folios, containing the Farhang-i Oîm-khadûk, and
the second part is separated from the first three chapters of the
appendix by four folios, containing the Patit-i Khû*d*; the next three
chapters of the appendix are from the latter end of the second volume of
M6, Chap, XXI is from the middle of the same, and the last two chapters
are from some additional folios at the beginning of the

<span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>

first volume. In K20 the first two parts are separated by ninety-two
folios, containing the Farhang-i Oîm-khadûk, Bundahi*s*, Bahman Ya*s*t,
and several other Pahlavi and Avesta texts; Chap. XVIII precedes the
first part, Chap. XIX precedes the second part, and Chap. XXI is in an
earlier part of the MS.

Derived from K20 are the two modern copies P7 and K21 (see [p.
xxviii](sbe0504.htm#page_xxviii).md). Derived from M6 are the modern copy
of the first two parts in M9 (No. 9 of the Haug collection in the State
Library at Munich), a copy of Chaps. XIV, XV in L15 (No. 15 of the
collection of Avesta and Pahlavi MSS. in the India Office Library at
London), a copy of Chap. XX, 4-17 in O121 (No. 121 of the Ouseley
collection in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, see [p.
xxx](sbe0504.htm#page_xxx).md), and a copy of Chap. XVIII in Dastûr
Jâmâspji's MS. of the Bundahi*s* at Bombay. While an independent Pahlavi
Version of Chap. XXIII occurs in a very old codex in the library of the
high-priest of the Parsis at Bombay, which version has been used for the
text of the present translation, because that chapter is incomplete in
M6.

Pâzand versions of some of the chapters, chiefly in the appendix, are to
be found in some MSS., but all derived apparently from M6. Thus, in the
Pâzand MSS. L7 and L22 (Nos. 7 and 22 in the India Office Library at
London, see [p. xxxi](sbe0504.htm#page_xxxi).md), written in Avesta
characters, Chaps. XVIII, XX, XV follow the last chapter of the
Bundahi*s*, and Chap. XIV occurs a few folios further on. And in the
Pâzand MS. M7 (No. 7 of the Haug collection in the State Library at
Munich), written in Persian characters, the following detached passages
occur in a miscellaneous collection of extracts (fols. 126-133):—Chaps.
XX, 14-16, X, 18, 19, IX, 9, 10, XX, 12, 13, 4, 5, VIII, 2, 4-14, XX,
11. A Persian version of Chap. XVIII also occurs in M5 (No. 5 of the
same collection) on fol. 54.

It does not appear that the Shâyast lâ-shâyast has ever been hitherto
translated into any European language <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md), nor

<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span>

is any Persian or Gu*g*arâti translation of it known to the present
translator, though a good deal of the matter it contains may be found in
the Persian Rivâyats, but generally given in a different form. Owing to
the technical character of the treatise, it is hazardous for any one but
a Parsi priest to attempt to translate it, so that errors will, no
doubt, be apparent to the initiated in the present translation. At the
same time it must not be forgotten that the laws and customs mentioned
in the text were those current in Persia twelve centuries ago, which may
be expected to differ, in many details, from those of the Parsis in
India at the present day. This is a consideration which a Parsi
translator might be too apt to ignore; so that his thorough knowledge of
present customs, though invaluable for the decipherment of ambiguous
phrases, might lead him astray when dealing with clear statements of
customs and rules now obsolete and, therefore, at variance with his
preconceived ideas of propriety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[lix:1](sbe0507.htm#fr_48.md) But perhaps before
the compilation of the prose Sad-dar Bundahi*s*, or Bundahi*s* of a
hundred chapters, which seems to refer to the Shâyast lâ-shâyast <span
id="page_lx">p. lx</span> in its opening words, as follows:—'This book
is on "the proper and improper" which is brought out from the good, pure
religion of the Mazdayasnians;' though this term may possibly relate to
its own contents. There is also a Persian treatise called Shâyast
na-shâyast, which gives a good deal of information obtained from the
Persian Rivâyats, and copies of which are contained in the MSS. Nos. 56
and 116 of the Ouseley collection in the Bodleian Library at Oxford.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[lxiii:1](sbe0507.htm#fr_49.md) Except Chaps, XXII,
XXIII (see the note on the heading of Chap. XXII).

<span id="fn_50"></span>[lxvi:1](sbe0507.htm#fr_50.md) Except Chap. XVIII,
which was translated into German by Justi, as the last chapter of his
translation of the Bundahi*s* (see p. xxvi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Concluding Remarks](sbe0508.md)
