[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0556)  [Next](sbe0558) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

## BAHMAN YA*S*T.

### CHAPTER I.

0\. *May* the gratification of the creator Aûharmazd, the beneficent,
the developer, the splendid, and glorious, and the benediction of the
archangels, which *constitute* the pure, good religion of the
Mazdayasnians, *be* vigour of body, long life, and prosperous wealth for
him whose writing I am <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1](#fn_1033).

1\. As <span id="fr_1041"></span>[2](#fn_1034) it is declared by the
Stû*d*gar *Nask* <span id="fr_1042"></span>[3](#fn_1035) that

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zaratû*s*t asked
for immortality from Aûharmazd, then Aûharmazd displayed the omniscient
wisdom to Zaratû*s*t, and through it he beheld the root of a tree, on
which were four branches, one golden, one of silver, one of steel, and
one was mixed up with iron. 2. Thereupon he reflected in this *way*,
that this was seen in a dream, and when he arose from sleep Zaratû*s*t
spoke thus: 'Lord of the spirits and earthly existences! it appears that
I saw the root of a tree, on which were four branches.'

3\. Aûharmazd spoke to Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1](#fn_1036) thus: 'That root of a tree which thou
sawest, and those four branches, are the four periods which *will*

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

come. 4. That of gold is when I and thou converse, *and* King Vi*s*tâsp
shall accept the religion, and shall demolish the figures of the demons,
*but* they *themselves* remain for <span
id="fr_1044"></span>[1](#fn_1037). . . . concealed proceedings. 5. And
that of silver is the reign of Ar*d*akhshîr <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[2](#fn_1038) the Kayân king (Kaî shah), and that of
steel is the reign of the glorified (anôshak-rûbân) Khûsrô son of
Kêvâ*d* <span id="fr_1046"></span>[3](#fn_1039), and that which was
mixed with iron is the evil sovereignty of the demons with dishevelled
hair <span id="fr_1047"></span>[4](#fn_1040) of the race of Wrath <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[5](#fn_1041), and when it is the end of the tenth
hundredth winter (satô zim) of thy millennium, O Zaratû*s*t the
Spîtâmân!'

6\. It is declared in the commentary (zand) <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[6](#fn_1042) of the Vohûman Ya*s*t, Horvada*d*
Ya*s*t, and Â*s*tâ*d* Ya*s*t

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

that, during this time, the accursed Mazdîk son of Bâmdâ*d*, who is
opposed to the religion, comes into notice, and is to cause disturbance
among those in the religion of God (yazdân). 7. *And* he, the glorified
*one* <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1](#fn_1043), summoned Khûsrô son of
Mâh-dâ*d* and Dâ*d*-Aûharmazd of Nishâpûr, who were high priests of
Âtarô-pâtakân, and Âtarô-frôbâg the undeceitful (akadbâ), Âtarô-pâ*d*,
Âtarô-Mitrô, and Bakht-âfrî*d* to his presence, and he demanded of them
a promise <span id="fr_1051"></span>[2](#fn_1044), thus: 'Do not keep
these Ya*s*ts in concealment, *and* do not teach the commentary except
among your relations <span id="fr_1052"></span>[3](#fn_1045).' 8. *And*
they made the promise unto Khûsrô.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[191:1](sbe0557.htm#fr_1040) Or, possibly,
'*for* whom I am written,' the meaning of mûn yektîbûnîhêm being not
quite clear. In fact, the construction of the whole of this initial
benediction is rather obscure.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[191:2](sbe0557.htm#fr_1041) It is possible
that this is to be read in connection with Chap. II, 1, with the meaning
that 'as it is declared by the Stû*d*gar *Nask* that Zaratû*s*t asked
for immortality from Aûharmazd, *so* in the Vohûman Ya*s*t commentary it
is declared that he asked for it a second time.' This introductory
chapter is altogether omitted in both the Pâz. MSS. which have been
examined, but it is given in the Pers. version. It is also omitted in
the epitome of the Bahman Ya*s*t contained in the Dabistân (see Shea's
translation, vol. i. pp. 264-271).

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[191:3](sbe0557.htm#fr_1042) This was the
first nask or 'book' of the complete Mazdayasnian literature, according
to the Dînkar*d*, which calls it Sû*d*kar; but according to the
Dînî-va*g*arkar*d* and the Rivâyats it was the second nask, called
Stûdgar or Istûdgar. For its contents, as given by the
Dînî-va*g*arkar*d* (which agrees with the account in the Rivâyats), see
Haug's Essays, p. 126. In the Dînkar*d*, besides a short description of
this Nask, given in the eighth book, there is also a detailed account of
the contents of each of its fargar*d*s, or chapters, occupying
twenty-five quarto pages of twenty-two lines each, in the ninth book.
From this detailed statement it appears <span id="page_192">p.
192</span> that the passage mentioned here, in the text, constituted the
seventh fargar*d* of the Nask, the contents of which are detailed as
follows:—

'The seventh fargar*d*, Tâ-ve-ratŏ (Av. tâ v*e* urvâtâ, Vas. XXXI, 1),
is about the exhibition to Zaratû*s*t of the nature of the four periods
in the Zaratû*s*tian millennium (hazangrôk zim, "thousand winters").
First, the golden, that in which Aûharmazd displayed the religion to
Zaratû*s*t. Second, the silver, that in which Vi*s*tâsp received the
religion from Zaratû*s*t. Third, the steel, the period within which the
organizer of righteousness, Âtarô-pâ*d* son of Mârspend, was born.
Fourth, the period mingled with iron is this, in which is much
propagation of the authority of the apostate *and* other villains
(sarîtarânŏ), along with destruction of the reign of religion, the
weakening of every kind of goodness *and* virtue, *and* the departure of
honour *and* wisdom from the countries of Iran. In the same period is a
recital of the many perplexities and torments of the period for that
desire (girâyîh) of the life of the good which consists in seemliness.
Perfect is the excellence of righteousness (Av. ashem vohû vahi*s*tem
astî, Yas. XXVII. 14, W.).'

If this be a correct account of the contents of this fargar*d*, the
writer was evidently consulting a Pahlavi version of the Nask, composed
during the later Sasanian times.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[192:1](sbe0557.htm#fr_1043) Generally
understood to mean 'descendant of Spitama,' who was his ancestor in the
ninth generation (see Bund. XXXII, 1).

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[193:1](sbe0557.htm#fr_1044) A word is lost
here in K20 and does not occur in the other copies and versions, nor can
it be supplied from the similar phrase in Chap. II, 16. The meaning of
the sentence appears to be that Vi*s*tâsp destroyed the idols, but the
demons they represented still remained, in a spiritual state, to produce
evil.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[193:2](sbe0557.htm#fr_1045) See, Chap. II,
17.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[193:3](sbe0557.htm#fr_1046) Khusrô Nôshirvân
son of Qubâd, in modern Persian, who reigned in A.D. 531-579. Kêvâ*d* is
usually written Kavâ*d*.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[193:4](sbe0557.htm#fr_1047) The epithet
vi*g*âr*d*-vars may also mean 'dressed-hair,' but the term in the text
is the more probable, as the Persian version translates it by kushâdah
muî, 'uncovered hair.' That it is not a name, as assumed by Spiegel,
appears clearly from the further details given in Chap. II, 25.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[193:5](sbe0557.htm#fr_1048) Or, 'the progeny
of Aêshm,' the demon. Wrath is not to be understood here in its abstract
sense, but is personified as a demon. It is uncertain whether the
remainder of this sentence belongs to this § or the next.

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[193:6](sbe0557.htm#fr_1049) If there were any
doubt about zand meaning the Pahlavi translation, this passage would be
important, as the Avesta of the Horvada*d* (Khordâd) and Â*s*tâ*d*
Ya*s*ts is still extant, but contains nothing about the heretic Mazdîk
or Mazdak (see Chap. II, 21). No Avesta of the Vohûman Ya*s*t is now
known.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[194:1](sbe0557.htm#fr_1050) That is, Khusrô
Nôshirvân. As the names of his priests and councillors stand in K20 they
can hardly be otherwise distributed than they are in the text, but the
correctness of the Ms. is open to suspicion. Dâ*d*-Aûharmazd was a
commentator who is quoted in Chap. III, 16, and in the Pahl. Yas. XI,
22; Âtarô-frôbâg was another commentator mentioned in Sls. I, 3; and
Âtarô-pâ*d* and Bakht-âfrî*d* are names well known in Pahlavi
literature, the former having been borne by more than one individual
(see Sls. I, 3, 4).

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[194:2](sbe0557.htm#fr_1051) The Pers. version
says nothing about this promise, but states that Khûsrô sent a message
to the accursed Mazdak, requiring him to reply to the questions of this
priestly assembly on pain of death, to which he assented, and he was
asked ten religious questions, but was unable to answer one so the king
put him to death immediately.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[194:3](sbe0557.htm#fr_1052) A similar
prohibition, addressed to Zaratû*s*t, as regards the Avesta text, is
actually found in the Horvada*d* Yt. 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe0558)
