[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0509)  [Next](sbe0511) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

## BUNDAHI*S*.

### CHAPTER I.

0\. In the name of the creator Aûharmazd.

1\. The Zand-âkâs ('Zand-knowing or tradition-informed <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)), which is first about Aûharmazd's
original creation and the antagonism of the evil spirit <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53) *and* afterwards about the nature of the
creatures from the original creation till the end, which is the future
existence (tanû-i pasînŏ). 2. As *revealed* by the religion of the
Mazdayasnians, so it is declared that Aûharmazd is supreme in
omniscience and goodness,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

*and* unrivalled <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) in splendour; the
region of light is the place of Aûharmazd, which they call 'endless
light,' and the omniscience *and* goodness of the unrivalled Aûharmazd
is what they call 'revelation <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55).' 3.
Revelation is the explanation of both *spirits* together; one is he who
is independent of unlimited time <span id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_56),
because Aûharmazd and the region, religion, and time of Aûharmazd were
and are and ever will be; *while* Aharman <span
id="fr_57"></span>[4](#fn_57) in darkness, with backward understanding
and desire for destruction, was *in* the abyss, and 'it is *he* who
*will* not be; and the place of that destruction, and also of that
darkness, is what they call the 'endlessly dark.' 4. And between them
was empty space, *that* is, what they call 'air,' in which is now
*their* meeting.

5\. Both are limited and unlimited spirits, for the supreme is that
which they call endless light, and the abyss that which is endlessly
dark, so that between them is a void, and one is not connected with

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

the other; and, again, both spirits are limited as to their own selves.
6. And, secondly, on account of the omniscience of Aûharmazd, both
things are in the creation of Aûharmazd, the finite and the infinite;
for this they know is that which is in the covenant of both spirits. 7.
And, again, the complete sovereignty of the creatures of Aûharmazd is in
the future existence, and that also is unlimited for ever and
everlasting; and the creatures of Aharman will perish at the time
when <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) the future existence occurs,
and that also is eternity.

8\. Aûharmazd, through omniscience, knew that Aharman exists, *and*
whatever he schemes he infuses with malice and greediness till the end;
*and* because He accomplishes the end by many means, He also produced
spiritually the creatures which were necessary for those means, *and*
they remained three thousand years in a spiritual *state*, so that they
were unthinking <span id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59) and unmoving, with
intangible bodies.

9\. The evil spirit, on account of backward knowledge, was not aware of
the existence of Aûharmazd; and, afterwards, he arose from the abyss,
and came in unto the light which he saw. 10. Desirous of destroying, and
because of *his* malicious nature, he

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

rushed in to destroy that light of Aûharmazd unassailed by fiends, and
he saw its bravery and glory were greater than his own; *so* he fled
back to the gloomy darkness, and formed many demons and fiends; *and*
the creatures of the destroyer arose for violence.

11\. Aûharmazd, by whom the creatures of the evil spirit were seen,
creatures terrible, corrupt, and bad, also considered them not
commendable (bûrzi*s*nîk). 12. Afterwards, the evil spirit saw the
creatures of Aûharmazd; they appeared many creatures of delight (vâyah),
enquiring creatures, and they seemed to him commendable, and he
commended the creatures and creation of Aûharmazd.

13\. Then Aûharmazd, with a knowledge <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60) of which way the end of the matter *would
be*, went to meet the evil spirit, and proposed peace to him, *and*
spoke thus: 'Evil spirit! bring assistance unto my creatures, and offer
praise! so that, in reward for it, ye (you and your creatures) may
become immortal and undecaying, hungerless and thirstless.'

14\. And the evil spirit shouted thus <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61): 'I *will* not depart, I *will* not
provide assistance for thy creatures, I *will* not offer praise among
thy creatures, and I am not of the same opinion with thee as to good
things. I *will* destroy thy creatures for ever and everlasting;
moreover, I *will* force all thy creatures into disaffection to thee and
affection for myself.' 15. And the explanation thereof is this, that the
evil spirit reflected in this manner, that

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Aûharmazd was
helpless as regarded him <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62), therefore
He proffers peace; and he did not agree, but bore on even into conflict
with Him.

16\. And Aûharmazd spoke thus: 'You are not omniscient and almighty, O
evil spirit! so that it is not possible for thee to destroy me, and it
is not possible for thee to force my creatures so that they *will* not
return to my possession.'

17\. Then Aûharmazd, through omniscience, knew that: If I do not grant a
period of contest, then it *will* be possible for him to act *so* that
he *may* be able to cause the seduction of my creatures to himself. As
even now there are many of the intermixture of mankind who practise
wrong more than right. 18. And Aûharmazd spoke to the evil spirit thus:
'Appoint a period! so that the intermingling of the conflict may be for
nine thousand years.' For he knew that by, appointing this period the
evil spirit *would* be undone.

19\. Then the evil spirit, unobservant and through ignorance, was
content with that agreement; just like two men quarrelling together, who
propose a time thus: Let us appoint such-and-such a day for a fight.

20\. Aûharmazd also knew this, through omniscience, that within these
nine thousand years, *for* three thousand years everything proceeds *by*
the will of Aûharmazd, three thousand years *there is* an intermingling
of the wills of Aûharmazd and Aharman, and the last three thousand years
the evil spirit is disabled, and they keep the adversary away <span
id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63) from the creatures.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

21\. Afterwards, Aûharmazd recited the Ahunavar thus: Yathâ ahû vairyô
('as a heavenly lord is to be chosen'), &c. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) once, *and* uttered the twenty-one
words <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65); He also exhibited to the evil
spirit His own triumph in the end, and the impotence of the evil spirit,
the annihilation of the demons, and the resurrection *and* undisturbed
future existence of the creatures for ever and everlasting. 22. And the
evil spirit, who perceived his own impotence and the annihilation of the
demons, became confounded, and fell back to the gloomy darkness; even so
as is declared in revelation, that, when one of its (the Ahunavar's)
three *parts* was uttered, the evil spirit contracted *his* body through
fear, and when two parts of it were uttered he fell upon *his* knees,
and when all of it was uttered he became confounded

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

and impotent as to the harm he caused the creatures of Aûharmazd, *and*
he remained three thousand years in confusion <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66).

23\. Aûharmazd created *his* creatures in the confusion of Aharman;
first he produced Vohûman ('good thought'), by whom the progress of the
creatures of Aûharmazd was advanced.

24\. The evil spirit first created <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67)
Mîtôkht ('falsehood'), and then Akôman ('evil thought').

25\. The first of Aûharmazd's creatures of the world *was* the sky, and
his good thought (Vohûman), by good procedure <span
id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68), produced the light of the world, along
with which was the good religion of the Mazdayasnians; this *was*
because the renovation (frashakar*d*) <span
id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_69), which happens to the creatures *was*
known to him. 26. Afterwards *arose* Ar*d*avahi*s*t,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

and then Shatvaîrô, and then Spendarma*d*, and then Horvada*d*, and then
Amerôda*d* <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70).

27\. From the dark world of Aharman *were* Akôman and Andar, and then
Sôvar, and then Nâkahê*d*, and then Tâîrê*v* and Zâîrî*k* <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71).

28\. Of Aûharmazd's creatures of the world, the first *was* the sky; the
second, water; the third, earth; the fourth, plants; the fifth, animals;
the sixth, mankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[3:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_52) The Pâzand and most of
the modern Pahlavi manuscripts have, 'From the Zand-âkâs,' but the word
min, 'from,' does not occur in the old manuscript K20, and is a modern
addition to M6. From this opening sentence it would appear that the
author of the work gave it the name Zand-âkâs.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[3:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_53) The Avesta
Angra-mainyu, the spirit who causes adversity or anxiety (see
Darmesteter's Ormazd et Ahriman, pp. 92-95); the Pahlavi name is, most
probably, merely a corrupt transliteration of the Avesta form, and may
be read Ganrâk-maînôk, as the Avesta Spe*n*ta-mainyu, the spirit who
causes prosperity, has become Spênâk-maînôk in Pahlavi. This latter
spirit is represented by Aûharmazd himself in the Bundahi*s*. The
Pahlavi word for 'spirit,' which is read madônad by the Parsis, and has
been pronounced mînavad by some scholars and mînôî by others, is
probably a corruption of maînôk, as its Sasanian form was minô. If it
were not for the extra medial letter in ganrâk, and for the obvious
partial transliteration of spênâk, it would be preferable to read ganâk,
'smiting,' and to derive it from a supposed verb gandan, 'to smite' (Av.
ghna), as proposed by most Zendists. A Parsi would probably suggest
gandan, 'to stink.'

<span id="fn_54"></span>[4:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_54) Reading aham-kaî,
'without a fellow-sovereign, peerless, unrivalled, independent.' This
rare word occurs three times in §§ 2, 3, and some Pâzand writers suggest
the meaning 'everlasting' (by means of the Persian gloss hamî*s*ah),
which is plausible enough, but hâmakî would be an extraordinary mode of
writing the very common word hamâî, 'ever.'

<span id="fn_55"></span>[4:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_55) The word dînô (properly
dênô), Av. daêna, being traceable to a root dî, 'to see,' must
originally have meant 'a vision' (see Haug's Essays on the Religion of
the Parsis, 2nd ed. p. 152, note 2), whence the term has been
transferred to 'religion' and all religious observances, rules, and
writings; so it may be translated either by 'religion' or by
'revelation.'

<span id="fn_56"></span>[4:3](sbe0510.htm#fr_56) This appears to be the
meaning, but the construction of § 3 is altogether rather obscure, and
suggestive of omissions in the text.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[4:4](sbe0510.htm#fr_57) The usual name of the
evil spirit; it is probably an older corruption of Angra-mainyu than
Ganrâk-maînôk, and a less technical term. Its Sasanian form was
Aharmanî.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[5:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_58) Substituting amat,
'when,' for mûn, 'which,' two Huzvâri*s* forms which are frequently
confounded by Pahlavi copyists because their Pâzand equivalents, ka and
ke, are nearly alike.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[5:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_59) Reading aminî*d*âr in
accordance with M6, which has amînî*d*âr in Chap. XXXIV, 1, where the
same phrase occurs. Windischmann and Justi read amûîtâr, 'uninjured,
invulnerable,' in both places. This sentence appears to refer to a
preparatory creation of embryonic and immaterial existences, the
prototypes, fravashis, spiritual counterparts, or guardian angels of the
spiritual and material creatures afterwards produced.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[6:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_60) The Huz. khavîtûnast
stands for the Pâz. dânist with the meaning, here, of 'what is known,
knowledge,' as in Persian.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[6:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_61) Literally, 'And it was
shouted by him, the evil spirit, thus:' the usual idiom when the
nominative follows the verb.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[7:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_62) The words dên val stand
for dên valman.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[7:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_63) That is, 'the adversary
is kept away.' In Pahlavi the third <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> person
plural is the indefinite person, as in English. These 9000 years are in
addition to the 3000 mentioned in § 8, as appears more clearly in Chap.
XXXIV, 1.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[8:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_64) This is the most sacred
formula of the Parsis, which they have to recite frequently, not only
during the performance of their ceremonies, but also in connection with
most of their ordinary duties and habits. It is neither a prayer, nor a
creed, but a declaratory formula in metre, consisting of one stanza of
three lines, containing twenty-one Avesta words, as follows:—

Yathâ ahû vairyô, athâ ratu*s*, ashâ*d* *k*î*d* ha*k*â,  
Vangh*e*us dazdâ mananghô, *s*kyaothnanãm angh*e*us mazdâi,  
Khshathrem*k*â ahurâi â, yim dregubyô dada*d* vâstârem.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And it may be
translated in the following manner: 'As a heavenly lord is to be chosen,
so is an earthly master (spiritual guide), for the sake of
righteousness, *to be* a giver of the good thoughts of the actions of
life towards Mazda; and the dominion is for the lord (Ahura) whom he
(Mazda) has given as a protector for the poor' (see Haug's Essays on the
Religion of the Parsis, 2nd ed. pp. 125, 141).

<span id="fn_65"></span>[8:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_65) The word mârik must
mean 'word' here, but in some other places it seems to mean 'syllable'
or 'accented syllable.'

<span id="fn_66"></span>[9:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_66) This is the first third
of the 9000 years appointed in §§ 18, 20, and the second 3000 years
mentioned in Chap. XXXIV, 1.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[9:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_67) It is usual to consider
dâ*d*an (Huz. yehabûntan), when traceable to Av. dâ = Sans. dhâ, as
meaning 'to create,' but it can hardly be proved that it means to create
out of nothing, any more than any other of the Avesta verbs which it is
sometimes convenient to translate by 'create.' Before basing any
argument upon the use of this word it will, therefore, be safer to
substitute the word 'produce' in all cases.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[9:3](sbe0510.htm#fr_68) Or it may be
translated, 'and from it Vohûman, by good procedure,' &c. The position
here ascribed to Vohûman, or the good thought of Aûharmazd, bears some
resemblance to that of the Word in John i. 1-5, but with this essential
difference, that Vohûman is merely a creature of Aûharmazd, not
identified with him; for the latter idea would be considered, by a
Parsi, as rather inconsistent with strict monotheism. The 'light of the
world' now created must be distinguished from the 'endless light'
already existing with Aûharmazd in § 2.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[9:4](sbe0510.htm#fr_69) The word frashakar*d*,
'what is made durable, perpetuation,' is applied to the renovation of
the universe which is to take place about the time of the resurrection,
as a preparation for eternity.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[10:1](sbe0510.htm#fr_70) These five, with
Vohûman and Aûharmazd in his angelic capacity, constitute the seven
Ameshaspends, 'undying causers of prosperity, immortal benefactors,' or
archangels, who have, charge of the whole material creation, They are
personifications of old Avesta phrases, such as Vohû-manô, 'good
thought;' Asha-vahi*s*ta, 'perfect rectitude;' Khshathra-vairya,
'desirable dominion;' Spe*n*ta-ârmaiti, 'bountiful devotion;'
Haurvatâ*d*, 'completeness or health;' and Ameretâ*d*, 'immortality.'

<span id="fn_71"></span>[10:2](sbe0510.htm#fr_71) These six demons are
the opponents of the six archangels respectively (see Chap. XXX, 29);
their names in the Avesta are, Akem-manô, 'evil thought;' I*n*dra,
Sauru, N*a*unghaithya, Tauru, Zairi*k*a (see Vendîdâd X, 17, 18 Sp., and
XIX, 43 W.), which have been compared with the Vedic god Indra, *S*arva
(a name of *S*iva), the Nâsatyas, and Sans. tura, 'diseased,' and
*g*aras, 'decay,' respectively. For further details regarding them, see
Chap. XXVIII, 7-13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe0511)
