[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0557)  [Next](sbe0559) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1432623850/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part I (SBE05)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1880\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

1\. In the Vohûman Ya*s*t commentary (zand) it is declared <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[4](#fn_1046) that Zaratû*s*t asked for immortality
from

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Aûharmazd a second
time, *and* spoke thus: 'I am Zaratû*s*t, more righteous and more
efficient among these thy creatures, O creator! when *thou* shalt *make*
me <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1](#fn_1047) immortal, as the tree opposed
to harm <span id="fr_1055"></span>[2](#fn_1048), and Gôpatshah, Gô*s*t-i
Fryân, *and* *K*îtrôk-miyân son of Vi*s*tâsp, who is Pêshyôtanû, were
made <span id="fr_1056"></span>[3](#fn_1049). 2. When thou shalt make me
immortal they in thy good religion *will* believe that the upholder of
religion, who receives from Aûharmazd his pure *and* good religion of
the Mazdayasnians, will become immortal; then those men *will* believe
in thy good religion.'

3\. Aûharmazd spoke <span id="fr_1057"></span>[4](#fn_1050) thus: 'When
I shall make thee immortal, O Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! then Tûr-i
Brâ*d*arvash the Karap <span id="fr_1058"></span>[5](#fn_1051) will
become immortal, and

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

when Tûr-i Brâ*d*arvash the Karap shall become immortal the resurrection
*and* future existence are not possible.'

4\. Zaratû*s*t seemed uneasy about *it* in *his* mind <span
id="fr_1059"></span>[1](#fn_1052); *and* Aûharmazd, through the wisdom
of omniscience, knew what was thought by Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân with
the righteous spirit, and he <span id="fr_1060"></span>[2](#fn_1053)
took hold of Zaratû*s*t's hand. 5. And he, Aûharmazd the propitious
spirit, creator of the material world, the righteous *one*, even he put
the omniscient wisdom, in the shape of water, on the hand of Zaratû*s*t,
and said to him thus: 'Devour it.'

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

6\. And Zaratû*s*t devoured *some* of it; thereby the omniscient wisdom
was intermingled with Zaratû*s*t, and seven days and nights Zaratû*s*t
was in the wisdom of Aûharmazd. 7. And Zaratû*s*t beheld the men and
cattle in the seven regions of the earth, where the many fibres of hair
of every one are, and whereunto the end of each fibre holds on the back.
8. And he beheld whatever trees and shrubs *there were*, and how many
roots of plants were in the earth of Spendarma*d*, where *and* how they
had grown, *and* where they were mingled.

9\. And the seventh day and night he (Aûharmazd) took back the
omniscient wisdom from Zaratû*s*t, and Zaratû*s*t reflected in this
*way*, that I have seen *it* in a pleasant dream produced by Aûharmazd,
*and* I am not surfeited with the dream. 10. And he took both hands,
rubbed his body (kerp) again, *and spoke* <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[1](#fn_1054) thus: 'I have slept a long time, and
am not surfeited with this pleasant dream produced by Aûharmazd.'

11\. Aûharmazd said to the righteous Zaratû*s*t thus: 'What was seen in
the pleasant dream produced by Aûharmazd?'

12\. Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'O Aûharmazd, propitious spirit! creator of
the material world, righteous creator! I have seen a celebrity
(khunî*d*) with much wealth, whose soul, infamous in the body, was
hungry (gurs) <span id="fr_1062"></span>[2](#fn_1055) and jaundiced and
in hell, and he did not seem to me exalted; and I saw a beggar with no
wealth and helpless, and his soul was thriving (farpîh) in paradise,
and <span id="fr_1063"></span>[3](#fn_1056) he seemed to me exalted.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 13. \[And I saw a
wealthy *man* without children, and he did not seem to me
exalted;\] <span id="fr_1064"></span>[1](#fn_1057) and I saw a pauper
with many children, and he seemed to me exalted. 14. And I saw a tree on
which were seven branches, one golden, one of silver, one brazen, one of
copper, \[one of tin\] <span id="fr_1065"></span>[2](#fn_1058), one of
steel, and one was mixed up with iron.'

15\. Aûharmazd spoke thus: 'O Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! this is what I
say beforehand, the one tree which thou sawest is the world which I,
Aûharmazd, created; and those seven branches thou sawest are the seven
periods which *will* come. 16. And that which was golden is the reign of
King Vi*s*tâsp, when I and thou converse about religion, *and* Vi*s*tâsp
shall accept that religion and shall demolish the figures of the demons,
and the demons desist from demonstration into concealed proceedings;
Aharman and the demons rush back to darkness, and care for water, fire,
plants, and the earth of Spendarma*d* <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[3](#fn_1059) becomes apparent. 17. And that which
was of silver <span id="fr_1067"></span>[4](#fn_1060) is the reign of
Ar*d*ashîr <span id="fr_1068"></span>[5](#fn_1061) the

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kayân (Kaî),
whom <span id="fr_1069"></span>[1](#fn_1062) they call Vohûman son of
Spend-dâ*d* <span id="fr_1070"></span>[2](#fn_1063), who is he who
separates the demons from men, scatters *them* about, and makes the
religion current *in* the whole world. 18. And that which was
brazen <span id="fr_1071"></span>[3](#fn_1064) is the reign of
Ar*d*akhshîr <span id="fr_1072"></span>[4](#fn_1065), the arranger and
restorer of the world, and that of King Shahpûr, when he arranges the
world which I, Aûharmazd, created; he makes happiness (bûkhtakîh) <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[5](#fn_1066) prevalent in the boundaries of the
world, and goodness shall become manifest; and Âtarô-pâ*d* of triumphant
destiny, the restorer of the true religion, with the prepared
brass <span id="fr_1074"></span>[6](#fn_1067), brings this religion,
together with the transgressors, back to the truth. 19. And that which
was of copper is the reign of the A*s*kânian king <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[7](#fn_1068), who removes from the world

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

the heterodoxy (*g*avî*d*-rastakîh) which existed, and the wicked
Akandgar-i Kilisyâkîh <span id="fr_1076"></span>[1](#fn_1069) is utterly
destroyed by this religion, *and* goes unseen and unknown from the
world. 20. And that which was of tin is the reign of King Vâhrâm
Gôr <span id="fr_1077"></span>[2](#fn_1070), when he

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

makes the sight <span id="fr_1078"></span>[1](#fn_1071) of the spirit of
pleasure manifest, and Aharman with the wizards rushes back to darkness
*and* gloom. 21. And that which was of steel is the reign of King Khûsrô
son of Kêvâ*d* <span id="fr_1079"></span>[2](#fn_1072), when he keeps
away from this religion the accursed Mazdîk <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[3](#fn_1073), son of Bâmdâ*d*, who remains opposed
to the religion along with the heterodox. 22. And that which was mixed
with iron \[is the reign of the demons with dishevelled hair <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[4](#fn_1074) of the race of Wrath, when it is the
end of the tenth hundredth winter of thy millennium\], O Zaratû*s*t the
Spîtâmân!'

23\. Zaratû*s*t said thus: 'Creator of the material world! O propitious
spirit! what token would you give of the tenth hundredth winter?'

24\. Aûharmazd spoke thus: ‘Righteous Zaratû*s*t! I *will* make *it*
clear: the token that it is the end of thy millennium, and the most evil
period is coming, is *that* a hundred kinds, a thousand kinds, a myriad
of kinds of demons with dishevelled hair, of the

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

race of Wrath, rush into the country of Iran (Aîrân shatrô) from the
direction of the east <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1](#fn_1075), which
*has* an inferior race and race of Wrath. 25. They have uplifted
banners, they slay those living in the world <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[2](#fn_1076), they have *their* hair dishevelled on
the back, and they are mostly a small and inferior (nîtûm) race, forward
in destroying the strong doer; O Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! the race of
Wrath is miscreated (vishû*d*) and its origin is not manifest. 26.
Through witchcraft they rush into these countries of Iran which I,
Aûharmazd, created, since they burn and damage many things; and the
house of the house-owner, the land of the land-digger, prosperity,
nobility, sovereignty, religion <span id="fr_1084"></span>[3](#fn_1077),
truth, agreement, security, enjoyment, and every characteristic which I,
Aûharmazd, created, this pure religion of the Mazdayasnians, and the
fire of Vâhrâm, which is set in the appointed place, encounter
annihilation, and the direst destruction and trouble will come into
notice. 27. And that which is a great district will become a town; that
which is a great town, a village; that

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

which is a great village, a family; and that which is a \[great\] <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[1](#fn_1078) family, a single threshold. 28. O
Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! they will lead these Iranian countries of
Aûharmazd into a desire for evil, *into* tyranny *and* misgovernment,
those demons with dishevelled hair who are deceivers, so that what, they
say they do not do, and they are of a vile religion, so that what they
do not say they do. 29. And their assistance and promise have no
sincerity, there is no law, they preserve no security, and on the
support they provide no one relies; with deceit, rapacity, and
misgovernment they will devastate these my Iranian countries, *who am*
Aûharmazd.

30\. ‘And at that time, O Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! all men will become
deceivers, great friends will become of different parties, and respect,
affection, hope <span id="fr_1086"></span>[2](#fn_1079), and regard for
the soul will depart from the world; the affection of the father will
depart from the son; and *that of* the brother from *his* brother; the
son-in-law will become a beggar (kîdyak or kasîk) from his
father-in-law <span id="fr_1087"></span>[3](#fn_1080), and the mother
will be parted and estranged from the daughter.

31\. ‘When it is the end of thy tenth hundredth winter, O Zaratû*s*t the
Spîtâmân! the sun is more unseen and more spotted (vasangtar); the year,
month, and day are shorter; and the earth of Spendarma*d* is more
barren, and fuller of

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

highwaymen <span id="fr_1088"></span>[1](#fn_1081); and the crop will
not yield the seed, *so* that of the crop of the corn-fields in ten
*cases* seven will diminish and three <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[2](#fn_1082) will increase, and that which
increases does not become ripe <span id="fr_1090"></span>[3](#fn_1083);
and vegetation, trees, and shrubs will diminish; when one shall take a
hundred, ninety will diminish and ten will increase, and that which
increases gives no pleasure and flavour. 32. And men are born smaller,
and their skill and strength are less; they become more deceitful and
more given to vile practices; they have no gratitude and respect for
bread and salt, and they have no affection for their country (dêsak).

33\. ‘And in that most evil time a boundary has most disrespect <span
id="fr_1091"></span>[4](#fn_1084) where it is the property of a
suffering man of religion; gifts are few among their deeds, and duties
and good works proceed but little from their hands; and sectarians of
all kinds are seeking mischief for them <span
id="fr_1092"></span>[5](#fn_1085). 34. And all the world will be burying
*and* clothing the dead, and burying the dead *and* washing the dead
*will be* by law; the burning, bringing to water and fire, and eating of
dead matter they practise by law and do not abstain from. 35. They
recount largely about duties and good works, and pursue wickedness and
the road to hell; and through the iniquity, cajolery, and craving of
wrath and avarice they rush to hell.

36\. ‘And in that perplexing time, O Zaratû*s*t the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spîtâmân!—the
reign of Wrath with infuriate spear <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[1](#fn_1086) and the demon with dishevelled hair,
of the race of Wrath,—the meanest slaves walk forth with the authority
of nobles of the land; and the religious, who wear *sacred
thread*-girdles on the waist, are then not able *to perform* their
ablution (pâ*d*îyâ*v*îh), for in those last times dead matter and bodily
refuse become so abundant, that *one who* shall set step to step walks
upon dead matter; or when he washes in the barashnûm *ceremony*, and
puts down a foot from the stone *seat* (magh) <span
id="fr_1094"></span>[2](#fn_1087), he walks on dead matter; or when he
arranges the *sacred* twigs (baresôm) and consecrates the sacred cakes
(drônô) in their corpse-chamber (nasâî katak) <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[3](#fn_1088) it is allowable.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 37. Or, in those
last times, it becomes allowable to perform a ceremonial (ya*z*i*s*n)
with two men, so that this religion may not come to nothing and
collapse <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1](#fn_1089); there *will* be only
one in a hundred, in a thousand, in a myriad, who believes in this
religion, and even he does nothing of it though *it be* a duty <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[2](#fn_1090); and the fire of Vâhrâm, which will
come to nothing and collapse, *falls* off from a thousand to one
care-taker, and even he does not supply it properly with firewood and
incense; or when a man, *who* has performed worship and does not know
the Nîrangistân <span id="fr_1098"></span>[3](#fn_1091) ('code of
religious formulas'), shall kindle *it* with good intentions, it is
allowable.

38\. ‘Honourable <span id="fr_1099"></span>[4](#fn_1092) wealth will all
proceed to those of perverted faith (kêvî*d*-kêshân); it comes to the
transgressors, and virtuous doers of good works, from the families of
noblemen even unto the priests (môg-mar*d*ân), remain running about
uncovered; the lower orders take in marriage the daughters of nobles,
grandees, and priests; and the nobles, grandees, *and* priests come to
destitution *and* bondage. 39. The misfortunes of the ignoble will
overtake greatness and authority, and the helpless and ignoble will come
to the foremost place *and* advancement; the words of the upholders of
religion, and the seal and decision of a just judge will become the

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

words of random speakers (andê*z*ŏ-gokân) *among* the just *and* even
the righteous; and the words of the ignoble and slanderers, of the
disreputable *and* mockers, and of those of divers opinions they
consider true and credible, about which they take <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1](#fn_1093) an oath, although with falsehood, and
thereby give false evidence, and speak falsely and irreverently about
me, Aûharmazd. 40. They who bear the title of priest and disciples wish
evil concerning <span id="fr_1101"></span>[2](#fn_1094) one another; he
speaks vice and they look upon vice; and the antagonism of Aharman and
the demons is much brought on by them; of the sin which men commit, out
of five <span id="fr_1102"></span>[3](#fn_1095) sins the priests and
disciples commit three sins, and they become enemies of the good, so
that they may thereby speak of bad faults relating to one another; the
ceremonies they undertake they do not perform, and they have no fear of
hell.

41\. ‘And in that tenth hundredth winter, *which* is the end of thy
millennium, O righteous Zaratû*s*t! all mankind will bind torn hair,
disregarding revelation <span id="fr_1103"></span>[4](#fn_1096), so that
a willingly-disposed cloud and a

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

righteous wind are not able to produce rain in its proper time and
season. 42. And a dark cloud makes the whole sky night, and the hot wind
and the cold wind arrive, and bring along fruit and seed of corn, even
the rain in its proper time; and it does not rain, *and* that which
rains also rains more noxious creatures than water; and the water of
rivers and springs will diminish, and there will be no increase. 43. And
the beast *of burden* and ox *and* sheep bring forth more
painfully <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1](#fn_1097) and awkwardly, and
acquire less fruitfulness; and *their* hair is coarser *and* skin
thinner; the milk does not increase and has less cream (*k*arbi*s*t);
the strength of the labouring ox is less, and the agility of the swift
horse is less, and it carries less in a race.

44\. ‘And on the men in that perplexing time, O Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân!
who wear the *sacred thread*-girdle on the waist, the evil-seeking of
misgovernment and much of its false judgment have come as a wind in
which their living is not possible, and they seek death as a boon; and
youths and children will be apprehensive, and gossiping chitchat and
gladness of heart do not arise among them. 45. And they practise the
appointed feasts (*g*a*s*nŏ) of *their* ancestors, the propitiation
(aûsôfrî*d*) of angels, *and* the prayers and ceremonies of the season
festivals and guardian spirits, in various places, yet that which they
practise they do not believe in unhesitatingly; they do not give rewards
lawfully, and

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

bestow no gifts and alms, and even those \[they bestow\] <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1](#fn_1098) they repent of again. 46. And even
those men of the good religion, who have reverenced the good religion of
the Mazdayasnians, proceed in conformity with (bar-hamakŏ rûbi*s*n)
those ways and customs <span id="fr_1106"></span>[2](#fn_1099), and do
not believe their own religion. 47. And the noble, great, and
charitable <span id="fr_1107"></span>[3](#fn_1100), who are the virtuous
of their own country and locality, will depart from their own original
place and family <span id="fr_1108"></span>[4](#fn_1101) as idolatrous;
through want they beg something from the ignoble and vile, and come to
poverty and helplessness; through them <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[5](#fn_1102) nine in ten of these men will perish
in the northern quarter.

48\. ‘Through their way of misrule everything comes to nothingness and
destitution, levity and infirmity; and the earth of Spendarma*d* opens
*its* mouth wide, *and* every jewel and metal becomes exposed, such as
gold and silver, brass, tin, and lead. 49. And rule *and* sovereignty
come to slaves, such as the Tûrk and non-Tûranian (Atûr) of the
army <span id="fr_1110"></span>[6](#fn_1103), and are turbulent as among
the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

mountaineers <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1](#fn_1104); and the
*K*înî <span id="fr_1112"></span>[2](#fn_1105), the Kâ*v*ûlî, the Sôftî,
the Rûman (Arûmâyak), and the white-clothed Karmak <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[3](#fn_1106) then attain sovereignty in my
countries of Iran, *and* their will and pleasure will become current in
the world. 50. The sovereignty will come from those leathern-belted
ones <span id="fr_1114"></span>[4](#fn_1107) and Arabs (Tâ*z*îgân) and
Rûmans to them, *and* they will be so misgoverning that when they kill a
righteous man who is virtuous and a fly, it is all one <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[5](#fn_1108) in their eyes. 51. And the security,
fame, and prosperity, the country and families, the wealth and
handiwork, the streams, rivers, and springs of Iran, and of those of the
good religion, come to those non-Iranians; and the army and standards of
the frontiers come to them, and a rule with a craving for wrath advances
in the world. 52. And their eyes of avarice are not sated with wealth,
and they form hoards of the world's wealth, and conceal *them*
underground; and through wickedness they commit sodomy, hold much
intercourse with menstruous *women*, and practise many unnatural lusts.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

53\. 'And in that perplexing time the night is brighter <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1](#fn_1109), and the year, month, and day will
diminish one-third; the earth of Spendarma*d* arises, and suffering,
death, and destitution become more severe in the world.'

54\. Aûharmazd said to Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân: 'This is what I
foretell: that wicked evil spirit, when it shall be necessary *for him*
to perish, becomes more oppressive and more tyrannical.'

55\. So Aûharmazd spoke to Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân thus: 'Enquire fully
and learn by heart <span id="fr_1117"></span>[2](#fn_1110) thoroughly!
teach *it* by Zand, Pâ*z*and, and explanation! tell *it* to the priests
and disciples *who* speak forth in the world, *and* those who are not
aware of the hundred winters, tell *it* then to them! so that, for the
hope of a future existence, *and* for the preservation of their own
souls, they may remove the trouble, evil, and oppression which those of
other religions cause in the ceremonies of religion. (dînô yêsnân). 56.
And, moreover, I tell thee this, O Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! that
whoever, in that time, appeals for the body is not able to save the
soul, for *he is* as it were fat, and *his* soul is hungry *and* lean in
hell; whoever appeals for the soul, *his* body is hungry *and* lean
through the misery of the world, and destitute, and his soul is fat in
heaven.'

57 . Zaratû*s*t enquired of Aûharmazd thus: 'O Aûharmazd, propitious
spirit! creator of the material world who art righteous!'—He is
Aûharmazd through righteous invocation, and the rest through

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

praise; some say 'righteous creator <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1](#fn_1111)!'—'O creator! in that perplexing time
are they righteous? and are there religious people who wear the *sacred
thread*-girdle (kûstîk) on the waist, and celebrate religious rites
(dînô) <span id="fr_1119"></span>[2](#fn_1112) with the *sacred* twigs
(baresôm)? and does the religious practice of next-of-kin marriage
(khvêtûk-das) continue in their families?'

58\. Aûharmazd said to Zaratû*s*t thus: 'Of the best men is he who, in
that perplexing time, wears the *sacred thread*-girdle on the waist, and
celebrates religious rites with the *sacred* twigs, *though* not *as* in
the reign of King Vi*s*tâsp. 59. Whoever in that perplexing time recites
Itâ-â*d*-yazam (Av. ithâ â*d* yazamaidê, Yas. Vand XXXVII) <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[3](#fn_1113) *and* one Ashem-vohû <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[4](#fn_1114), *and* has learned *it* by heart, is
as though, in the reign of King Vi*s*tâsp, *it were* a
Dvâ*z*dah-hômâst <span id="fr_1122"></span>[5](#fn_1115), with
holy-water (zôhar). 60. And by

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

whomever prayer is offered up, *and* the Gâtha-*hymns* are chanted, *it
is* as though the whole ritual had been recited, *and* the Gâtha-*hymns*
consecrated by him *in* the reign of King Vi*s*tâsp. 61. The most
perfectly righteous of the righteous is he who remains in the good
religion of the Mazdayasnians, and continues the religious practice of
next-of-kin marriage in his family.'

62\. Aûharmazd said to the righteous Zaratû*s*t: 'In these nine thousand
years which I, Aûharmazd, created, mankind become most perplexed in that
perplexing time; for in the evil reigns of A*z*-i Dahâk and Frâsîyâ*v*
of Tûr mankind, in those perplexing times, were living better and living
more

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

numerously, and their disturbance by Aharman and the demons was less.
63. For in their evil reigns, within the countries of Iran, there were
not seven <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1](#fn_1116) towns which *were*
desolate as they *will be* when it is the end of thy millennium, O
Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân! for all the towns of Iran *will* be ploughed up
by their horses' hoofs, and their banners *will* reach unto
Pa*d*ashkhvârgar <span id="fr_1124"></span>[2](#fn_1117), and they
*will* carry away the sovereignty of the seat of the religion I approve
from there; and their destruction comes from that place, O Zaratû*s*t
the Spîtâmân! this is what I foretell.'

64\. Whoever <span id="fr_1125"></span>[3](#fn_1118) of those existing,
thus, with reverence unto the good, performs much worship for Aûharmazd,
Aûharmazd, aware of *it* through righteousness, gives *him* whatsoever
Aûharmazd is aware of through righteousness, as remuneration *and*
reward of duty *and* good works, and *such* members of

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

the congregation, males and females, I reverence; and the archangels,
who are also male and female, they are good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[194:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1053) This seems to
imply that this text is not the commentary <span id="page_195">p.
195</span> itself, but merely an epitome of it. The Pâz. MSS. which have
been examined, begin with this chapter.

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[195:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1054) Or, 'when I shall
*become*;' the verb is omitted by mistake in K20.

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[195:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1055) Three of these
immortals are mentioned in Bund. XXIX, 5, and Gô*s*t-i Fryân is included
in a similar enumeration in Dâ*d*. (Reply 89). The tale of Gô*s*t-i
Fryân (Av. Yôi*s*tô yô Fryananãm, of Âbân Yt. 81 and Fravardîn Yt. 120)
has been published with The Book of Ar*d*â-Vîrâf,' ed. Hoshangji and
Haug.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[195:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1056) Or, 'became;'
most of this verb is torn off in K20.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[195:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1057) The verb is
placed before its nominative in the Pahlavi text, both here and in most
similar sentences, which is an imitation of the Avesta, due probably to
the text being originally translated from an Avesta book now lost, or,
at any rate, to its author's wish that it might appear to be so
translated. In such cases of inverted construction, when the verb is in
a past tense, the Pahlavi idiom often requires a pronominal suffix,
corresponding, to the nominative, to be added to the first word in the
sentence; thus, gûftŏ*s* Aûharmazd, or afa*s* gûft Aûharmazd, does not
mean 'Aûharmazd spoke to him (or said it),' but merely 'Aûharmazd spoke'
(lit. 'it was said by him, Aûharmazd').

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[195:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1058) According to an
untranslated passage in the Selections of Zâ*d*-sparam, mentioned in the
note on [p. 187](sbe0555.htm#page_187), this is the name of <span
id="page_196">p. 196</span> one of the five brothers in the Karapân
family of sorcerers, who were enemies of Zaratû*s*t during his
childhood. Their names, as written in SZS., may be read as follows,
'Brâ*d*arvakhsh, Brâ*d*rôyi*s*nŏ, Tûr Brâgrêsh, Azânŏ, and Nasm,' and
the first is also called 'Tûr-i 'Brâ*d*arvakhsh;' they are described as
descendants of the sister of Manû*sk*îhar. In the seventh book of the
Dînka*r*d a wizard, who endeavours to injure Zaratû*s*t in his
childhood, is called 'Tûr-i Brâ*d*rôk-rêsh, the Karapŏ,' and was
probably the third brother, whose name (thus corrected) indicates
brâthrô-raêsha as its Avesta form. Karap or Karapân in all these
passages is evidently the name of a family or caste, probably the Av.
karapanô which Haug translates by 'performers of (idolatrous)
sacrificial rites,' in connection with Sans. kalpa, 'ceremonial ritual'
(see Haug's Essays, pp. 289-291).

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[196:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1059) K20 has 'among
the spirits;' the word mîni*s*n having become maînôkân by the insertion
of an extra stroke.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[196:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1060) Reading afa*s*
instead of mina*s* (Huz. of a*g*a*s*, 'from or by him,' which is written
with the same letters as afa*s*; 'and by him'), not only here, but also
in §§ 5, 7, 9. The copyist of K20 was evidently not aware that afa*s* is
a conjunctive form, but confounded it with the prepositional form
a*g*a*s*, as most Parsis and some European scholars do still. The
Sasanian inscriptions confirm the reading afa*s* for the conjunctive
form; and Nêryôsang, the learned Parsi translator of Pahlavi texts into
Pâzand and Sanskrit some four centuries ago, was aware of the difference
between the two forms, as he transcribes them correctly into Paz. va*s*
and a*z*a*s*.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[197:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1061) This verb is
omitted in K20 by mistake.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[197:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1062) Or else 'dirty.'

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[197:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1063) Reading afam
instead of minam, both here and in § 14; the <span id="page_198">p.
198</span> copyist of K20 having confounded these two words, like those
mentioned in the note on § 4.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[198:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1064) The passage in
brackets is omitted in K20, but is supplied from the Paz. MSS., being
evidently necessary to complete the contrast. It occurs also in the
Pers. version.

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[198:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1065) Supplied from the
Paz. and Pers. versions, being omitted here in K20, though occurring in
§ 20.

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[198:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1066) The female
archangel who has charge of the earth (see Bund. I, 26).

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[198:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1067) The Pâz. MSS.
omit the description of the silver age.

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[198:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1068) Usually
identified with Artaxerxes Longimanus, but his long reign of 112 years
may include most of the Achæmenian sovereigns down to Artaxerxes Mnemon,
several of whom are called Ahasuerus or Artaxerxes in the biblical books
of Ezra and Esther. See Bund. XXXI, 30, XXXIV, 8.

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[199:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1069) Reading mûn,
'whom,' instead of amat, 'when' (see the note on Bund. I, 7).

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[199:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1070) Contracted here
into Spendâ*d*, as it is also in Bund. XXXIV, 8 in the old MSS. This
name of the king is corrupted into Bahman son of Isfendiyâr in the
Shâhnâmah.

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[199:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1071) This brazen age
is evidently out of its proper chronological order. The Pâzand and
Persian versions correct this blunder by describing the copper age
before the brazen one here, but they place the brazen branch before the
copper one in § 14, so it is doubtful how the text stood originally.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[199:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1072) Artakhshatar son
of Pâpakî and Shahpûharî son of Artakhshatar are the Sasanian forms of
the names of the first two monarchs (A.D. 226-271) of the Sasanian
dynasty, whose reigns constitute this brazen age.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[199:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1073) Literally,
'deliverance *from sin*' or 'salvation' by one's own good works, and,
therefore, not in a Christian sense.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[199:6](sbe0558.htm#fr_1074) Referring to the
ordeal of pouring molten brass on his chest, undergone by Âtarô-pâ*d*
son of Mâraspend, high-priest and prime minister of Shâpûr I, for the
purpose of proving the truth of his religion to those who doubted it.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[199:7](sbe0558.htm#fr_1075) It is uncertain
which of the A*s*kânian sovereigns is meant, or whether several of the
dynasty may not be referred to. The Greek <span id="page_200">p.
200</span> successors of Alexander were subdued in Persia by A*s*k
(Arsaces I), who defeated Seleucus Callinicus about B.C. 236. But the
third book of the Dînkar*d* (in a passage quoted by Haug in his Essay on
the Pahlavi Language) mentions Valkha*s* (Vologeses) the A*s*kânian as
collecting the Avesta and Zand, and encouraging the Mazdayasnian
religion. This Valkha*s* was probably Vologeses I, a contemporary of
Nero, as shown by Darmesteter in the introduction to his translation of
the Vendidad.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[200:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1076) I am indebted to
Professor J. Darmesteter for pointing out that Nêryôsang, in his
Sanskrit translation of Yas. IX, 75, explains Kala*s*iyâkâ*h* as 'those
whose faith is the Christian religion;' the original Pahlavi word in the
oldest MSS. is Kilisâyâîk, altogether a misunderstanding of the Avesta
name Keresâni, which it translates, but sufficiently near the name in
our text to warrant the assumption that Nêryôsang would have translated
Kilisyâkîh by 'Christianity;' literally it means 'ecclesiasticism, or
the church religion' (from Pers. kilisyâ, Gr. ἐκκλησία). Akandgar is
probably a miswriting of Alaksandar or Sikandar; though Darmesteter
suggests that Skandgar (Av. ske*n*dô-kara, Pers. *s*ikandgar), 'causer
of destruction,' would be an appropriate punning title for Alexander
from a Persian point of view. The anachronisms involved in making
Alexander the Great a Christian, conquered by an A*s*kânian king, are
not more startling than the usual Pahlavi statement that he was a Roman.
To a Persian in Sasanian times Alexander was the representative of an
invading enemy which had come from the countries occupied, in those
times, by the eastern empire of the Christian Romans, which enemy had
been subdued in Persia by the A*s*kânian dynasty; and such information
would naturally lead to the anachronisms just mentioned. The name
Kilisyâkîh is again used, in Chap. III, 3, 5, 8, to denote some
Christian enemy.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[200:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1077) This Sasanian
monarch (A.D. 420-439), after considerable provocation, revived the
persecution of the heretics and foreign creeds which had been tolerated
by his predecessor, and this conduct naturally endeared him to the
priesthood.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[201:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1078) Reading vênâp
(Pers. bînâb), but it may be va davâ*g*, in which case the phrase must
be translated as follows: 'when he makes the spirit of pleasure and joy
manifest.'

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[201:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1079) See Chap. I, 5.
The characteristic of the steel age, like that of the tin one, was the
persecution of heretics who had been tolerated by the reigning monarch's
predecessor.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[201:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1080) Generally written
Mazdak, a heretic whose teaching was very popular in the time of King
Kêvâ*d* (or Kavâ*d*, A.D. 487-531). His doctrine appears to have been
extreme socialism built upon a Mazdayasnian foundation. He was put to
death by Khûsrô I, as hinted in the text. It is remarkable that none of
the successors of Khûsrô Nôshirvân are mentioned in the Bahman Ya*s*t,
so that a Parsi, who even did not believe in the verbal inspiration of
the book, might possibly consider the remainder of it as strictly
prophetical.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[201:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1081) The passage in
brackets is omitted in K20 by mistake, and is here supplied from Chap.
I, 5, in accordance with the Pâz. and Pers. versions.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[202:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1082) Or 'of Khûrâsân.'
it is difficult to identify these demons with the Arabs, who came from
the west, though a dweller in Kirmân might imagine that they came from
Khûrâsân. In fact, hardly any of the numerous details which follow,
except their long-continued rule, apply exclusively to Muhammadans. It
appears, moreover, from § 50 and Chap. III, 8, that these demons are
intended for Tûrks, that is, invaders from Turkistân, who would
naturally come from the east into Persia.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[202:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1083) Reading
gêhân-zîvŏ zektelûnd, but the beginning of the latter word is torn off
in K20, and the other versions have no equivalent phrase. The Pâzand
substitutes the phrase 'black banners, and black garments.'

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[202:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1084) This word, being
torn off in K20, is supplied from the Pâz. MSS.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[203:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1085) This word is
omitted in K20, but supplied from the Pâzand. The whole section is
omitted in the Pers. version.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[203:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1086) This word, being
torn off in K20, is doubtfully supplied from the Pers. paraphrase. The
Pâz. MSS. omit §§ 30-32.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[203:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1087) Or, perhaps,
'parents-in-law;' the original is khûsrûînê, followed by some word
(probably naf*s*man) which is torn off in K20. The Pers. version gives
no equivalent phrase.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[204:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1088) Or,
'tax-collectors;' Pahl. tangtar va râs-vânagtar.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[204:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1089) In K20 'va 3' is
corrupted into the very similar va vâi, 'and a portion.'

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[204:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1090) Literally,
'white.'

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[204:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1091) Reading anâ*z*arm
instead of hanâ â*z*arm.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[204:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1092) That is, for the
Iranians in general, who are the 'they' in §§ 32-35.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[205:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1093) The Av. Aêshmô
khrvîdru*s*, 'Aêshma the impetuous assailant' (see Bund. XXVIII, 15-17);
this demon's Pahlavi epithet is partly a transcription, and partly a
paraphrase of the Avesta term.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[205:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1094) According to
Dastûr Hoshangji (Zand-Pahlavi Glossary, p. 65) the term magh is now
applied to the stones on which the person undergoing purification has to
squat during ablution in the barashnûm ceremony. Originally, however,
Av. magha appears to have meant a shallow hole dug in the earth, near or
over which the person squatted upon a seat, either of stone or some
other hard material (see Vend. IX). The term for the hole was probably
extended to the whole arrangement, including the seat, which latter has
thus acquired the name of magh, although magh and maghâk still mean 'a
channel or pit' in Persian.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[205:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1095) The Av. kata of
Vend *V*, 36-40; a special chamber for the temporary reception of the
corpse, when it was impossible to remove it at once to the dakhma, owing
to the inclemency of the weather. It should be large enough for standing
upright, and for stretching out the feet and hands, without touching
either walls or ceiling; that is, not less than six feet cube. The text
means that those times will be so distressing, that it will be
considered lawful to perform the sacred ceremonies even in a place of
such concentrated impurity as a dead-house not actually occupied by a
corpse.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[206:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1096) The Pâz. MSS.
add, 'and helplessness.'

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[206:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1097) The Pâz. MSS.
add, 'and the prayers and ceremonies that he orders of priests and
disciples they do not fulfil.'

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[206:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1098) The name of a
work which treats of various ceremonial details, and appears to be a
portion of the Pahlavi translation of the seventeenth or Hûspâram Nask,
containing many Avesta quotations, which are not now to be found
elsewhere.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[206:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1099) The Pâz. MSS.
have misread a*z*îr damîk, 'underground,' instead of â*z*armîk.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[207:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1100) Literally,
'devour an oath,' which Persian idiom was occasioned by the original
form of oath consisting in drinking water prepared in a particular
manner, after having invoked all the heavenly powers to bear witness to
the truth of what had been asserted (see the Saûgand-nâmah).

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[207:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1101) Reading râî
instead of lâ, 'not.' The whole section is omitted by the Pâz. MSS.,
possibly from politic motives, as the language is plain enough.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[207:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1102) The Persian
paraphrase has 'eight.'

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[207:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1103) Referring
probably to the injunctions regarding cutting the hair and paring the
nails, with all the proper precautions for preventing any fragments of
the hair or nails from lying about, as given in Vend. XVII. One of the
penalties for neglecting such precautions is supposed to be a failure of
the necessary rains. The <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> words anâstak
dînô can also be translated by 'despising the religion.'

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[208:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1104) The word appears
to be dar*d*aktar, but is almost illegible in K20; it may possibly be
kûtaktar, 'more scantily' as the Pâz. MSS. have kôdaktar bahô*d*,
'become smaller.'

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[209:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1105) This verb is
omitted in K20.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[209:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1106) It is rather
doubtful whether their own customs are meant, or those of their
conquerors.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[209:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1107) Or dahâkân may
mean 'the skilful.'

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[209:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1108) Reading dû*d*ak
instead of rû*d*ak. At first sight the miswriting of r for d seems to
indicate copying from a text in the modern Persian character, in which
those two letters are often much alike; but it happens that the
compounds dû and rû also resemble one another in some Pahlavi
handwriting.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[209:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1109) Whether through
poverty and helplessness, or through the conquerors, is not quite clear.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[209:6](sbe0558.htm#fr_1110) Very little
reliance can be placed upon the details of this sentence, but it is
difficult to make any other complete and consistent translation.
Darmesteter suggests the reading hênô, 'army,' but another possible
reading is Khyôn (Av. *Hv*yaona), the old name <span id="page_210">p.
210</span> of some country probably in Turkistân, as Ar*g*âsp, the
opponent of Vi*s*tâsp, is called 'lord or king of Khyôn' in the
Yâ*d*kâr-i Zarîrân (see also Gô*s* Yt. 30, 31, Ashi Yt. 50, 51, Zamyâd
Yt. 87).

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[210:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1111) Or, 'as the
mountain-holding Khûdarak.' Darmesteter suggests that Khûdarak may be an
'inhabitant of Khazar.'

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[210:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1112) Probably the
people of Samarkand, which place was formerly called *K*în according to
a passage in some MSS. of Tabart's Chronicle, quoted in Ouseley's
Oriental Geography, p. 298. See also Bund. XII, 22.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[210:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1113) The Kâbulî and
Byzantine Rûman are plain enough; not so the Sôftî and Karmak (Kalmak or
Krimak).

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[210:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1114) That is, the
Tûrks, as appears more clearly from Chap. III, 8, 9. The Arabs are
mentioned here, incidently, for the first time, and again in Chap. III,
9, 51.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[210:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1115) Literally, 'both
are one.'

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[211:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1116) The Pâz. version
adds, 'the motion of the sun is quicker.'

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[211:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1117) Literally, 'make
easy.'

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[212:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1118) This interpolated
commentary is a pretty clear indication that the writer is translating
from an Avesta text.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[212:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1119) Both Pâz. and
Pers. have drônô, 'sacred cakes.'

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[212:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1120) The third hâ or
chapter of the Yasna of seven chapters. It worships Aûharmazd as the
creator of all good things.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[212:4](sbe0558.htm#fr_1121) See Bund. XX, 2.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[212:5](sbe0558.htm#fr_1122) For the following
explanation of the various kinds of hômâst I am indebted to Dastûr
Jâmâspji Minochiharji Jâmâsp-Âsâ-nâ of Bombay:—

There are four kinds of hômâst recited by priests for the atonement of
any sin that may have been committed by a woman during menstruation,
after her purification:—

1\. Hômâst consists of prayers recited for 144 days, in honour of the
twelve following angels: Aûharmazd, Tî*s*tar, Khûrshêd, Mâh, Âbân, Âdar,
Khurdâd, Amerdâd, Spendarma*d*, Bâd, Srôsh, and Ardâ-fravash. Each
angel, in turn, is reverenced for twelve days successively, with one
Yasna each day.

2\. Khadûk-hômâst, 'one hômâst,' differs from the last merely in adding
a Vendidad every twelfth day, to be recited in the <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> Ushahin Gâh (12 P*M*. to 6 A*M*.) in honour
of the angel whose propitiation ends that day.

3\. Dah-hômâst, 'ten hômâsts,' differs from the preceding merely in
having a Vendidad, in addition to the Yasna, every day.

4\. Dvâzdah-hômâst, 'twelve hômâsts,' are prayers recited for 264 days
in honour of twenty-two angels, namely. the twelve aforesaid and the
following ten: Bahman, Ardibahi*s*t, Shahrivar, Mihir, Bahrâm, Râm, Dîn,
Rashnû, Gô*s*, and Â*s*tâd. Each angel, in turn, is reverenced as in the
last.

The celebration of hômâst costs 350 rûpîs, that of khadûk-hômâst 422
rûpîs, that of dah-hômâst 1000 rûpîs, and that of dvâzdah-hômâst 2000
rûpîs; but the first and third are now no longer used. The merit
obtained by having such recitations performed is equivalent to 1000
tanâpûhars for each Yasna, 10,000 for each Visparad, and 70,000 for each
Vendidad recited. A tanâpûhar is now considered as a weight of 1200
dirhams, with which serious sins and works of considerable merit are
estimated; originally it must have meant a sin which was 'inexpiable' by
ordinary good works, and, conversely, any extraordinary good work which
was just sufficient to efface such a sin.

The amount of merit attaching to such recitations is variously stated in
different books, and when recited with holy-water (that is, with all
their ceremonial rites) they are said to be usually a hundred times as
meritorious as when recited without it.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[214:1](sbe0558.htm#fr_1123) So in the Pâzand,
but 'seventeen' in Persian; in K20 the word is partly illegible, but can
be no other number than *s*ibâ, seven.'

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[214:2](sbe0558.htm#fr_1124) The mountainous
region south of the Caspian (see Bund. XII, 2, 17).

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[214:3](sbe0558.htm#fr_1125) This section is
the Pahlavi version of an Avesta formula which is appended to nearly
two-thirds of the hâs or chapters of the Yasna, and, therefore,
indicates the close of the chapter at this point. The version here given
contains a few verbal deviations from that given in the Yasna, but none
of any importance. The Avesta text of this formula is as follows:—

YêNhê hâtãm âa*d*, yêsnê paitî  
vanghô mazd*a*u ahurô vaêthâ, ashâ*d* ha*k*â,  
y*a*unghãm*k*â, tãs*k*â t*a*us*k*â yazamaidê.

And it may be translated in the following manner:—

'Of whatever male of the existences, therefore, Ahuramazda was better
cognizant, through righteousness in worship, and of whatever females,
both those males and those females we reverence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](sbe0559)
