[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ttx03) [Next](ttx05.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# THE T‘AI HSI CHING.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PREFATORY NOTE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

T<span class="small">HE</span> following treatise, belonging though it
does to a corrupted development of Taoism proper, may claim a place in
the present series as being an amplification of the sixth chapter of the
Tao Tê Ching. It teaches that in the whole Universe there is but one
Breath, or Being, a participation in which results in Life or Birth.
This Breath is as it were a vast and inexhanstible reservoir, whence all
things derive their existence; but it is double, embodying the Yin or
feminine Principle of Nature with the Yang, and from these producing all
things. The sixth chapter of the Tao Tê Ching, constituting the text or
key-note of the present essay, is to the following effect:—

   "The Breath, or Spirit, of the Deep is imperishable. It is called the
Azure (Heaven) and the Mother (Earth). The passage through which these
Two Influences emerge and enter is called the root of the visible
creation. They are ceaseless in action as though permanent, and may be
used without ever being exhausted."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TEXT.

   *The Embryo is formed by the concretion of concealed Breath;*<span
id="page_63_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_63_note_*.md) *and the Embryo being
brought into existence, the Breath begins to move in Respiration.*

   The generative auræ of the Great Empyrean all constitute one Breath.
The Great or Universal Spirit,<span
id="page_63_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_63_note_dagger.md) lying in
readiness, becomes united with the embryo, and the embryo, being thus
united with it, develops respiration. Then the embryo is like a flower,
of which the navel is the peduncle; and as the umbilical cord is
connected with the placenta, the embryo inhales and exhales
simultaneously with the mother, <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> one
inhalation and one exhalation constituting Respiration. A period of
absolute quiescence follows, \[during which\] the unmixed virility of
the embryo—the pure Yang—increases day by day; and when the months are
fulfilled the body is fully formed and parturition takes place. This is
what Yuen Shih—the First Person in the Taoist Trinity—makes known to
men, in order that they may preserve their breath intact until it
becomes soft and pliable as a little child's.

   *The entrance of Breath into the body is Life; the departure of the
Spirit from the external form is Death.*

   The external form of a man is his body; the spirit is the intelligent
part of the breath; perception is the controller of the external form.
The breath effects the completion of this form; as long as the outer
form and the spirit are not separated, the breath will enter the body;
and if the spirit remains in the body, the body will assuredly live for
ever. But if the spirit departs, the breath will be dispersed and the
body will decay; that is death. Therefore it may be said that death is
the source of the life and life the source of death.

   *He who understands the Spirit and the Breath may live for ever; he
who rigorously maintains the Empty and Non-existent may thereby nourish
the Spirit and the Breath.*

   Spirit and Breath are One; they come from Emptiness and
Non-existence. From the disruption of Chaos until now they have never
either diminished or increased. Wherefore it is said that the Spirit of
the Deep is immortal. When a man is able to discard his senses of sight
and hearing, and to abstain from understanding and knowing, this amounts
to a rigorous maintenance \[of the Empty and Non-existent\], by means of
which he nourishes \[the Spirit and the Breath\]. But if he recognises
the Actual and the Existent he will be deceived, and he himself the
means of shortening his own life.

   *When the Spirit moves the Breath moves; when Spirit is still the
Breath is still.*

   The Spirit is identical with the Will. The Breath is that which
pervades, or is co-extensive with, the whole body. The Will is the
conductor of the Breath. The Breath accompanies the Spirit, and the
Spirit conducts the Breath, which, in moving or resting, takes its cue
from the Spirit; so that the Spirit and the Breath necessarily nourish
one another.

   *If you desire to attain to immortality, the Spirit and the Breath
must be diffused through one another.*

   The Spirit of the Deep is immortal. It is called the Azure (Heaven)
and the Mother (Earth); the Emptiness which exists in the centre of the
ancestral Breath before the birth takes place. Heaven and Earth <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> are also called the Cavity where resides the
Breath. If one closes the eyes and looks inwards, consolidating the
Spirit and causing it to enter this Cavity, the Spirit and the Breath
will pervade each other and be firmly maintained within; and by this
means immortality may be obtained.

   *If the Heart is perfectly devoid of thoughts—neither going nor
coming, issuing nor entering—it will dwell permanently within of its own
accord.*

   The Heart is the abode of the Spirit. If it exercises itself in
thinking, it will go backwards and forwards and out and in, and be
unable to dwell permanently within. The spirit and the breath of an
infant in the womb are both alike motionless; so that \[the heart\],
being devoid or thoughts, neither comes nor goes, emerges nor enters in.
Now if a man is able to concentrate his breath and enfold his spirit
like a little child, the pure virile principle will be agglomerated, and
he will return from a state of age to that of a boy and live for ever.
This is the nourishment of the Spirit and the Breath by rigorously
maintaining the Empty and the Non-existent. Wherefore I say, Discard the
will, revert to the Empty and Non-existent, and let your mental vacuity
be permanent.

   *Be diligent in pursuing this course; for it is the true road to
take.*

   To sum up the whole: Act permanently and strenuously. Lao Tsze said,
"If you employ \[such methods\] without diligence you will receive no
help." The meaning of "diligence" as here used implies *never
neglecting*; that is, a constant practice, as though permanent. "True"
means *not false*; it is the straight road, not a side gate.

   *In the Thirty-six Imbibements the first thing is that the exalation
should be very slight; the inhalation very long drawn. Whether sitting
or lying, this rule should be alike observed; walking and standing there
should be tranquillity. Guard against clamour and crowds; avoid the
odour of fish and meat. That which is metaphorically called the
Respiration of the Embryo is truly called the Inner Elixir. It not only
cures diseases, but confers immortality. He who continuously pursues
this practice will have his name inscribed upon the Register of the
Immortals.*

   This is a guide-book to Embryonic Respiration. If the breath be
regulated and the saliva \[properly\] swallowed, the primogenial breath
of the Inner Palace may be recruited. The saliva should be swallowed
thrice every two hours; to swallow during the period between eleven and
one at night will do still more towards the nourishment of Life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ttx05.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_63">p. 63</span>

<span id="page_63_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_63_fr_*.md) This might perhaps
be rendered "by being *united with*, or *brought into conjunction with*,
the concealed Breath." The character is \#\#\#, which may be elliptical
for either \#\#\# or \#\#\#.

<span id="page_63_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_63_fr_dagger.md) Or, the
Spirit of the Abyss, \#\#\#; apparently identical with the \#\#\# of the
*Tao Tê Ching*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
