[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ttx08) [Next](ttx10.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

# A CHAPTER FROM THE HUNG LIEH CHUAN, <span class="small">BY HUAI-NAN TSZE, <span class="small">PRINCE OF KUANG LING.</span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

N<span class="small">OW</span> T<span class="small">AO</span> is that
which covers Heaven and supports Earth; it is co-extensive with the four
quarters, and spreads to the eight points; its height cannot be
measured, nor its depths fathomed; it enfolds the Universe in its
embrace, and confers visibility upon that which at first was formless.
If a spring flows, its fountain of water will be copious; empty before,
it will gradually overflow; and as it rolls on ceaselessly, turbid and
bubbling, it will get clear at last. Thus the T<span
class="small">AO</span> reaches upwards to Heaven and touches the Earth
beneath; sideways it fills up all within the Four Seas. Its use cannot
be exhausted; it knows neither exuberance nor decay; if it be opened
out, it will cover the North, the South, the East, the West, the Zenith
and the Nadir, as with a veil; if it be gathered together, it will not
fill even a man's fist. Though it be contracted, it can yet be expanded;
though it be obscure, it can become clear; though it be weak, it can
become strong; though it be soft, it can become hard. It fills all
within the four points of the compass; it contains the Yin and Yang; it
holds together the Universe and the Ages, and supplies the Three
Luminaries with light. It is so tenuous and subtle that it pervades
everything as water pervades earth, in mire. It is by T<span
class="small">AO</span> that mountains are high, and abysses deep; that
beasts walk and birds fly; that the sun and moon are bright, and the
stars revolve in their courses; that the *ch‘i-lin* roams abroad, and
the phœnix hovers in the air. In remote antiquity the two Emperors Fu
Hsi and Shên Nung obtained the power inherent in T<span
class="small">AO</span>, and were established in the Centre; their
spirits roamed in company with the Creator, and pacified everything
within the limits of the Universe.

   Therefore it is that the sky revolves and the earth is motionless;
that circumvolution goes on unceasingly, and that water flows without
stopping; for T<span class="small">AO</span> is the beginning and end of
the visible creation. The rising of wind, the gathering of Clouds—all
are *necessities*; the rolling of thunder, and the fall of rain, alike
*must be*, and that without end.<span
id="page_74_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_74_note_*.md) \[The operations of
T<span class="small">AO</span> are as\] the apparition of a ghost, the
disappearance of <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> a lightning-flash, the
soaring of a dragon, the alighting of a phœnix. They resemble the
rotations of a potter's wheel, which goes round and round for ever. They
cause things which have been polished and engraved to revert to their
pristine roughness. Those whose action is inaction are in harmony with
T<span class="small">AO</span>; those whose speech is inaction have a
full comprehension of Virtue; those who are tranquil and content, devoid
of conceit, are in possession of Harmony. Although there be a myriad
diversities \[of affairs affecting them\], all will be in accordance
with their dispositions. The spirits of such men may find a home in the
tip of an autumn hair or pervade the Universe in its entirety. Their
virtue moulds Heaven and Earth, and harmonises the Yin and Yang; it
divides the Four Seasons from each other, and brings the Five Elements
into accord. Its benign and gentle breath cherishes all things, both
inanimate and alive; it enriches vegetation with moisture, and permeates
stones and metals; it causes the growth of birds and beasts, giving to
the one rich and glossy fur, to the other abundant plumage, and horns to
the antlered stag. The fœtus of no animal fails of maturity, nor is the
egg of any bird addled before it is hatched. The father has not to mourn
the death of his son, nor the elder brother that of the younger; the lad
is not left an orphan, nor the wife a widow. Rain-clouds and the rainbow
never appear, nor do stars of evil omen pass across the sky. Such are
the effects of secret or inherent Virtue.

   Now T<span class="small">AO</span>, in its sublimest aspect, does not
regard itself as the author of Creation, or as the power which
completes, transforms, and gives all things their shape. Things which
walk, or breathe, or fly, or crawl, await the operation to T<span
class="small">AO</span> before they come into being, without recognising
the Virtue to which they owe existence; and they await the operation of
the same principle before they die, without feeling any resentment. When
men derive benefit from T<span class="small">AO</span>, they render it
no praise; so when they misuse it and bring disaster upon themselves,
they may not reproach it. When they accumulate and store up riches, this
may not be considered an increase of their wealth; nor, when they
scatter it broad-cast, is it to be accounted any impoverishment.
All-pervading and everywhere-revolving, T<span class="small">AO</span>
yet cannot be sought out; subtle and impalpable, it yet may not be
overlooked: if it be piled up, it will not be high; if it be overthrown,
it will not be low; if it be added to, it will not increase; if it be
deducted from, it will not be diminished; if it be planed, it will not
become thin; if it be cut, it will not be injured; if it be dug into, it
will not be found deep; if \[such a hole\] be filled up, it will not
become shallow. Shadowy and indistinct! it has no form. Indistinct and
shadowy! its resources have no limit. Hidden and obscure! it reinforces
\[all things\] out of formlessness. Penetrating and permeating <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> everywhere! it never acts in vain. It stoops
and rises with the hard and the soft; mounts and falls with the Yin and
Yang!

   In times gone by, Fêng Yi and T‘ai Ping controlled the Yin and Yang
as a driver his horses, riding on the clouds as on a chariot, with the
rainbow for their steeds, roaming through the subtle mists of space,
flying to the loftiest and most distant regions of Nebulosity. When they
trod upon the hoar-frost or the snow, they left no footprints; when the
rays of the sun fell upon them, they threw no shadow. They climbed aloft
on spiral gusts of wind; they passed over hills and streams, treading in
the air and soaring higher than the Kwên-lwên Mountains, bursting open
the Gate of Heaven, and entering the Palace of God!

   The successors of these men were unable to emulate them, although
they had light chariots, docile horses, strong whips, and pointed goads.
Wherefore, the wise and good are ever tranquil and have no desires; they
are ever contented, and have no cares. They use the sky as their canopy,
the earth as their chariot, the four seasons as their horses, and the
Yin and Yang as their postilions; riding upon the clouds they soar
through the fleecy mists of Heaven, and dwell with the Creator.<span
id="page_76_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_76_note_*.md) Perfectly free and
knowing no restraints, they advance through the empyrean; going slowly
or rapidly as they wish. They cause the rain-stars to sprinkle moisture
on the roads, and the wind-stars to sweep the dust; the lightning serves
them for a whip, and the thunder for their chariot-wheels. Above, they
roam through the empty wastes of ether; below, they pass through the
Gate of Boundlessness. There is nothing that does not pass before their
vision in these wanderings, yet, on their return, their completeness
\[of spirit\] is unimpaired; and although everything within the four
corners of the Universe is under their control, they ever revert to
their foundation. Wherefore, the sky being their canopy, there is
nothing uncovered; the earth being their chariot, there is nothing
unsupported; the four seasons being their horses, they are never without
such as serve them; the Yin and Yang being their postilions, nothing is
left unprovided for. So that, swiftly as they may move, they are always
steady; however far they may go, they never tire; their limbs are
motionless, and their mental powers remain unimpaired. Yet they know the
forms and distinguishing marks of everything within the Universe; how
can this be? It is because they have got a firm grasp of T<span
class="small">AO</span>; thus they are enabled to roam through the land
of Infinity. Therefore although the affairs of the world are not easily
administered, they may be carried out by a comprehension of the course
they would naturally take; although the transmutations of the visible
Universe baffle investigation, they may yet be understood by obtaining
their actual origin and destiny.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

   Now when a mirror, and water, for example, are brought into proximity
with any object, they reflect it as square or round, crooked or
straight, as the case may be, with perfect tranquillity. \[In like
manner does the heart of a wise man naturally reflect the principles of
T<span class="small">AO</span>\]. Wherefore the wise man does not need
to hear sounds or see forms; for he is conscious of both, even in the
midst of silence and vacancy. The quiescence of spirit with which a man
is born, is the nature implanted in him by Heaven; the influences which
affect and excite him subsequently, work injury to that nature. When a
man responds to the calls made upon him by business of whatever sort,
that implies an excitation of his knowledge; and when his faculty of
knowledge is brought into contact with outside matters, he becomes the
subject of predilections and aversions. As soon as a man's predilections
and aversions assume shape, his faculty of knowledge, or cognition, is
enticed \[into play\] by external objects; and if he is unable to revert
to his true self, the T<span class="small">AO</span> is extinguished in
him. Wherefore those who are perfectly versed in T<span
class="small">AO</span> do not permit any change to take place in their
Heaven-implanted constitution through any human agency. Though they
undergo variations outwardly in common with everything else, inwardly
they never lose their inherent actuality. Utterly non-existent, T<span
class="small">AO</span> is yet ever ready to respond to those who seek
it; it apportions the Zodiacal Mansions as they revolve; for everything,
great or small, long and short, due provision is made. \[If a man is
identified with T<span class="small">AO</span>\] let a myriad things
present themselves before him, all prancing and rearing, as it were, in
utter confusion, they will be inadequate to make him lose his head.
Wherefore such men, when in positions of prominence and authority, do
not bring their weight to bear heavily upon the people, nor do they
injure them. The good betake themselves to them for protection, while
the lascivious and depraved stand in awe of them; for, as they do not
place themselves in antagonism to the world, so does the world not dare
to contend with them.

   Now when you go to a river to fish, you cannot fill your bag in one
day, however sharp and barbed may be your hook, and fine your line, and
appetising your bait; even if you add to these advantages the skill of
Chan Ho and Kwên Huan, you will still be able to compete with those who
fish with nets. Nor, if you go out shooting birds, with the best of bows
and fleetest of arrows, and have the additional advantage of being as
adroit as Yih and P‘êng Meng, will you be able to compete with those who
lay snares and nets, in catching birds on the wing. And why? Because
your implements are too small. Well, then; if the world be regarded as a
cage, and seas and rivers as a net, how can a single bird or fish be
lost or escape? So that just as a simple arrow is not equal to one which
has a string attached to it to draw it back again, even that is not
<span id="page_78">p. 78</span> equal to \[the net\] which has no
form—*q.d.*, the world, the rivers, and the seas.

   Now attempting to explain the Great Doctrine by means of
insignificant illustrations is exactly like setting a crab to catch a
rat, or a toad to catch a flea. Not only would such teachings be
inadequate to repress lasciviousness and put a stop to depravity, but
they would have exactly the opposite effect. The olden times Kwên, the
father of Yü, built a city wall twenty-four feet in height; in
consequence of which all the feudal princes fell off in their allegiance
and dwellers beyond the sea became false and crafty. Yü knew that the
Empire was infected with disloyalty, so he pulled down the wall and
filled up the city-moat, distributed largess among the people, and burnt
all the armour and muniments of war. Thus by a display of kindness he
caused those who dwelt beyond the sea to come willingly offer and their
allegiance, and people from all sides to bring tribute; and when the
feudal princes assembled at T‘u-shan, bearing their jade insignia, they
represented no less than ten thousand States. So that cherishing a
scheming, crafty mind defiles one's original innocence and purity, and
prevents both one's spirit and virtue from becoming perfect. If a man
does not understand the things pertaining to himself, how can he expect
people from a distance to place confidence in him? Wherefore, if armour
be strong, the weapons brought against it will be sharp; when the city
wall is completed, battering engines will be prepared. If hot soup be
poured into liquid already boiling, it will bubble up as much as ever;
if you whip a snapping dog or a kicking horse with a view to teaching it
better, you will not be able to change its disposition even if you were
Yi Yin or Tsao Fu himself. If a man extinguishes fondness and the fear
arising from it, in his heart, he may follow in the track of a famished
tiger \[with impunity\]; how much less will he care to avoid a dog or a
horse? Wherefore, those who embody the teachings of T<span
class="small">AO</span> are quiet and easy, yet meet with no
impediments; while those who employ schemes and methods put themselves
to great trouble and yet with no result. Now those who frame laws of
unyielding severity, in which there is left no loophole of escape, have
no chance of becoming princes or usurpers; and the method of those who
use rods and whips \[in enforcing such laws\] is not one which has in it
the elements of permanence. Li Chu had such clearness of vision that he
was able to distinguish the point of a needle at a distance of over a
hundred paces; yet he could not see the fish in the depths of the sea.
Shih Kuang had such quickness of ear that he was able to blend together
the individual tones of the eight winds \[in his music\]; yet he could
hear no sound at a distance of over ten *li*. In like manner, if the
ability of a single man be relied on, it will be found insufficient to
govern a dwelling-place three roods in size; while if the <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> principle of right and the spontaneity of
Heaven and Earth be brought into play, there will be no difficulty
whatever in tranquillising the entire Universe. Thus Yü accepted water
as his model, in digging his canals; and Shên Nung based his
agricultural labours on what he learnt from the budding sprouts. Now
duckweed has its root in water, and wood has its root in the soil. When
birds are in the empty air, they can fly; when beasts tread upon the
solid earth, they can walk. Dragons and the like live in water; tigers
and leopards among mountains; such is the nature conferred upon them by
Heaven and Earth. When two pieces of wood are rubbed together, they will
ignite; when metals are brought into contact with fire, they melt.
Spherical objects constantly roll about; hollow ones float easily; such
are their natural properties. Thus when the spring-winds blow the sweet
rain falls, and all things live and grow. The feathered ones brood and
hatch, the furry ones breed and bear; plants and trees put forth all
their glorious exuberance of foliage, birds and animals lay eggs and
produce offspring; no action is visible outwardly, and yet the work is
completed. When autumn-winds bring down the hoarsfrost, the trees,
though still alive, bow their heads, broken and bare; the falcon and the
eagle pounce ruthlessly upon their prey, and reptiles and insects burrow
into the ground and become torpid; then plants and trees strike root,
fishes and turtles dive into the depths of the sea; no action is visible
outwardly, yet they disappear, and their forms are no more seen.

   Such as live in trees make their nests of brushwood; such as live in
the water have their lurking-places in holes. Birds and beasts have
grassy jungles for their dwellings, while human beings have houses; oxen
and horses are useful on dry ground, boats where water is abundant; the
country of the Hsiung-nu produces thick furs, while the districts of
Soochow and Che-kiang, bean and grass-cloth—for summer wear. Each place
produces that which is necessary to its requirements, in order to
counteract the dryness or humidity of the climate; and at every place
such things are used as are calculated to resist extremes of cold and
heat. Wherever the lot of living creatures is cast, there it will be
found that provision is made for their comfort; and from this it may be
seen that spontaneity is the original law of creation. What scope is
there, then, for the interference of the Sages?

   To the south of Mount Chiu-yi, there is very little business done on
land, but a great deal on water; in consequence of which the inhabitants
cut their hair and tattoo their bodies to make themselves resemble scaly
reptiles. They wear a short strip of cloth round their loins instead of
trousers, to facilitate wading and swimming; their sleeves also are
short, leaving the arms bare, in order that they may be free to propel
their boats; all of which is the result of their aquatic surroundings.
To the <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> north of Yen-mên, the Ti savages
do not eat grain; they despise the old and honour the robust; according
to their customs, it is bodily strength that is most highly prized. The
men never part company with their bows; the bridles are never taken off
the horses; such is what they are accustomed to. Thus when the Emperor
Yü went to the country where everybody went about naked, he stripped off
his clothes before crossing the frontier, resuming his robe and girdle
on leaving it again. This was in order to conform to the customs of the
country. Now, if those who have occasion to transplant trees neglect to
consider whether their nature requires a sunny or a shady position, the
trees will inevitably wither up. Thus, if orange-trees are transplanted
to the north of the Yang-tsze, their fruit will be changed into a small,
bitter, rough-skinned sort. The thrush never passes the river Chi; if
the tapir (?) crosses the river Wên, it dies; for neither the forms nor
the natures of these objects are changeable, nor may their surroundings
or the places to which they are indigenous, be altered.

   Wherefore, those who have arrived at a thorough understanding of the
T<span class="small">AO</span>, revert to a condition of pure repose;
those who investigate the things around them, enter, at last, upon
absolute inaction.<span id="page_80_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_80_note_*.md)
Nourishing their constitutions by tranquillity, and resting their
spirits in indifference, they enter the Door of Heaven. And what is it
that is thus called the Heavenly? It is that which is homogeneous, pure,
simple, undefiled, ungarnished, upright, luminous and immaculate, and
which has never undergone any mixture or adulteration from the
beginning. And what is the Human? It is that which has been adulterated
with shrewdness, crookedness, dexterity, hypocrisy and deceit; wherefore
it bends itself in compliance with the world, and is brought into
association with the customs of the age. For example, the ox has a
divided hoof, and wears horns, while the horse has a dishevelled mane
and a complete hoof; this is the Heavenly. Putting a bit into the
horse's month and piercing the nose of the ox; this is the Human. Those
who follow the Heavenly, are such as roam in company with T<span
class="small">AO</span>; those who follow the Human, are such as connect
themselves with the customs of the world. Now a fish in a well is unable
to discourse about that which is great, for it is hampered by the
narrowness of its surroundings. The summer insect is unable to discourse
about the cold, for it only believes in the season of which it has
experience. Sophists are unable to discourse upon the Perfect Doctrine,
for they are hampered by their conventionalities and bound by their
erudition. Wherefore the Sage does not allow the Human to disorder his
Heaven \[-implanted nature\], nor does he allow desire to disturb his
natural feelings. He <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> acts exactly as he
ought, without considering what he shall do beforehand; he is
trustworthy, without promising; he obtains what he wants, without
anxiety; he brings his designs to completion without doing anything
himself. His Spiritual Palace,—or mind—being filled with pure sincerity,
he governs men in company with the Creator.

   Now expert swimmers may be drowned, and expert horsemen thrown. The
very things at which they are most clever turn to their disaster;
wherefore restless people invariably come to grief, and the avaricious
invariably fall into poverty. In ancient times, Kung Kung had strength
sufficient to cause a landslip towards the south-east by butting his
head against the Pu-chou Mountain; but when he contended for the Empire
with Kao Hsin, \[he was beaten, so\] he plunged into an abyss—and
drowned himself. His entire family being extinguished, there was no one
left to perform the ancestral sacrifices. Yi, Prince of Yueh, plunged
into a mountain cave \[rather than accept the Crown\]; so the men of
Yueh lighted fires and smoked him out, and he had no choice but to
comply with their demands. From this it may be seen that the acquisition
\[of empire\] is a matter of opportunity, and not the result of
struggling for it, and that its successful government lies in
spontaneous action, and not in the exercise of mere Imperial power.<span
id="page_81_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_81_note_*.md)

   The ground which occupies a low position does not struggle to secure
a lofty one; and therefore it is tranquil, and out of danger. Water
flows downward, but one stream does not struggle to outrun another; yet
it flows swiftly and never lags behind. In ancient times Shun cultivated
the ground at the Li mountain, and at the expiration of a single year
all the husbandmen from other places came and settled there,
appropriating all the poor, stony soil to themselves, and ceding all the
rich fat land to each other. When he fished by the river-side, all the
fishermen came and settled near him,—everybody choosing for himself the
places where the water was shallow and the fish scarce, and yielding to
others all the places where there was a good depth and plenty of fish.
During this time, Shun never either uttered a word \[of admonition\] nor
did he lift a hand to direct them what to do; he simply held the
principle of Virtue firmly in his heart, and the reformation of the
people was effected with a supernatural rapidity. If Shun had not held
this object in view, however eloquent he might have been, and however
indefatigable his admonitions, he would not have been able to convert a
single man. How vast, therefore, and how great, is that Doctrine which
cannot be spoken of!

   Now if a man is able to govern the inhabitants of the Three Miao, to
force the winged folk to come and present tribute, to change the <span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> customs of the country where everybody goes
naked, to exact homage from the Shu-shân—or Ju-chih—tribes, without
issuing any commands, and yet to prove successful in changing their
manners and altering their customs; it can only be one who does so by
force of his own natural faculties. How would laws, enactments, and
penalties be sufficient to accomplish so much? Wherefore the Sage
cultivates, internally, that which is the root \[of his attainments\],
and does not, outwardly, make a parade of accessories. He preserves the
spiritual part of his nature and discards his shrewdness; silent and
inactive, there is yet nothing he does not accomplish; indifferent and
caring for nothing, there is yet nothing he does not govern. Those who
are called inactive are such as do not attempt to force things into
premature action; those who are said to leave nothing unaccomplished are
such as simply allow things to follow their natural course. Those who
are said to govern everything are such as never alter that which is
spontaneous or natural; those who are said to leave nothing ungoverned
are such as give to all that which is their natural requirement. It is
only these men who know how to preserve the root from which all creation
springs, and the causes, or antecedents, of all the affairs of life.
Therefore they are all able to pursue their investigations without
limit, and to reach that which has no end; they understand all things
thoroughly, without any misconception or delusion; they respond to all
requirements as the echo to a sound, and that untiringly; and this
ability may be called the endowment of Heaven.<span
id="page_82_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_82_note_*.md) Thus those who are in
possession of the True Doctrine are pliable in will but strong in
action;<span id="page_82_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_82_note_dagger.md)
their hearts are perfectly unbiassed, and their decisions are therefore
just. Those who are long in making up their minds but strong when they
come to act are mild and pliant, tranquil and quiescent; inwardly they
are diffident, and when they come to act as though they had no ability;
perfectly content, they have no anxieties; in acting they never lose an
opportunity—or, they always act at the right moment; they follow all
things in their march and revolutions; they never take the initiative in
anything, but only respond when influence is brought to bear upon them.
Therefore the noble ought to adopt humble designations,<span
id="page_82_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_82_note_ddagger.md) and lofty
structures should be built on low foundations. They use the small to
direct or control the great;<span
id="page_82_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_82_note_sect.md) a motive power from
within exercises its influence abroad. <span id="page_83">p. 83</span>
Pliant in action, they can yet be firm; yielding, they can yet be
strong; adapting themselves to circumstances as they change, they still
hold fast the fundamental part of the Doctrine, and are able to effect
great things by small means. When those who are said to be strong in
action encounter vicissitudes, or meet with sudden emergencies, or find
themselves compelled to prepare for misfortune, or to ward off troubles,
their strength is never inadequate—their antagonists are invariably
discomfited. Adapting themselves to the transmutations of nature, they
choose their times for action, and therefore they are invulnerable.
Wherefore those who wish to preserve their resolution, must maintain it
by means of gentleness; and those who wish to preserve their force, must
guard it by means of weakness. If gentleness be persevered in it will
lead to resolution; if weakness be persevered in it will lead to
strength. It is possible to foretell the future weal or woe of any given
person, by watching to see what his constant practice is. Force can only
be successful in combating what is weaker than itself; it cannot
overcome anything which is equally strong. But weakness can overcome
what is far stronger than itself; the strength of weakness cannot be
estimated! Thus if soldiers be fierce, they will eventually be
annihilated; if wood be hard, it will be easily snapped in twain; when
the skin of a drum is hard, it will soon crack; the teeth, which are
stronger and harder than the tongue, decay first. Wherefore weakness
constitutes the substance of life; strength is associated with death.
Those who take the initiative in action are soon brought to a pass where
they can get no further; those who wait for others to act before they do
so themselves have a starting-place from which they can go through all
they want to compass. And how can it be known that this is so? The
average life of men is seventy years; and day by day and month by month
they repent of the things they have done amiss, until they come to die.
Thus when Ch‘ü Pŏ-yü arrived at the age of fifty, he considered that he
had done wrong for forty-nine years. And why? It is always the man who
does a thing for the first time, who has the difficulties to contend
with; to those who come after him the fight is easy. When the pioneers
have attained a position of eminence, those who come after them reap the
benefit of their experience; when pioneers fall down, those in the rear
fall upon the top of them. When the pioneers are taken in a trap or pit,
those in the rear devise means to avoid the danger themselves; when the
pioneers are defeated, those in the rear adopt a different method. It
may be seen from this that the pioneers are simply the target on which
those who come after them practise shooting. These two classes may be
compared to the point and the butt-end of a spear respectively. The
point encounters dangers, while the butt-end is free from troubles; and
why? Because it is in the rear. This is what the commonest and most
ordinary people can all <span id="page_84">p. 84</span> see; yet the
virtuous and wise are unable to avoid being always in the position of
the point. When I speak of those who are in the rear of the others, I
don't mean to imply that they are in a state of obstruction, and
motionless in a state of coagulation, and therefore do not flow; their
strong point is that they fall in with any methods there may be at hand,
and always act according to the times. Furthermore, in adapting
themselves to the vicissitudes of the world according to the rule of
right, the pioneers and those who follow them exercise a mutually
regulating influence. How is it, then, that they do not lose their
control over others? It is, that no one can control them; for the times
change with greater rapidity than one can draw a breath in—\[so that it
is a matter of enormous difficulty to catch the opportunity as it
passes\]. If you act too soon, you overpass it; if too late, you fail to
catch it up. Again, when the Sun leaves us, round comes the Moon; they
do not await the convenience of men in their revolutions. For this
reason, while the Sage attaches no value of a jade sceptre a foot long,
he prizes an inch-long shadow on the dial; because time is difficult to
get and very easy to lose. The Emperor Yü availed himself of his
opportunities to such an extent that when his shoe dropped off he did
not stop to pick it up, and if his cap were caught up from his head—as
by a roadside branch—he took no notice of it. Yet his object was not so
much to get on ahead, as to avail himself of opportunities. Wherefore
the Sage preserves the principle of quiescence, and guards the weaker
side of his nature. He waits till the changes bring about the time for
action—never being premature or precipitate; soft, pliant, and at
rest—easy, tranquil, and secure,—he storms, as it were, a great
\[citadel\] and lays a strong \[tower\] in ruins, nothing in the world
being able to withstand him!

   There is nothing in the world so weak as water; yet its experience is
such that it has no bounds, its depth such that it cannot be fathomed.
In length it is without limit, in distance it has no shores; in its
flows and ebbs, its increase and decrease, it is measureless. When it
rises to Heaven, it produces rain and dew; when it falls upon the earth,
it gives richness and moisture; there is no creature in the world to
whom it does not impart life, and nothing that it does not bring to
completion. It holds all things in its wide embrace with perfect
impartiality; its graciousness extends even to creeping things and tiny
insects, without any expectation of reward. Its wealth is sufficient to
supply the wants of the whole world, without fear of exhaustion; its
virtue is bestowed upon the people at large, and yet there is no waste.
Its flow is ever onward—ceaseless and unlimited; its subtlety such that
it cannot be grasped in the hand. Strike it,—you hurt it not; stab
it,—you cause no wound; cut it,—you cannot sever it in twain; apply fire
to it—it will not burn. Whether it runs deep or shallow, seen or unseen,
taking different directions <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> —flowing
this way and that, without order or design—it can never be utterly
dispersed. Its cutting power is such that it will work its way through
stone and metal; its strength so great that the whole world is succoured
by it.<span id="page_85_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_85_note_*.md) It floats
lazily through the regions of formlessness, soaring and fluttering above
the realms of obscurity;<span
id="page_85_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_85_note_dagger.md) it worms its way
backwards and forwards among valleys and watercourses, it seethes and
overflows its banks in vast and desert wilds. Whether there be a
superfluity of it, or a scarcity, the world is supplied according to its
requirements for receiving and for imparting moisture to created things,
without respect to precedence in time. Wherefore there is nothing either
generous or mean about it; for it flows and rushes with echoing
reverberations throughout the vast expanse of Earth and Heaven. Thus it
cannot be said to have a left side or a right—\[filling everything as it
does\]; it winds and meanders backwards and forwards, this way and that,
being co-existent in point of time with the entire Universe—for which
cause its virtue may be called perfect. And how comes it that water is
able thus to bring its virtue to perfection in the world? It is because
of its gentleness, weakness, fertilising properties, and lubricity. Thus
Lao Tsze said, "That which is the weakest thing in all the world is able
to overcome the strongest. Issuing from nothingness it returns to
nowhere; and from this I know that there is advantage in
non-action."<span
id="page_85_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_85_note_ddagger.md)

   Now Formlessness is the first progenitor of Form, and Silence is the
first ancestor of Sound. The son of Formlessness is Light; its grandson
is Water. Everything that lives was thus produced from Formlessness. For
Light can be seen, but not grasped; Water may be complied with, but not
violently compelled. Wherefore among all things which are endowed with
form there are none so noble as water.

   To leave \[the road of\] life and enter upon \[that of\] death; to
revert to non-existence from a state of being after having arrived at a
state of being from one of non-existence, \[cannot be done\], and \[any
attempt to do so\] will result in obloquy and ruin. Therefore quiet and
impassiveness are the climax of virtue; and softness and weakness are
the important parts from which virtue springs; all things are emptiness,
<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> nothingness; tranquillity and content
are the true outcome of all things. When a man is able, calmly and
impassively, to await whatever may befal him, and patiently and
resolutely to cause his heart to revert to that from whence he sprang,
he will then be engulphed in a state of Formlessness. And what is this
Formlessness of which I speak? It is the One. And what is this One? It
is that which has no equal under Heaven; which, although it stands
unsupported and alone, emotionless and isolated, permeates the Nine
Heavens above and the Nine Fields below; round—but with a roundness that
no compasses could describe; square—but with a squareness that no
carpenter's square could make; one with the vast expanse; exuberant in
leaves, but having no \[discoverable\] root; embracing and enveloping
both Heaven and Earth. It is the Door of Nature! Majestic in its breadth
and depth, invisible and without form, it alone preserves its virtue
absolutely pure, spreading and diffusing it without exhaustion,
exercising it without fatigue. Wherefore it is invisible, though looked
for; inaudible, though listened for; intangible, though followed after;
formless, yet giving birth to forms; without sound, yet causing the five
notes of harmony; tasteless, yet producing the five flavours;
colourless, yet perfecting the five colours. Thus existence is produced
from non-existence, and reality from vacancy. The world being its only
enclosure, the nominal and the actual exist together. There are only
five notes in music; but the variations of these are more numerous than
can be listened to. There are only five flavours; but the modifications
of these are more numerous than can be tasted. There are only five
colours; but the diversifications of these are more numerous than can be
observed. Wherefore, given the note *kung*, the five notes may be
formulated correctly; given the quality of sweetness, the five flavours
may be decided; given whiteness, the five colours may be perfected;
given T<span class="small">AO</span>, the Creation will come into being.
Thus the Principle of this One pervades the Four Seas; the permeation of
it fills up all Heaven and Earth. In compactness it is as pure as an
unpolished gem; in a state of diffusion, it is turbid as foul
water.<span id="page_86_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_86_note_*.md) Yet, turbid
as it is, it becomes gradually clear; from hollowness it becomes full;
it ripples placidly like a deep abyss; it drifts along like floating
clouds; to all appearance non-existing, it yet exists; to all appearance
lost, it is still preserved. Multifarious as are created things, they
all pass through its aperture; the origin of all affairs emerges from
its door. Its movements are invisible—its transformations like those of
a spirit; its actions leave no vestiges,—ever behind, and yet before
all. Wherefore, in governing the Perfect Man screens his intelligence,
and does away with written legislation; he depends upon the <span
id="page_87">p. 87</span> principle of spontaneity and discards
shrewdness, and includes both himself and his people in a policy of
liberality and justice. The restraints he does keep in force are few;
the objects he strives for are restricted. He relinquishes allurements
on one hand and longings on the other; discarding his lustful appetites
and throwing off anxiety and care. The restrictive ordinances which he
retains being few, they can be easily investigated; the objects he
strives for being few, they can be easily attained. Those who depend
upon their ears for hearing and their eyes for seeing, put their bodies
to great weariness, and do not succeed in perceiving clearing even then.
Those who use knowledge and anxious thoughts in the work of government
put their minds to great trouble, and yet fail to accomplish their
objects. Wherefore the Sage uses spontaneous methods, never swerving
from what the occasion demands, or changing his constant habit, but
following out the proper line of conduct through all the windings that
it may be necessary for it to take. Now joy and anger are deflections
from the true Doctrine—conformity with T<span class="small">AO</span>;
sorrow and melancholy are lapses from Virtue; loves and hates are
aberrations of the heart; depraved appetites are impediments to the
original temperament. Great anger in a man tends to disperse the Yin
principle in his nature; great joy, to repress the Yang. Conflicting
passions produce dumbness; intense terror produces madness. When sorrow,
melancholy, and anger co-exist, the disease is past cure; when loves and
hatreds flourish greatly, tribulation will follow in their train.
Wherefore the height of virtue is an absence of both joy and sorrow from
the heart; the height of tranquillity is to reach this condition and
abide in it without change; the height of emptiness is to be perfectly
free of depraved appetites; the height of peace is the absence of loves
and hates; the height of simplicity is to keep oneself free from the
confusion which affects others. Those who are able to bring themselves
into these five conditions acquire absolute perspicacity; and the
acquirement of absolute perspicacity involves the entire grasp \[of the
True Doctrine\] by the mind. If the mind is thus able to obtain \[the
True Doctrine\], it is impossible that the passions should be fostered;
so that the acquirement of the Doctrine by the mind results in the
tranquillisation of the interior and the pacification of the passions of
joy and anger; the sinews will become hard, the strength firm, the ear
quick, and the eye clear. The mind being free and open, it never runs
counter to right; the body being robust and strong, it never breaks
down. Such a man never either oversteps his duty nor yet falls short of
it. If his sphere of action is limited, he does not feel cramped; if it
be large, he is able, in like manner, to accommodate himself to its
extent. His soul is not prone to anger, nor his spirit to vexation; but
pure and tranquil, placid and indifferent, he is the paragon of the
Universe!

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

   The Great Way of Nature is smooth and easy. It is not far from any
one. If it to be sought for in the body, it passes away, yet returns
again; if it be closely approached, it will respond; if influenced, it
will move, or act on, being; it is infinitely recondite and abstruse.
Its transmutations are independent of form; tranquil is it and
unreserved, like an echo or a shadow. When a man has climbed to some
great height, and then looks down, he should not let go of the support
he grasps; similarly, in treading a dangerous course, and performing
perilous actions, one must not forget the Principle he originally
received. As long as he is able to preserve this intact, his virtue will
remain unimpaired; when all things are disorganised, he will be able to
restore them to a state of order; so that by this means he controls the
world as easily as though galloping with a fair wind. This may be called
the Perfection of Virtue; and when a man is possessed of this perfect
virtue, he will be filled with joy. Among the ancients there were men
who, living among caves and precipices, yet never suffered any
diminution of their natural spirits. In degenerate times, let a man even
become Emperor by virtue of his great influence, or power, and every day
he will be melancholy and sad. From this it may be seen that the Sage
lays no store by governing others, but devotes himself exclusively to
acquiring the Principle of Nature (T<span class="small">AO</span>); and
the man who finds his delight \[in this acquirement\] lays no store by
wealth and rank, but devotes himself to Virtue and Harmony. Knowing his
own greatness, he regards the whole world as insignificant, and thus
approaches nearly to the Principle \[which is his guide\].

   And now as regards what is called Happiness. Surely it cannot be said
necessarily to consist in dwelling on the Ching T‘ai or the Chung
Hua,<span id="page_88_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_88_note_*.md) sauntering
through Yün Mêng<span
id="page_88_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_88_note_dagger.md) or Sha
Chin,<span id="page_88_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_88_note_ddagger.md)
listening to the Chin Shao<span
id="page_88_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_88_note_sect.md) or the Lin
Ying,<span id="page_88_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_88_note_dvert.md)
regaling the mouth with fried and boiled, fragrant and savoury viands,
flying on swift steeds along level roads, or entrapping or shooting the
wild goose? What *I* call Happiness consists in the acquirement, by man,
of what he ought, or has a right, to obtain.<span
id="page_88_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_88_note_para.md) And what is this
acquirement of what he ought to obtain? It consists in not finding
happiness in empty show, or regarding frugal simplicity as a matter of
sadness; to remain secluded in accordance with the principle Yin, and to
develop action in accordance with the principle Yang. It was from this
cause that Tsze Hsia, while the subject of internal conflict, grew thin:
but on acquiring the T<span class="small">AO</span> he became fat. The
<span id="page_89">p. 89</span> Sage does not permit his body to be
under the control of external influences, nor does he permit lusts to
throw into confusion the harmony which reigns within him. For this
reason neither his happiness nor his sadness ever oversteps in due
bounds. In every place, the multitudinous vicissitudes of the world
disturb and discompose \[the heart\] and there is nothing certain. I,
alone, firmly and promptly put aside external temptations, and follow
the True Way. To those who have accomplished the self-acquirement \[of
the Principle of Nature\], it is enough to live beneath lofty trees and
in hollow caves, in order to enjoy relaxation of the spirits; but to
those who have not accomplished this, though the Empire be regarded as
their house,<span id="page_89_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_89_note_*.md) and the
whole population as their servants and concubines, it would not be
sufficient for the nourishment of their life. Those who are able to
arrive at a condition of joylessness—*i.e.*, apathy—will never be
without joy, they will then arrive at a condition of ecstasy, or joy in
its highest form.

   Now those who find their happiness in bells and drums, in bands of
musicians playing flutes and lutes, in spreading silken carpets and soft
cushions, in wearing featherwork and ivory, in listening to the slow
cadences of the music played in the corrupt district north of Chao
Kô,<span id="page_89_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_89_note_dagger.md) in
collecting wanton or enticing beauties, in arranging banquets of wine
and pledging one another in goblets, prolonging their revelries far into
the night, in shooting birds on the wing with powerful crossbows, and
coursing hares with trained dogs: brilliant and powerful as they may be,
they are yet subject to apprehension, and are, as it were, a prey to
temptation and hankering. If their chariots have to be relinquished,
their horses allowed to rest, their potations stopped, and their music
taken from them, they feel as though they had suddenly suffered
bereavement, and are as vexed and miserable as though all were over with
them. And why? Because they do not use their hearts in the enjoyment of
outward things, but use outward things as a means of delighting their
hearts.<span id="page_89_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_89_note_ddagger.md)
While the music is being played, they are merry; but when the song comes
to an end, they are sad. Mirth and sadness, alternating, give birth one
to another; and when their spirits are under the baleful spell \[of
worldly enjoyments\], they never know a moment's tranquillity. When the
cause of all this is sought for, it is found to lie in the fact that
they have never grasped the substance of true enjoyment; the injury of
which they are the subject grows ever day by day, and they lose all
mastery over themselves.<span
id="page_89_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_89_note_sect.md) Therefore, if the
heart has <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> not attained the True
Medium,<span id="page_90_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_90_note_*.md) but accepts
its endowment \[of happiness\] from outward things, it is self-deceived.
If the outward skin be not wetted, no moisture can penetrate to the
bones and marrow; if things be not first admitted into the thoughts,
they will not accumulate in the interior. Wherefore, such things as
enter from the outside, will never cease \[to flow in\] as long as there
is no resolution to control the heart; and such things as proceed from
the heart—wishes, intentions, desires, etc.,—will not be carried into
execution<span id="page_90_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_90_note_dagger.md)
if there be no response from outside. Therefore, however simple men may
be, they yet know the pleasure of listening to virtuous words and
beneficial projects; however degenerate they may be, they yet know how
to esteem what is called perfect virtue and a lofty walk in life. Those
who find delight in virtuous words and beneficial projects are legion;
but those who practise them are rare. Those who admire perfect virtue
and lofty conduct are many; but those who act them out are few. And why
is this? Because they are unable to revert to their original
\[simplicity of\] nature.

   Now if a man does not open his heart to the True Medium, but forces
his attention to learning this and enquiring about that, what he hears
neither penetrates his ear nor finds a lodging in his mind. What
difference is there between such a one, and a deaf man singing? He may
intimate the gestures he sees another man make, but he derives no
pleasure from it himself; the sound comes out of his mouth, it is true;
but passes away and dies without his hearing it. Now the mind is the
controller of the whole internal economy; so that it is able to govern
and direct the four limbs, and to induce the circulation of the blood
and breath—roaming to and fro within the limits of Right and Wrong, and
emerging and entering through the door of all worldly affairs.
Wherefore, a man who possesses the will to govern the empire without
having the mind, or heart, well in hand, is like a person without ears
wanting to play bells and drums, or a person with no eyes wanting to
gaze on varied hues, both of which are far beyond his powers. Therefore,
\[such a man\] is unfitted to use the insignia of the Empire. If he
acts, he fails; if he grasps, he misses. The light esteem in which Hsü
Yu held Imperial power, and his refusal to supersede Yao as Emperor,
came from his resolution to ignore, or renounce, the world altogether.
And what was the reason of this? It was, that the government of the
world is only necessary because of the world's existence; \[and, for
him, the world did not exist\]. The more important affairs of government
did not devolve upon Yao, they devolved upon Hsü Yu; they devolved not
on others, but on his own person. When the body attains self-mastery,
then all <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> things are in a state of
completeness; when the science of human motives is thoroughly
understood, desires, predilections, and aversions will no longer be in
the heart. Consequently, if there be no joy, there will be no anger; if
there be no happiness, there will be no sadness. All things springing
from the same source,<span
id="page_91_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_91_note_*.md) there is no difference
between right and wrong. The processes of transmutation and nourishment
springing from the glory of that source,—*i.e.*, the Light of
Heaven—birth is much the same thing as death. Now the world possesses
me, and I possess the world; what difference is there between the world
and myself? Is it necessary for a ruler that he should monopolise power,
hold fast authority, maintain his control of life and death, and thus
promulgate his decrees? What I call a ruler is not such a one as this;
it is one who is master of *himself*—that is all. For, if I am master of
myself, the world obtains me—as its ruler—too; if I and the world thus
obtain each other, our mutual possession will continne permanently, and
then how can either not tolerate the other? He who is said to have
acquired self-mastery preserves his body in its entirety; and he who
preserves his body in its entirety is one with T<span
class="small">AO</span>. Wherefore, although a man may wander along
steep river-banks, or by the margin of the sea, or gallop on steeds of
unexampled swiftness, under a canopy of kingfishers' plumes: though his
eyes may rest on waving panaches and witness the pomp of tournaments:
though his ears may listen to the strains of T‘ao-lang, Ch‘i-li, and
Chi-chên, while the swelling notes of the music of Chêng and Wei are
blazoned forth: though he perpetuates the customs bequeathed by Ch‘i and
Ch‘u,—shoots waterfowl soaring high in air, or chases wild animals in
the Imperial preserves; all this constitutes the vicious indulgences in
which the vulgar herd are so hopelessly immersed. If, on the other hand,
the Sage be brought in contact with such things, they will be found
powerless to carry away his feelings, or disturb his stability of
purpose. Then again, if a man's heart be so full of apprehensions as to
deprive him of his natural good faculties; if his lot be cast in wild,
out-of-the-way places, where he is buried among mountain-streams and
caves, or hidden away among brambles and thickets; if he lives in some
wretched hovel thatched with fresh grass, with a porch of tangled weeds,
windows made of broken jars, and door-posts of soft
mulberry-twigs-leaking above and wet underfoot, a soaked and saturated
house, with a dull northern aspect, where the crystals of hoarfrost and
snow destroy the wild gourds that grow in the surrounding swamps, and
where he wanders unrestrained through wide marshes, and roams aimlessly
along the side of mountain-gorges; such circumstances as these render
common people rigid and helpless, cause them sorrow and trouble, misery
and sadness, and deprive them of all natural gratification. <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> But if a Sage incurs such things, they are
powerless to cause him any chagrin, distress, repining, or disease; nor
can they deprive him of that in which he finds delight. And how is this?
It is because he has within him a full comprehension of the secret
workings of Heaven; and thus he does not lose the natural goodness of
his disposition, be he in a high position or a low one, rich or poor,
laborious or at ease. How should the cawing of the raven or the
chattering of the magpie change its sound with the alternations of cold
and heat, drought and moisture? Wherefore, when the acquisition of the
T<span class="small">AO</span> has been once secured, it can be neither
expelled nor removed by the outer world; nor should the settlement of
what I have thus obtained be dependent upon—or affected by—the changes
and transmutations around me. And what is this acquisition that I speak
about? It is the dwelling, in perfect tranquillity, of those passions
which pertain to the disposition and the life. Now the disposition and
the life both arise from the same Origin, or Source, as the body itself.
The body being in readiness, the disposition and the life are completed;
the disposition and the life being completed, predilections and
aversions come into existence. Wherefore, the relationships which exist
between men of culture are such as are settled once for all, and the
course adopted by maidens is an unvarying course.<span
id="page_92_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_92_note_*.md) Squares and compasses,
hooks and lines, are not necessary to form or regulate the characters of
such; \[they are as they should be, naturally\]. \[Their principles\]
are as eternal as Heaven and Earth. If they ascend eminences, they have
no sensation of loftiness; if they dwell in lowly places, they are not
conscious of any depression. Wherefore he who has grasped the True
Principle fears nothing, though without resources, and does not glory,
though successful; he dwells in high places without danger, supports
heavy burdens without succumbing, does not flaunt his acquirements when
new, preserves them long without altering, enters fire without being
scorched, and water without getting wet. Wherefore he does not depend on
the respect of others for his power, nor upon possessions for his
wealth, nor upon brute force for his strength; but is able to soar to
and fro between the firmament above and the waters below, in company
with the Creator!

   He to whom this is possible will bury gold in the mountain and pearls
in the deep abyss;<span
id="page_92_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_92_note_dagger.md) he will prize
neither goods nor wealth, he will covet neither power nor fame. Thus he
does not regard physical comfort as true happiness, nor penury as
pitiable, nor an honourable position as one of tranquillity, nor a
humble one as anything to be feared. His <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>
body, spirit, breath, and will all dwell in their appointed places, and
conform to the working of the Cosmos.<span
id="page_93_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_93_note_*.md)

   Now the Body is the dwelling-place of the life; the Breath is the
complementary part of the life; the Spirit is the controller of the
life. If any one of these be misplaced, all three will suffer; so that
the Sage causes other men to keep each of them in its proper sphere, and
to maintain its own functions without interfering with those of the
others. For if the body is forced to occupy a position to which it is
unsuited, it will become useless; if the breath is made to complement
that to which it is inadequate, it will escape; if the spirit is caused
to act in spheres to which it does not properly belong, it will become
obscured. It is therefore imperative that these three things should be
carefully guarded from misuse. Let me draw an illustration from natural
objects. Caterpillars, worms, and small-waisted insects that squirm and
wriggle and raise themselves upon their feelers, all know what they
enjoy and what they dread, what is good for them and what is injurious.
And how is this? It is because they all have a certain natural instinct,
which never leaves them. Let this property once depart, however, and
they will be no longer reckoned among living things. And how are we to
account for the clear, sharp eyesight of modern folk, their delicate
perception in hearing, their uprightness of body, their ability to move
their joints, to distinguish black from white and ugliness from beauty,
to differentiate between likeness and dissimilarity, and to understand
right and wrong? It is to be accounted for by the fact that the breath
complements, or fills up, \[the life\]; and therefore the spirit is able
to make use of the body. And how is it known to be thus? If the mind of
an ordinary man is fixed upon some particular thing, and his spirit
bound up in some object \[of contemplation\], he will, while walking,
stumble inadvertently into ditches and his head will bump against any
tree that may stand in his way, without his being conscious of it
himself. Beckon to him, he will not see you; call to him, he will not
hear you. It is not that his eyes and ears have departed; still, he
makes no response; and why? Because his spirit has lost all control over
his faculties. Therefore, if his spirit is taken up with anything
insignificant, he forgets what is great; if with internal matters, he
forgets what is exterior; if with what is above, he forgets what is
below; if with what is on his left hand, he forgets what is on his
right. If there is nothing which the spirit does not fill, then there is
no place in which it does not exist; wherefore those who prize vacuity
regard even the tip of a hair as a place fit to dwell in. But take the
case, now, of one of your headstrong people, \[a man\] unable to avoid
the calamities of fire <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> and water, or to
leap over the dangers of drains and gutters; surely, such inability on
his part is not due to the fact that he is devoid of body, spirit,
breath, and will? No; it is because he puts these things to a perverse
use, so that they all lose control over their several spheres; those
whose functions are internal being made to act externally, and *vice
versâ*. Wherefore, in promoting or discarding others, such a man will
not be able to act in accordance with right, nor will his conduct,
whether while moving or at rest, be such as to chime in \[with the
exigencies of the moment\]; all his life long he uses his worn-out body
in crooked, devious ways, and rugged paths, so that he stumbles and
falls into filthy cesspools or deep pits. Although he is born just like
anybody else in the world, he is unable to avoid incurring the derision
of every-one. And how is all this? It is because the man's spirit and
body have lost each other. Therefore, if the spirit be regarded as the
controlling power, the body will comply with it and reap the benefit;
whereas if the government be vested in the body, the spirit will comply
with it and incur injury. Gluttons and voluptuaries are blinded by power
and gain, and hanker greatly after position and renown; they are eager
to surpass others in shrewdness, and to assume a high place in the
world. Then their mental faculties decay day by day, and recede far
beyond their reach; having been long over-used, they return no more; for
the body will be closed against them and the heart oppose their
entrance, so that there will be no place for the spirit to pass in by.
Thus it comes that there are in the world, at times, the calamities of
blindness, madness, and loss of self-control. People thus affected are
like tallow-candles, which are the faster consumed the faster the fire
burns.

   Thus, if the natural faculties, the breath, and the will, be kept in
repose, they will daily attain their full proportion and the man will
become robust; but if they be overworked they will daily diminish, and
the man will become decrepit. Wherefore the Sage nourishes and fosters
his spirit, moderates his breath,<span
id="page_94_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_94_note_*.md) and tranquillises his
person, so that he sinks and floats, looks up and looks down, together
with the T<span class="small">AO</span>. When he has nothing to do, he
just takes his ease; when pressed, he exerts himself. He takes his ease
as though putting off a garment; he exerts himself as promptly as arrows
fly \[in succession\] from a crossbow. This being the case, the changes
of nature never fail to occur, nor the vicissitudes of worldly matters
to happen in exact response to whatever exigencies may arise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ttx10.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_74">p. 74</span>

<span id="page_74_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_74_fr_*.md) The text implies
that all these natural phenomena mutually respond to requirements; that
when they happen it is because they cannot but happen; that the need is,
in fact, itself the cause of that which comes to relieve it.

<span id="footnotes_page_76">p. 76</span>

<span id="page_76_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_76_fr_*.md) Who, says the
Commentator, is T<span class="small">AO</span>.

<span id="footnotes_page_80">p. 80</span>

<span id="page_80_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_80_fr_*.md) The Commentary
says, \#\#\#. Independent of outward affairs; nothing is able to force
or to disturb them.

<span id="footnotes_page_81">p. 81</span>

<span id="page_81_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_81_fr_*.md) Thus the Commentary
explains the text, which runs \#\#\#, \#\#\#. *Shêng* here means the
Emperor, not a Sage.

<span id="footnotes_page_82">p. 82</span>

<span id="page_82_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_82_fr_*.md) \#\#\#, which I
render in the sense of \#\#\#. See *Lun-yü*, chapter vi., 2.

<span id="page_82_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_82_fr_dagger.md) \#\#\#.
The first two characters do not mean vacillating and undecided, as they
appear to; but imply extreme caution, and great wariness in making up
one's mind. The reverse, in fact, of headstrong.

<span id="page_82_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_82_fr_ddagger.md)
"Marquises and Earls ought to call themselves orphans, widowers, or
unworthy ones."—C<span class="small">OMM</span>.

<span id="page_82_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_82_fr_sect.md) As in the case
of a small handle, which works a huge machine. Or, the agent is
insignificant; that which is involved in it is great.

<span id="footnotes_page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="page_85_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_85_fr_*.md) The text runs
\#\#\#. The Commentary explains it as meaning that water is able to
support the ships of all the world on its broad bosom. The first
character means to *cross* or *ford* when in connection with \#\#\#.

<span id="page_85_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_85_fr_dagger.md) That is,
in the form of clouds.

<span id="page_85_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_85_fr_ddagger.md) This
quotation does not appear in this form in any edition of the *Tao Tê
Ching* I possess. The words here used, \#\#\#, are quite different from
those employed in the 43rd chap. according to Lü Tsû, where the first,
second, and sixth characters are omitted, and \#\#\# is used instead of
\#\#\#. See [page 27](ttx02.htm#page_27.md). In another copy, the \#\#\# is
used, but the other three characters still do not appear.
Huai-nan-Tsze's Commentator says he is referring to water. But how does
Dr. Chalmers reconcile his translation of this sentence (*Tao Tê Ching*,
chap. 43), with his evident allusion to it, Introduction, p. xv, lines 4
and 5 from bottom?

<span id="footnotes_page_86">p. 86</span>

<span id="page_86_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_86_fr_*.md) \#\#\# and \#\#\#
might here be rendered "homogeneous" and "heterogeneous" respectively.

<span id="footnotes_page_88">p. 88</span>

<span id="page_88_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_88_fr_*.md) Two famous towers
which used to exist in the State of Chu.—C<span
class="small">OMM</span>.

<span id="page_88_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_88_fr_dagger.md) A
celebrated lake.

<span id="page_88_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_88_fr_ddagger.md) A
pleasaunce which belonged to Chou Hsin, at Chü-lu Hsien in Chihli.

<span id="page_88_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_88_fr_sect.md) The Music of
the Emperor Shun.

<span id="page_88_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_88_fr_dvert.md) The Music of
the Emperor Chuan Hsü.

<span id="page_88_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_88_fr_para.md) \#\#\#. I take
this to mean *self-mastery*.

<span id="footnotes_page_89">p. 89</span>

<span id="page_89_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_89_fr_*.md) That is, though
they attain Imperial power.

<span id="page_89_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_89_fr_dagger.md) The
capital of the wicked Emperor Chou Hsin. On hearing this music, the
blind musician Kuang exclaimed, "That is the music of a lost State!"

<span id="page_89_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_89_fr_ddagger.md) That is,
they do not seek enjoyment within, but from without; they allow
themselves to be under the control of outward things instead of
controlling their own hearts.

<span id="page_89_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_89_fr_sect.md) \#\#\#.

<span id="footnotes_page_90">p. 90</span>

<span id="page_90_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_90_fr_*.md) If \#\#\# is to be
accepted in this and other passages as here rendered, it suggest the
idea that Huai-nan Tsze had not given up all Confucianist theories when
he wrote his treatise.

<span id="page_90_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_90_fr_dagger.md) Or,
perhaps, "will cease." The phrase is simply \#\#\#.

<span id="footnotes_page_91">p. 91</span>

<span id="page_91_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_91_fr_*.md) "Which is
Heaven"—says the Commentary.

<span id="footnotes_page_92">p. 92</span>

<span id="page_92_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_92_fr_*.md) This means that no
virtuous girl gives her affections to more than one man, or marries
again after her husband's death.—C<span class="small">OMM</span>.

<span id="page_92_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_92_fr_dagger.md) A
reference to Shun, who said to have done this. The Commentary affirms
that it means the putting away of covetous and lustful desires.

<span id="footnotes_page_93">p. 93</span>

<span id="page_93_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_93_fr_*.md) Alluding of course
to the theory \#\#\#.

<span id="footnotes_page_94">p. 94</span>

<span id="page_94_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_94_fr_*.md) Here used in the
sense of passions.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
