[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ttx06) [Next](ttx08.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

# THE CH‘IH WEN TUNG.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

W<span class="small">HERE</span> there is motion, that motion proceeds
from immobility; where there is action, that action proceeds from
inactivity. Where there is inactivity, the spirit reverts to its
original; and when the spirit thus reverts, all things become still.
Where there is no motion, the vital force becomes extinct; and the vital
force being extinct, all things are produced, all spirits maintain each
other; all objects depend upon or help each other, causing the rudiment
\[of all things\] to revert to its primary source.

   By silent contemplation this will become clear. I myself bear it
constantly in mind; \[the doctrine\], entering uninterruptedly, does
away with all distinctions between life and death, and makes me one with
Heaven and Earth. When the sense of sight is forgotten, the Light
becomes infinitely copious; when the sense of hearing is annihilated,
the heart becomes concentrated upon the Eternal Depths. If these two
organs of perception be both forgotten, the man will be able to shut
himself off from the allurements of the world—pure, guileless, and
complete, in perfect unison with the Universe,—vast, limitless, like a
vivifying aura, subject to no distinctions of mankind. The greatness of
Heaven and Earth is that with which I am linked; the multitude of
created things is what I direct, or grasp. How can it be said that, to
the very furthest limit whither we can penetrate, there are any faults
or imperfections?

   If a man cherishes the Invisible, he will be able to maintain for
ever the Visible—that which has a semblance; if he cherishes the
Incorporeal, the Corporeal will attain to perfection and purity; and if
perfection and purity co-operate to promote each other, the result will
be the acquisition of perpetuity. It is because Heaven has obtained this
original purity that it lasts for ever; it is because Earth has obtained
it that it is enduring; it is when Man obtains it that he achieves
immortality. The reason that the vulgar are unable to attain to
prolonged existence is that they lose their hold of the Invisible and
suffer the Incorporeal to escape them; thus they are unable to preserve
their bodily organs and nine apertures together with the pure essence
they received at birth, as one whole, and therefore it is they die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ttx08.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
