[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Taoism](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](ttx09) [Next](ttx11.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

# THE SU SHU.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PREFATORY NOTE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I<span class="small">T</span> is related that one day, during the reign
of Chuang Hsiang, third King of the Ts‘in dynasty (<span
class="small">B.C.</span> 247-244), a youth named Chang Tsz-fang,
afterwards Marquis of Lin, was wandering alone upon a river-bank.
Suddenly his attention was attracted by a strange-looking old man, who
was standing upon a bridge that spanned the stream. While he was
wondering what sort of a person this could be—for there was something
remarkable about the grey-beard's appearance—the object of his
contemplation deliberately kicked off his sandal, and then called to
Tsz-fang to fish it out of the water for him. The youth complied. No
sooner, however, had the old man put it on again, than he as
deliberately kicked off the other, motioning to Tsz-fang to go in search
of it once more. His shoe having been restored to him a second time, he
let it fall into the water again; and the pious boy, respecting the
eccentricities of age, plunged a third time from the bridge in search of
it, and then, reverently kneeling, placed it on the mysterions being's
foot himself. "Good!" said the ancient man; "you will do. Meet me here
in five days' time, in the morning early." So Chang Tsz-fang, whose
curiosity was now on the alert, hastened to the rendezvous at the
appointed time; but alas! the old man was there before him, and,
reproving the youth for his want of respect in keeping him waiting, told
him to come again next day. But the old man was again before him, and
the promised revelation was again postponed in consequence. The third
time, however, Chang took the precaution of sleeping on the bridge all
night; and ere dawn of day had the satisfaction of seeing his venerable
friend approach. "Now," said the latter, "you shall have the reward due
to you. Take this book," he continued, drawing a manuscript from his
capacious sleeve; "he who studies the precepts herein contained may
become the preceptor of a King! I now leave you; but if you will repair
thirteen years from now, to Ku Ch‘êng, you will see a yellow stone; that
will be I, in metamorphosis." Thereupon the being disappeared, leaving
in the hands of the astonished youth the tract we now give below. It is
popularly ascribed to Huang Shih Kung, or his lordship Yellow-Stone.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TEXT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I.

   Now T<span class="small">AO</span>, Virtue, Benevolence, Rectitude
and Decorum,—these five things are all one Principle. As regards the Way
of T<span class="small">AO</span>, it is the Way that all men should
walk in; making use of all things, they yet know not the source from
which they spring. Virtue is what all men should obtain; then everyone
will have what he naturally needs. The Benevolent are such as all men
love; for where there is a merciful, liberal, sympathetic disposition,
there will be a systematic compliance with the mutual wants of others.
The Right-minded are those who act properly and justly towards their
fellows, rewarding the good and punishing the wicked; by virtue of which
they establish their own merit and give equitable decisions on the
affairs that are brought before them. Decorum is what all men should
observe, both in rising in the morning and retiring to rest at night;
then the duties connected with human relationships will be performed in
their due order. Now it is necessary to observe these five courses of
action if one wishes to fulfil the proper functions of a man; there is
not one which may be omitted. The Sage and the superior man understand
the law which governs prosperity and decay; they are well versed in the
calculation of failure and success, they can discern between the
conditions of orderly government and of anarchy, and know when to accept
and when to decline appointments. Thus, abiding in retirement and
holding fast their principles, they wait for seasonable opportunities;
and if a proper time arrives, they act. By this policy they are able to
gain the highest offices in the State;<span
id="page_96_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_96_note_*.md) and when the occasion
presents itself, they strike out in some decisive action by which they
achieve merit such as never had been achieved before. But if the
opportunity does not offer, they just die when their time comes, and
there is an end of it; so that the principles they hold are exalted in
the extreme, and their fame descends to generations yet unborn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II.

   He whose virtue is all-sufficient to gain the affectionate esteem of
those most distant from him, whose good-faith is all-sufficient to mould
<span id="page_97">p. 97</span> confidence of the people, whose ability
is all-sufficient to reflect the example of the ancients as in a mirror,
and whose perspicacity in all-sufficient to superintend his
subordinates: such a man is distinguished above all others. He whose
conduct suffices as an example for others to imitate, whose wisdom is
great enough to enable him to decide equitably in cases of enmity and
mutual suspicion, whose good-faith causes others to keep their promises,
and whose incorruptibility ensures a fair allotment of whatever there
may be to divide: such a man is eminent above all others. He who, in an
official position, does not fail in the performance of his duties,
abides steadfast in his rectitude without swerving, incurs hatred or
suspicion yet does not desert his post, and never illicitly avails
himself of any opportunity of self-advantage which may come in this way:
such a man is a hero.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III.

   By abandoning the appetites and restraining the passions, you may
escape trouble and anxiety. By suppressing wrong and renouncing evil,
you may ward off calamities. By avoiding over-indulgence in wine and
curbing the carnal desires, you may escape defilement. By keeping clear
of calumny and beyond the reach of suspicion, you may avoid hindrance to
your affairs. By extensive study and eager questionings you may greatly
enlarge your knowledge. By a high course of conduct and a reserve in
conversation, you may cultivate the person. By courtesy, frugality,
modesty, and moderation, you may preserve your possessions from
diminution. By deep calculations and taking thoughts for the distant
future, you may avoid poverty. By consulting with the benevolent and
making friends of the outspoken and blunt, you may receive support in
seasons of adversity. By doing to others as you would wish to be done
by, and being sincere and honest in all your dealings, you may attract
all men to become your friends. By committing responsibilities to able
men, and making special use of their special faculties, you may
materially further the business of the State. By abhorring the wicked
and expelling slanderers from your presence, you may put a stop to
disorder. By testing the practices of to-day by investigating those of
ancient times, you may avoid blunders. By first estimating \[the pros
and cons of an affair\] and then calculating \[what ought to be done
under the circumstances\] you will be prepared to meet the most
unexpected emergencies. By providing against disaffection and knowing
how to use your power, you will be able to unravel complications. By
keeping your knowledge to yourself and only acting as opportunity
occurs, you avoid getting into trouble \[by failing in what you
professed yourself <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> able to perform\]. By
firmness and stability of purpose, you will establish merit. By
unwearying efforts and impregnable virtue, you will be able to preserve
yourself securely until death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV.

   As regards the methods employed for forming deliberate intentions and
doing straightforward actions, there is none that will enable you to
continue longer in the course you desire to pursue than that of ample
deliberation; and none that will enable you to pursue that course in
greater peace than the patient bearing of insult. There is nothing more
important than the cultivation of virtue; there is no greater cause of
joy than the love of goodness; there is nothing that will give you
deeper insight into hidden things than perfect sincerity in word and
deed; there is nothing that will make you clearer-sighted than
understanding the nature of all created beings; there is nothing more
felicitous than contentment, nothing bitterer than covetousness, nothing
more sorrowful than the dispersion (or loss) of animal vigour, no
greater sickness than that which results from the vicissitudes of life,
nothing shorter than a career of unlawful gain, nothing that tends more
to secrecy (or stealthiness) than avarice, nothing that isolates a man
more than trusting to himself alone, nothing more dangerous than
employing those whom you have reason to suspect, and nothing more
certain to bring ruin to you than unfairness or partiality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V.

   Those who proclaim their own cleverness to their inferiors are
themselves ignorant. Those who are unconscious of their own faults are
blinded. Those who are so fascinated by anything as to be unable to turn
away from its pursuit, are deluded. Those who provoke animosity by
\[irritating\] words, will incur disaster. Those whose commands are at
variance with their consciences will meet with failure. Those who
mislead people by countermanding the orders they have previously given,
will bring ruin upon the affairs they have in hand. If a man is angry
without inspiring awe, the delinquency will be repeated. A man who
acquires a false reputation for honesty and brings shame on others, will
meet with retribution. It is dangerous, first to treat a man with
contumely and afterwards entrust him with responsibility. It is
inauspicious to treat the honourable with negligence or disrespect. A
man who hides an alienated heart under a friendly face will be shunned.
If \[a sovereign\] loves flatterers and keeps aloof from the honest and
true, <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> his kingdom will soon fall. He who
consorts much with beautiful women, and avoids the society of the
virtuous, is deluded. If women are openly allowed to have audiences of
the sovereign, internal disorder will ensue. If the monarch gives office
to his private friends and minions, the emoluments of the State will be
squandered in vain. He who oppresses his subjects and gets the better of
them by main force, is a usurper. He whose reputation is greater than
his actual abilities, is obliged to exert himself to the utmost to keep
up that reputation—and without result. To make little of one's own
faults and be severe to others', is not the way to govern. He who is
generous as regards himself and niggardly in dealing with his fellows,
will be abandoned. He who ignores merit on account of some trifling
lapse, will suffer injury himself. He who estranges the people from him
will be ruined without hope. He who employs people irrespective of their
peculiar capabilities will incur the evil results of his laxity. He who
bestows rewards with a grudging face will receive a grudging service. He
who promises much and gives little will be murmured at. He who makes
advances to another and then suddenly breaks off intercourse with him,
will meet with unexpected opposition. He who is niggardly in bestowal
and yet looks for a large return, will get no return at all. He who in a
position of honour forgets the humble—or, the friends of humbler
days—will not enjoy his honours long. To harbour old grievances in one's
memory and ignore present merit, is inauspicious. Not to select upright
men when employing people, is dangerous. He who employs others by main
force will have nobody to obey him. To appoint officials in deference to
requests made by the friends of the candidates for office, will result
in disorder. He who loses that in which consists his power, will become
weak. He who devises plans for the benefit of the inhuman—or, he who
allows the inhuman to form plans for him—will be placed in jeopardy. If
secret counsels be bruited abroad, defeat will be the result. He who
hoards much and gives out grudgingly, will find his substance
diminishing. Where the military leaders are in penury and fashionable
idlers wealthy, the State will fall. A man who openly accepts bribes, is
self-deceived,—or, does so against his own conscience. He who, hearing
of virtuous deeds, makes no account of them, but never forgets a fault,
is tyrannical. He who commits responsibilities to the untrustworthy, and
none to those who may be confided in, is muddle-headed, or stupid. If a
man nourishes the people according to virtue, all will come flocking to
him; but if he holds them in restraint by means of punishments, they
will disperse. If small merit be not rewarded, great merit will not be
performed; if petty injuries be not forgiven, serious animosities will
arise. If rewards be bestowed upon the undeserving, and punishments on
the unwilling,—*i.e.*, on those who know they have not incurred any
<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> penalty—the people will revolt. To
reward those who have no merit and punish those who have committed no
fault, is truculent. Listening with delight to flattery and with disgust
to candid expostulation, will bring about the ruin of the State. To be
content with one's own will result in a nation's tranquillity; but to
covet what belongs to another leads to oppression and wrong-doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI.

   Enmities result from not abandoning little faults; misfortunes arise
from not making decided plans beforehand. Happiness results from the
accumulation of good deeds; misery, from the accumulation of wicked
ones. Famines come about from depreciating agriculture; cold results
from the neglect of weaving. Tranquillity results from securing the
services of suitable men; danger from losing men of ability. Wealth
results from meeting \[opportunities\] half-way,—or, taking advantage of
whatever may turn up; penury, from rejecting such opportunities. If
those in authority are not perpetually vacillating, their subordinates
will not be a prey to perplexity. Those who despise their superiors
should not be held guiltless; while those who oppress their inferiors
show by so doing their want of affection for them. If ministers of the
Presence do not receive proper consideration from the sovereign, he will
be lightly esteemed by those of his ministers who are at a distance. If
you are naturally suspicious, you cannot have confidence in others; but
if you are of a confiding nature, you will not suspect people.<span
id="page_100_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_100_note_*.md) The depraved have no
true friends. A perverted sovereign will have no upright ministers. A
State in danger has no virtuous man to the front; there are no good men
under a disorderly government. Those who sincerely love others will
search eagerly for men of virtue; and those who take pleasure in
virtuous men will nourish the people generously. Where there is a State
whose power has been established by sheer force of merit, all able men
will resort to it; but virtuous men will retire from a State that is on
the verge of ruin. Where the soil is thin, large things will not grow;
where water is shallow, large fishes will not disport themselves; if a
tree is leafless, no large bird will rest upon it; if a forest is
sparse, no large animal will take up his abode in it. If a mountain is
high and steep, it will easily fall; if a pool is full of water, it will
overflow. Those who throw away jade and cling to a common stone, are
blind. Those who cover up a sheep in a tiger's skin will incur
ridicule.<span id="page_100_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_100_note_dagger.md)
<span id="page_101">p. 101</span> If you don't hold a coot by the
collar, you will put it on upside down. If you don't look at the ground
as you walk, you will fall. If the posts of a house are weak, the rooms
will come to grief; and if the supports of a Government are feeble, the
State will be ruined. If the foot is cold, the heart will be injured;
and if the populace are angered, the State will suffer. Before the
mountain falls, the base is undermined; and before the State falls, the
people are in extremity. If the root of a tree is rotten, the leaves
will decay; if the people are worn out, the State will be annihilated.
If you drive a carriage in the ruts made by another carriage that has
been overturned, you will meet the same disaster; and if you follow the
example set by a State that is already lost, yours will be lost too.
Having already seen, therefore, the bad results which will accrue from a
given line of conduct, take care not to give rise to them again; if you
dread such consequences, make provision against them beforehand. To have
a proper dread of danger is the way to ensure safety; to have a proper
dread of the extermination \[of one's State\] is the way to preserve it.
So, as regards the conduct of a man: if it be in accordance with right
principle, it will be auspicious; if not, it will be the reverse. It is
not the spirits or holy ones who will give one happiness; one must be
endowed with it naturally. If a man discharges his functions on virtuous
plans, no evil will ensue; but if he does not take forethought for what
is yet far off, sorrow will come speedily upon him. When \[two or more\]
persons have one object in view, they will achieve it; when they are
benevolent, they will share each other's disappointments. The wicked all
consort one with another. Those who are equally beautiful are jealous to
each other. Those whose shrewdness is equally great will scheme one
against the other. Those whose positions are equally high will injure
each other. Those who are competing for gain will be envious of one
another. Those whose voices are the same will respond to one another.
Those who are subject to similar influences will be similarly affected.
Those who belong to the same category conform to each other's habits.
Those who are righteous will love each other. Those who are in the same
difficulty will assist each other. Those who are guided by the same
principle of right will arrive at completion together—or, will \[aid
in\] completing each other. Thoee who possees the same skill will check
each other's performances. Those who have the same adroitness will
compete with each other.

   The above embody an unvarying principle in each case, and the
principle cannot be successfully opposed by anybody. To give free rein
to oneself and prescribe laws for others, will lead to disobedience; but
if a man who attempts to reform his fellows is upright himself, all will
follow his example. If a monarch runs counter to his people, he will
have great difficulty in enforcing obedience; but if he guides himself
by <span id="page_102">p. 102</span> his people's wishes, affairs will
go on easily. In the former case, disorder will ensue; in the latter,
the government will be tranquilly accomplished.

   It is in this way that a man may achieve the proper regulation of
himself, his household, and his State.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## POSTSCRIPT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small"></span>

   The title of this book opens a very interesting field of
investigation, the direction of which is sufficiently indicated by what
follows. In that part of the \#\#\#, which deals with the Yin dynasty,
we have this curious passage:—"A certain man said to Ch‘eng T‘ang, 'Yi
Yin is an unemployed scholar;' whereupon T‘ang sent a messenger to
invite him and bring him to Court. The messenger returned five times
\[unsuccessful\]; but at last Yi Yin came, entered the Emperor's
service, and discoursed of the Su Wang and the Nine Rulers \[\#\#\#\]."
The Nine Rulers comprise the \#\#\#, the \#\#\#, and the Emperor Yü;
while the Su Wang, according to the Commentator Sou Ying, was the
\#\#\#, whose doctrine was sincere, pure, or unvarilished—\#\#\#. The
title of the book here translated, therefore, means, in full, 'Book of
the Doctrines professed by the Su Wang,'—the Pure or Simple Prince, or,
to use the longer phrase, Exalted Emperor of Sublime Simplicity. Who
this person was I do not know; but the title certainly does not belong
specially to Confucius. Neither can I guess what Mr. Wylie means by
describing the 'Su Shu' as a military treatise; seeing that war is
scarcely so much as referred to in it. It is simply an application of
the Taoist doctrines of purity and simplicity to political, social, and
individual life, and a remarkably beautiful book it is, from the
standpoint of high morals. Mr. Wylie attributes it to Chang Shang-ying
of the Sung dynasty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](ttx11.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_96">p. 96</span>

<span id="page_96_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_96_fr_*.md) It must be observed
that the whole bent of this treatise is political; the maxims are
supposed to be addressed to rulers and sovereigns, to aid them in the
proper government of their States.

<span id="footnotes_page_100">p. 100</span>

<span id="page_100_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_100_fr_*.md) Perhaps this
might be rendered, "If you doubt your*self*, have no confidence in your
own integrity, you will have no confidence in others:" and so on. The
text reads \#\#\#.

<span id="page_100_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_100_fr_dagger.md)
Analogous to the idea of a daw in borrowed plumes, or an ass in a lion's
skin.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
