[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100082)  [Next](1100084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXV"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXV.
1-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span
id="iii.LXXV-p2.2"></span>. <span id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854)
</span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p4"></span>“Then shall the kingdom of Heaven,” He
saith, “be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went
forth to meet the bridegroom. But five of them were wise, and the other
five foolish, which took not,” He saith, “oil.”

<span id="iii.LXXV-p5"></span>“Then, while the bridegroom tarried, they
all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold,
the bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet Him. And the five arose, and
being in perplexity, said to the wise, Give us of your oil. But they
consented not, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you;
go to them that sell, and buy.”

<span id="iii.LXXV-p6"></span>“And while they were gone for this, the
bridegroom came, and those went in; but these came afterwards, saying,
Lord, Lord, open to us. But He answered and said, Verily I say unto you,
I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know not the day, nor the hour.”

<span id="iii.LXXV-p7"></span>*“Then He spake again another parable. A
man travelling into a far country, called his own servants, and
delivered unto them his goods; to one five talents, to another two, to
another one, to every man according to his several ability, and took his
journey. Then, when the two had brought him the double, he that had been
entrusted with the one talent brought it alone, and being blamed saith,
I knew that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and
gathering where thou hast not strawed; and I* <span id="page_452">p.
452</span> <span id="iii.LXXV-Page_452"></span> *was afraid, and hid thy
talent; lo! there thou hast that is thine. His Lord answered and said,
Thou wicked servant, thou knewest that I reap where I have not sown, and
gather where I have not strawed: thou oughtest therefore to have put my
money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I might have received
mine own with usury. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it to
him that hath ten talents. For to him that hath shall be given, and he
shall have more abundantly; but from him that hath not, shall be taken
away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into
outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”*

<span id="iii.LXXV-p8"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p8.1"></span>These</span> parables are like the former
parable of the faithful servant, and of him that was ungrateful and
devoured his Lord’s goods. For there are four in all, in different ways
admonishing us about the same things, I mean about diligence in
almsgiving, and about helping our neighbor by all means which we are
able to use, since it is not possible to be saved in another way. But
there He speaks more generally of all assistance which should he
rendered to one’s neighbor; but as to the virgins, he speaketh
particularly of mercifulness in alms, and more strongly than in the
former parable. For there He punishes him that beats, and is drunken,
and scatters and wastes his lord’s goods, but here even him that doth
not help, nor spends abundantly his goods upon the needy. For they had
oil indeed, but not in abundance, wherefore also they are punished.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p9"></span>But wherefore doth He set forth this
parable in the person of the virgins, and doth not merely suppose any
person whatever? Great things had He spoken of virginity, saying, “There
are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
Heaven’s sake;” and, “He that is able to receive, let him receive
it.” <span id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855) He knew also that the
generality of men would have a great opinion of it. For indeed the work
is by nature great, and is shown so by this, that neither under the old
dispensation was it fulfilled by these ancient and holy men, nor under
the new was it brought under the compulsion of the law. For He did not
command this, but left it to the choice of his hearers. Wherefore Paul
also said “Now, concerning virgins I have no commandment of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856) “For though I praise
him that attains thereto, yet I constrain not him that is not willing,
neither do I make the thing an injunction.” Since then the thing is both
great in itself and hath great honor with the multitude, lest any one
attaining to this should feel as though he had attained to all, and
should be careless about the rest, He putteth forth this parable
sufficient to persuade them, that virginity, though it should have
everything else, if destitute of the good things arising out of
almsgiving, is cast out with the harlots, and He sets the inhuman and
merciless with them. And most reasonably, for the one was overcome by
the love of carnal pleasure, but these <span
id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857) of money. But the love of carnal
pleasure and of money are not equal, but that of carnal pleasure is far
keener and more tyrannical. And the weaker the antagonist, the less
excusable are these <span id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858) that are
overcome thereby. Therefore also He calls them foolish, for that having
undergone the greater labor, they have betrayed all for want of the
less. But by lamps here, He meaneth the gift itself of virginity, the
purity of holiness; and by oil, humanity, almsgiving, succor to them
that are in need.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p14"></span>“Then, while the bridegroom tarried, they
all slumbered and slept.” He shows that the time intervening will not be
short, leading His disciples away from the expectation that His kingdom
was quite immediately to appear. For this indeed they hoped, therefore
He is continually holding them back from this hope. And at the same time
He intimates this too, that death is a sleep. For they slept, He saith.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p15"></span>“And about midnight there was a cry
made.” Either He was continuing the parable, or again He shows that the
resurrection will be at night. But the cry Paul also indicates, saying,
“With a shout, with a voice of an archangel, with the last trump, He
shall come down from Heaven.” <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859)
And what mean the trumpets, and what saith the cry? “The bridegroom
cometh.” When therefore they had trimmed their lamps, the foolish say
unto the wise, “Give us of your oil.” Again He calls them foolish,
showing that nothing can be more foolish than they who are wealthy here,
and depart naked thither, where most of all we have need of humanity,
where we want much oil. But not in this respect only were they foolish,
but also because they looked to receive it there, and sought it out of
season; and yet nothing could be more humane than those virgins, <span
id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span id="iii.LXXV-Page_453"></span> who for
this especially were approved. Neither do they seek for it all, for,
“Give us,” they say, “of your oil;” and the urgency of their need is
indicated; “for our lamps,” they say, “are going out.” But even so they
failed, and neither the humanity of those whom they asked, nor the
easiness of their request, nor their necessity and want, made them
obtain.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p17"></span>But what now do we learn from hence? That
no man can protect us there, if we are betrayed by our works, not
because he will not, but because he cannot. For these too take refuge in
the impossibility. This the blessed Abraham also indicated, saying,
“Between us and you there is a great gulf,” <span
id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) so that not even when willing is it
permitted them to pass it.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p19"></span>“But go to them that sell, and buy.” And
who are they that sell? The poor. And where are these? Here, and then
should they have sought them, not at that time.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p20"></span>2. Seest thou what great profit arises to
us from the poor? shouldest thou take them away, thou wouldest take away
the great hope of our salvation. Wherefore here must we get together the
oil, that it may be useful to us there, when the time calls us. For that
is not the time of collecting it, but this. Spend not then your goods
for nought in luxury and vainglory. For thou wilt have need of much oil
there.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p21"></span>Having heard these things, those virgins
went their way; but they profited nothing. And this He saith, either
pursuing the parable, and working it up; or also by these things
showing, that though we should become humane after our departure, we
shall gain nothing from thence towards our escape. Therefore neither did
their forwardness avail these virgins, because they went to them that
sell not here, but there; nor the rich man, when he became so
charitable, as even to be anxious about his relations. For he that was
passing by him that was laid at the gate, is eager to rescue from perils
and from hell them whom he did not so much as see, and entreats that
some be sent to tell them these things. But nevertheless, he derived no
benefit from thence, as neither did these virgins. For when they having
heard these things went their way, the bridegroom came, and they that
were ready went in with Him, but the others were shut out. After their
many labors, after their innumerable toils, and that intolerable fight,
and those trophies which they had set up over the madness of natural
appetite, disgraced, and with their lamps gone out, they withdrew,
bending down their faces to the earth. For nothing is more sullied than
virginity not having mercy; so that even the multitude are wont to call
the unmerciful dark. Where then was the profit of virginity, when they
saw not the bridegroom? and not even when they had knocked did they
obtain, but they heard that fearful saying, “Depart, I know you
not.” <span id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861) And when He hath said
this, nothing else but hell is left, and that intolerable punishment; or
rather, this word is more grievous even than hell. This word He speaks
to them also that work iniquity. <span
id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862)

<span id="iii.LXXV-p24"></span>“Watch therefore, for ye know not the day
nor the hour.” <span id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863) Seest thou how
continually He adds this, showing how awful our ignorance concerning our
departure hence? Where now are they, who throughout all their life are
remiss, but when they are blamed by us, are saying, At the time of my
death, I shall leave money to the poor. Let them listen to these words,
and be amended. For indeed at that time many have failed of this, having
been snatched away at once, and not permitted so much as to give charge
to their relations touching what they wished to be done.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p26"></span>This parable was spoken with respect to
mercy in alms; but the one that comes after this, to them that neither
in money, nor in word, nor in protection, nor in any other things
whatever, are willing to assist their neighbors, but withhold all.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p27"></span>And wherefore can it be that this parable
brings forward a king, but that a bridegroom? That thou mightest learn
how close Christ is joined unto the virgins that strip themselves of
their possessions; for this indeed is virginity. Wherefore Paul also
makes this as a definition of the thing. “The unmarried woman careth for
the things of the Lord;” <span id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864) such
are his words: and, “For that which is comely, and that ye may attend
upon the Lord without distraction. These things we advise,” he saith.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p29"></span>And if in Luke the parable of the talents
is otherwise put, this is to be said, that the one is really different
from the other. For in that, from the one capital different degrees of
increase were made, for from one pound one brought five, another ten;
wherefore neither did they obtain the same recompense; but here, it is
the contrary, and the crown is accordingly equal. For he that received
two gave two, and he that had received the five again in like manner;
but there since from the same beginning one made the greater, <span
id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span id="iii.LXXV-Page_454"></span> one the
less, increase; as might be expected, in the rewards also, they do not
enjoy the same.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p30"></span>But see Him everywhere, not requiring it
again immediately. For in the case of the vineyard, He let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a far country; and here He committed to them
the talents, and took His journey, that thou mightest learn His
long-suffering. And to me He seems to say these things, to intimate the
resurrection. But here it is no more a vineyard and husbandmen, but all
servants. For not to rulers only, nor to Jews, but to all, doth He
address His discourse. And they who bring a return unto Him confess
frankly, both what is their own, and what their Master’s. And the one
saith, Lord, “Thou gavest me five talents;” and the other saith, “two,”
indicating that from Him they received the source of their gain, and
they are very thankful, and reckon all to Him.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p31"></span>What then saith the Master? “Well done,
thou good” (for this is goodness to look to one’s neighbor) “and
faithful servant; thou wast faithful over few things, I will set thee
over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord,” <span
id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865) meaning by this expression all
blessedness.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p33"></span>But not so that other one, but how? “I
knew that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou sowedst not, and
gathering where thou strawedst not: and I was afraid, and hid thy
talent: lo, there thou hast that is thine.” <span
id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866) What then the Master? “Thou
oughtest to have put my money to the exchangers,” <span
id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867) that is, “that oughtest to have
spoken, to have admonished, to have advised.” But are they disobedient?
Yet this is nought to thee.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p36"></span>What could be more gentle than this? For
men indeed do not so, but him that hath put out the money at usury, even
him do they make also responsible to require it again. But He not so;
but, Thou oughtest, He saith, to have put it out, and to have committed
the requiring of it again to me. And I should have required it with
increase; by increase upon the hearing, meaning the showing forth of the
works. Thou oughtest to have done that which is easier, and to have left
to me what is more difficult. Forasmuch then as he did not this, “Take,”
saith He, “the talent from him, and give it to him that hath ten
talents. <span id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868) For unto every one
that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that
hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.” <span
id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) What then is this? He that hath a
gift of word and teaching to profit thereby, and useth it not, will lose
the gift also; but he that giveth diligence, will gain to himself the
gift in more abundance; even as the other loseth what he had received.
But not to this is the penalty limited for him that is slothful, but
even intolerable is the punishment, and with the punishment the
sentence, which is full of a heavy accusation. For “cast ye,” saith He,
“the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.” <span id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870) Seest
thou how not only the spoiler, and the covetous, nor only the doer of
evil things, but also he that doeth not good things, is punished with
extreme punishment.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p40"></span>Let us hearken then to these words. As we
have opportunity, let us help on our salvation, let us get oil for our
lamps, let us labor to add to our talent. For if we be backward, and
spend our time in sloth here, no one will pity us any more hereafter,
though we should wail ten thousand times. He also that had on the filthy
garments condemned himself, and profited nothing. He also that had the
one talent restored that which was committed to his charge, and yet was
condemned. The virgins again entreated, and came unto Him and knocked,
and all in vain, and without effect.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p41"></span>Knowing then these things, let us
contribute alike wealth, and diligence, and protection, <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) and all things for our neighbor’s
advantage. For the talents here are each person’s ability, whether in
the way of protection, or in money, or in teaching, or in what thing
soever of the kind. Let no man say, I have but one talent, and can do
nothing; for thou canst even by one approve thyself. For thou art not
poorer than that widow; thou art not more uninstructed than Peter and
John, who were both “unlearned and ignorant men;” <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872) but nevertheless, since they showed
forth a zeal, and did all things for the common good, they attained to
Heaven. For nothing is so pleasing to God, as to live for the common
advantage.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p44"></span>For this end God gave us speech, and
hands, and feet, and strength of body, and mind, and understanding, that
we might use all these things, both for our own salvation, and for our
neighbor’s advantage. For not for hymns only and thanksgivings is our
speech serviceable to us, but it is profitable also for instruction and
admonition. And if indeed we used it to this end, we should be imitating
our Master; but if for the opposite ends, the devil. Since Peter also,
when he <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="iii.LXXV-Page_455"></span> confessed the Christ, was blessed, as
having spoken the words of the Father; but when he refused the cross,
and dissuaded it, he was severely reproved, as savoring the things of
the devil. But if where the saying was of ignorance, so heavy is the
blame, when we of our own will commit many sins, what favor shall we
have?

<span id="iii.LXXV-p45"></span>Such things then let us speak, that of
themselves they may be evidently the words of Christ. For not only if I
should say, “Arise, and walk;” <span
id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873) neither if I should say, “Tabitha,
arise,” <span id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874) then only do I speak
Christ’s words, but much more if being reviled I bless, if being
despitefully used I pray for him that doeth despite to me. Lately indeed
I said, that our tongue is a hand laying hold on the feet of God; but
now much more do I say, that our tongue is a tongue imitating the tongue
of Christ, if it show forth the strictness that becometh us, if we speak
those things which He wills. But what are the things which He wills us
to speak? Words full of gentleness and meekness, even as also He Himself
used to speak, saying to them that were insulting Him, “I have not a
devil;” <span id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) and again, “If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil.” <span
id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876) If thou also speak in this way; if
thou speak for thy neighbor’s amendment, thou wilt obtain a tongue like
that tongue. And these things God Himself saith; “For he that bringeth
out the precious from the vile, shall be as my mouth;” <span
id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877) such are His words.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p51"></span>When therefore thy tongue is as Christ’s
tongue, and thy mouth is become the mouth of the Father, and thou art a
temple of the Holy Ghost, then what kind of honor could be equal to
this? For not even if thy mouth were made of gold, no nor even of
precious stones, would it shine like as now, when lit up with the
ornament of meekness. For what is more lovely than a mouth that knoweth
not how to insult, but is used to bless *and give good words*? But if
thou canst not bear to bless him that curses thee, hold thy peace, and
accomplish but this for the time; and proceeding in order, and striving
as thou oughtest, thou wilt attain to that other point also, and wilt
acquire such a mouth, as we have spoken of.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p52"></span>4. And do not account the saying to be
rash. For the Lord is loving to man, and the gift cometh of His
goodness. It is rash to have a mouth like the devil, to have a tongue
resembling that of an evil demon, especially for him that partakes of
such mysteries, and communicates of the very flesh of the Lord.
Reflecting then on these things, become like Him, to the utmost of thy
power. No longer then will the devil be able so much as to look thee in
the face, when thou art become such a one as this. For indeed he
recognizes the image of the King, he knows the weapons of Christ,
whereby he was worsted. And what are these? Gentleness and meekness. For
when on the mountain Christ overthrew and laid low the devil who was
assaulting him, it was not by making it known that He was Christ, but He
entrapped him by these sayings, He took him by gentleness, he turned him
to flight by meekness. Thou also must do this; shouldest thou see a man
become a devil, and coming against thee, even so do thou likewise
overcome. Christ gave thee also power to become like Him, so far as thy
ability extends. Be not afraid at hearing this. The fear is not to be
like Him. Speak then after His manner, and thou art become in this
respect such as He, so far as it is possible for one who is a man to
become so.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p53"></span>Wherefore greater is he that thus speaks,
than he that prophecies. For this is entirely a gift, but in the other
is also thy labor and toil. Teach thy soul to frame thee a mouth like to
Christ’s mouth. For it can create such things, if it will; it knows the
art, if it be not remiss. And how is such a mouth made? one may ask. By
what kind of colorings? by what kind of material? By no colorings,
indeed, or material; but by virtue only, and meekness, and humility.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p54"></span>Let us see also how a devil’s mouth is
made; that we may never frame that. How then is it made? By curses, by
insults, by envy, by perjury. For when any one speaks his words, he
takes his tongue. What kind of excuse then shall we have; or rather,
what manner of punishment shall we not undergo; when this our tongue,
wherewith we are allowed to taste of the Lord’s flesh, when this, I say,
we overlook, speaking the devil’s words?

<span id="iii.LXXV-p55"></span>Let us not overlook it, but let us use
all diligence, in order to train it to imitate its Lord. For if we train
it to this, it will place us with great confidence at Christ’s judgment
seat. Unless any one know how to speak thus, the judge will not so much
as hear him. For like as when the judge chances to be a Roman, he will
not hear the defense of one who knows not how to speak thus; so likewise
Christ, unless thou speak after His fashion, will not hear thee, nor
give heed.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p56"></span>Let us learn therefore to speak in such
wise as our Judge is wont to hear; let it be <span id="page_456">p.
456</span> <span id="iii.LXXV-Page_456"></span> our endeavor to imitate
that tongue. And shouldest thou fall into grief, take heed lest the
tyranny of despondency pervert thy tongue, but that thou speak like
Christ. For He too mourned for Lazarus and Judas. Shouldest thou fall
into fear, seek again to speak even as He. For He Himself fell into fear
for thy sake, with regard to His manhood. <span
id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) the other sheep, that He might
indicate the unfruitfulness of the one, for no fruit will come from
kids; and the great profit from the other, for indeed from sheep great
is the profit, as well from the milk, as from the wool, and from the
young, of all which things the kid <span
id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879) is destitute.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p59"></span>But while the brutes have from nature
their unfruitfulness, and fruitfulness, these have it from choice,
wherefore some are punished, and the others crowned. And He doth not
punish them, until He hath pleaded with them; wherefore also, when He
hath put them in their place, He mentions the charges against them. And
they speak with meekness, but they have no advantage from it now; and
very reasonably, because they passed by a work so much to be desired.
For indeed the prophets are everywhere saying this, “I will have mercy
and not sacrifice,” <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) and the
lawgiver by all means urged them to this, both by words, and by works;
and nature herself taught it.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p61"></span>But mark them, how they are destitute not
of one or two things only, but of all. For not only did they fail to
feed the hungry, or clothe the naked; but not even did they visit the
sick, which was an easier thing.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p62"></span>And mark how easy are His injunctions. He
said not, “I was in prison, and ye set me free; I was sick, and ye
raised me up again;” but, “ye visited me,” and, “ye came unto me.” And
neither in hunger is the thing commanded grievous. For no costly table
did He seek, but what is needful only, and His necessary food, and He
sought in a suppliant’s garb, so that all things were enough to bring
punishment on them; the easiness of the request, for it was bread; the
pitiable character of Him that requesteth, for He was poor; the sympathy
of nature, for He was a man; the desirableness of the promise, for He
promised a kingdom; the fearfulness of the punishment, for He threatened
hell. The dignity of the one receiving, for it was God, who was
receiving by the poor; the surpassing nature of the honor, that He
vouchsafed to condescend so far; His just claim for what they bestowed,
for of His own was He receiving. But against all these things
covetousness once for all blinded them that were seized by it; and this
though so great a threat was set against it.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p63"></span>For further back also He saith, that they
who receive not such as these shall suffer more grievous things than
Sodom; and here He saith, “Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye did it not unto me.” <span
id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881) What sayest Thou? they are Thy
brethren; and how dost Thou call them least. Why, for this reason they
are brethren, because they are lowly, because they are poor, because
they are outcast. For such doth He most invite to brotherhood, the
unknown, the contemptible, not meaning by these the monks only, and them
that have occupied the mountains, but every believer; though he be a
secular person, yet if he be hungry, and famishing, and naked, and a
stranger, His will is he should have the benefit of all this care. For
baptism renders a man a brother, and the partaking of the divine
mysteries.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p65"></span>2. Then, in order that thou mayest see in
another way also the justice of the sentence, He first praises them that
have done right, and saith, “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you before <span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="iii.LXXV-Page_457"></span> the foundation of the world. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat,” and all that follows. <span
id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882) For that they may not say, we had
it not, He condemns them by their fellow-servants; like as the virgins
by the virgins, and the servant that was drunken and gluttonous by the
faithful servant, and him that buried his talent, by them that brought
the two, and each one of them that continue in sin, by them that have
done right.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p67"></span>And this comparison is sometimes made in
the case of an equal, as here, and in the instance of the virgins,
sometimes of him that hath advantage, as when he said, “The men of
Nineveh shall rise up and shall condemn this generation, because they
believed at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is
here;” and, “The queen of the south shall condemn this generation,
because she came to hear the wisdom of Solomon;” <span
id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883) and of an equal again, “They shall
be your judges;” <span id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) and again of
one at advantage, “Know ye not, that we shall judge angels, how much
more things that pertain to this life?” <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885)

<span id="iii.LXXV-p71"></span>And here, however, it is of an equal; for
he compares rich with rich, and poor with poor. And not in this way only
doth He show the sentence justly passed, by their fellow-servants having
done what was right when in the same circumstances, but also by their
not being obedient so much as in these things in which poverty was no
hindrance; as, for instance, in giving drink to the thirsty, in looking
upon him that is in bonds, in visiting the sick. And when He had
commended them that had done right, He shows how great was originally
His bond of love towards them. For, “Come,” saith He, “ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.” To how many good things is this same equivalent, to be blessed,
and blessed of the Father? And wherefore were they counted worthy of
such great honors? What is the cause? “I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink;” and what follows.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p72"></span>Of what honor, of what blessedness are
these words? And He said not, Take, but, “Inherit,” as one’s own, as
your Father’s, as yours, as due to you from the first. For, before you
were, saith He, these things had been prepared, and made ready for you,
forasmuch as I knew you would be such as you are.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p73"></span>And in return for what do they receive
such things? For the covering of a roof, for a garment, for bread, for
cold water, for visiting, for going into the prison. For indeed in every
case it is for what is needed; and sometimes not even for that. For
surely, as I have said, the sick and he that is in bonds seeks not for
this only, but the one to be loosed, the other to be delivered from his
infirmity. But He, being gracious, requires only what is within our
power, or rather even less than what is within our power, leaving to us
to exert our generosity in doing more.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p74"></span>But to the others He saith, “Depart from
me, ye cursed,” (no longer of the Father; for not He laid the curse upon
them, but their own works), “into the everlasting fire, prepared,” not
for you, but “for the devil and his angels.” For concerning the kingdom
indeed, when He had said, “Come, inherit the kingdom,” He added,
“prepared for you before the foundation of the world;” but concerning
the fire, no longer so, but, “prepared for the devil.” I, saith He,
prepared the kingdom for you, but the fire no more for you, but “for the
devil and his angels;” but since ye cast yourselves therein, impute it
to yourselves. And not in this way only, but by what follows also, like
as though He were excusing Himself to them, He sets forth the causes.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p75"></span>“For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no
meat.” For though He that came to thee had been thine enemy, were not
His sufferings enough to have overcome and subdued even the merciless?
hunger, and cold, and bonds, and nakedness, and sickness, and to wander
everywhere houseless? These things are sufficient even to destroy
enmity. But ye did not these things even to a friend, being at once
friend, and benefactor, and Lord. Though it be a dog we see hungry,
often we are overcome; and though we behold a wild beast, we are
subdued; but seeing the Lord, art thou not subdued? And wherein are
these things worthy of defense?

<span id="iii.LXXV-p76"></span>For if it were this only, were it not
sufficient for a recompense? (I speak not of hearing such a voice, in
the presence of the world, from Him that sitteth on the Father’s throne,
and of obtaining the kingdom), but were not the very doing it sufficient
for a reward? But now even in the presence of the world, and at the
appearing of that unspeakable glory, He proclaims and crowns thee, and
acknowledges thee as His sustainer and host, and is not ashamed of
saying such things, that He may make the crown brighter for thee.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p77"></span>So for this cause, while the one are
punished justly, the others are crowned by grace. For though they had
done ten thousand <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="iii.LXXV-Page_458"></span> things, the munificence were of grace,
that in return for services so small and cheap, such a heaven, and a
kingdom, and so great honor, should be given them.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p78"></span>“And it came to pass, when Jesus had
finished these sayings, <span id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886) He
said unto His disciples, Ye know that after two days is the passover,
and the Son of Man is betrayed to be crucified.” <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) In good season again doth He speak
of the passion, when He had reminded them of the kingdom, and of the
recompense there, and of the deathless punishment; as though He had
said, Why are ye afraid at the dangers that are for a season, when such
good things await you?

<span id="iii.LXXV-p81"></span>3. But mark thou, I pray thee, how He
hath in all His first sayings after a new manner worked up and thrown
into the shade what was most painful to them. For He said not, Ye know
that after two days I am betrayed, but, “Ye know that after two days is
the passover,” <span id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888) to show that
what is done is a mystery and that a feast and celebration is being kept
for the salvation of the world, and that with foreknowledge He suffered
all. So then, as though this were sufficient consolation for them, He
did not even say anything to them now about a resurrection; for it was
superfluous, after having discoursed so much about it, to speak of it
again. And moreover, as I said, He shows that even His very passion is a
deliverance from countless evils, having by the passover reminded them
of the ancient benefits in Egypt.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p83"></span>“Then were assembled together the chief
priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, in the palace of
the high priest, who was called Caiaphas, and consulted that they might
take Jesus by subtlety, and kill Him. But they said, Not on the feast
day, lest there be an uproar among the people.” <span
id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889)

<span id="iii.LXXV-p85"></span>Seest thou the unspeakable corruption of
the Jewish state? Attempting unlawful acts, they come to the high
priest, desiring to obtain their authority from that quarter, whence
they ought to have found hindrance.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p86"></span>And how many high priests were there? For
the law wills there should be one, but then there were many. Whence it
is manifest, that the Jewish constitution had begun to dissolve. For
Moses, as I said, commanded there should be one, and that when he was
dead there should be another, and by the life of this person He measured
the banishment of them that had involuntarily committed manslaughter.
How then were there at that time many high priests? They were afterwards
made for a year. And this the evangelist declared, when he was speaking
of Zacharias, saying, that he was of the course of Abia. Those therefore
doth he here call high priests, who had been high priests.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p87"></span>What did they consult together? That they
might seize Him secretly, or that they might put Him to death? Both; for
they feared the people. Wherefore also they waited for the feast to be
past; for “they said, Not on the feast day.” <span
id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890) For the devil, lest he should make
the passion conspicuous, was not willing it should take place at the
passover; but they, lest there should be an uproar. Mark them then ever
fearing, not the ills from God, neither lest any greater pollution
should arise to them from the season, but in every case the ills from
men.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p89"></span>Yet for all this, boiling with anger,
they changed their purpose again. For though they had said, “Not at the
feast time;” when they found the traitor, they waited not for the time,
but slew Him at the feast. But why did they take Him then? They were
boiling with rage, as I said; and they expected then to find Him, and
all things they did as blinded. For though He Himself made the greatest
use of their wickedness for His own dispensation, they were not surely
for this guiltless, but deserving of inflictions without number for
their temper of mind. At least when all should be set free, even the
guilty, then these men slew the guiltless, Him that had conferred on
them countless benefits, and who for a time had neglected the Gentiles
for their sake. But O loving-kindness! them that were thus depraved,
them that were *thus froward, and* <span
id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891) full of countless evils, He again
saves, and sends the apostles to be slain in their behalf, and by the
apostles makes entreaty. “For we are ambassadors for Christ.” <span
id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892)

<span id="iii.LXXV-p92"></span>Having then such patterns as these, I say
not, let us die for our enemies, for we ought to do even this; but since
we are too feeble for this, I say for the present, at least let us not
look with an evil eye upon our friends, let us not envy our benefactors.
I say not for the present, let us do good to them that evil entreat us,
for I desire even this; but <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="iii.LXXV-Page_459"></span> since you are too gross for this, at
least avenge not yourselves. What is our condition, a scene, and acting?
Wherefore can it be that ye set yourselves directly against the acts
enjoined? It is not for nought that all else hath been written and how
many things He did at the very cross sufficient to recall them to Him;
but that thou mightest imitate His goodness, that thou mightest emulate
His lovingkindness. For indeed He cast them to the ground, and restored
the servant’s ear, and discoursed with forbearance; and great miracles
did He show forth, when lifted up, turning aside the sunbeams, bursting
the rocks, raising the dead, frightening by dreams the wife of him that
was judging Him, at the very judgment showing forth all meekness (which
was of power not less than miracles to gain them over), forewarning them
of countless things in the judgment hall; on the very cross crying
aloud, “Father, forgive them their sin.” <span
id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893) And when buried, how many things
did He show forth for their salvation? And having risen again, did he
not straightway call the Jews? did He not give them remission of sins?
did He not set before them countless blessings? What can be more strange
than this? They that crucified Him, and were breathing murder, after
they crucified Him, became sons of God.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p94"></span>What can be equal to this tenderness? On
hearing these things let us hide our faces, to think that we are so far
removed from Him whom we are commanded to imitate. Let us at least see
how great the distance, that we may at any rate condemn ourselves, for
warring with these, in behalf of whom Christ gave His life, and not
being willing to be reconciled to them, whom that He might reconcile He
refused not even to be slain; unless this too be some expense, and
outlay of money, which ye object in almsgiving.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p95"></span>4. Consider of how many things thou art
guilty; and so far from being backward to forgive them that have injured
thee, thou wilt even run unto them that have grieved thee, in order that
thou mayest have a ground for pardon, that thou mayest find a remedy for
thine own evil deeds.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p96"></span>The sons of the Greeks, who look for
nothing great, have often shown self-command toward these: and thou who
art to depart hence with such hopes, shrinkest, and art slow to act; and
that which time effects, this thou endurest not to do before the time
for God’s law, but willest this passion to be quenched without reward,
rather than for a reward? For neither, if this should have arisen from
the time, wilt thou have any advantage, but rather great will be the
punishment, because, what time hath effected, this the law of God
persuaded thee not to do.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p97"></span>But if thou sayest that thou burnest with
the memory of the insult; call to mind if any good hath been done thee
by him that hath offended thee, and how many ills thou hast occasioned
to others.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p98"></span>Hath he spoken ill of thee, and disgraced
thee? Consider also that thou hast spoken thus of others. How then wilt
thou obtain pardon, which thou bestowest not on others? But hast thou
spoken ill of no one? But thou hast heard men so speaking, and allowed
it. Neither is this guiltless.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p99"></span>Wilt thou learn how good a thing it is
not to remember injuries, and how this more than anything pleases God?
Them that exult over persons, justly chastised by Himself, He punishes.
And yet they are justly chastised; but thou shouldest not rejoice over
them. So the prophet having brought many accusations, added this also,
saying, “They felt nothing for the affliction of Joseph;” <span
id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894) and again, “She that inhabiteth
Enan, came not forth to lament for the place near her.” <span
id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895) And yet both Joseph (that is, the
tribes that were sprung from him), and the neighbors of these others,
were punished according to the purpose of God; nevertheless, it is His
will that we sympathize even with these. For if we, being evil, when we
are punishing a servant, if we should see one of his fellow slaves
laughing, we at the same time are provoked the more, and turn our anger
against him; much more will God punish them that exult over those whom
He chastises. But if upon them that are chastised by God it is not right
to trample, but to grieve with them, much more with them that have
sinned against us. For this is love’s sign; love God prefers to all
things. For as in the royal purple, those are precious amongst the
flowers and dyes, which make up this robing; so here too, these virtues
are the precious ones, which preserve love. But nothing maintains love
so much as the not remembering them that have sinned against us.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p102"></span>“Why? did not God guard the other side
also? Why? did He not drive him that hath done the wrong to him that is
wronged? Doth He not send him from the altar to the other, and so after
the reconciliation invite him to the table?” But do not therefore wait
for the other to come, since thus thou hast lost all. For to this intent
most especially doth He appoint unto thee an unspeaka <span
id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span id="iii.LXXV-Page_460"></span> ble
reward, that thou mayest prevent the other, since, if thou art
reconciled by his entreaties, the amity is no longer the result of the
divine command, but of the other party’s diligence. Wherefore also thou
goest away uncrowned, while he receives the rewards.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p103"></span>What sayest thou? Hast thou an enemy,
and art thou not ashamed? Why is not the devil enough for us, that we
bring upon ourselves those of our own race also? Would that not even he
had been minded to war against us; would that not even he were a devil!

<span id="iii.LXXV-p104"></span>Knowest thou not how great the pleasure
after reconciliation? For what, though in our enmity it appear not
great? For that it is sweeter to love him that doth us wrong than to
hate him, after the enmity is done away thou shalt be able to learn full
well.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p105"></span>5. Why then do we imitate the mad,
devouring one another, warring against our own flesh?

<span id="iii.LXXV-p106"></span>Hear even under the Old Testament, how
great regard there was for this, “The ways of revengeful men are unto
death. <span id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896) One man keepeth anger
against another, and doth he seek healing of God?” <span
id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897) “And yet He allowed, ‘eye for eye,’
and ‘tooth for tooth,’ how then doth He find fault?” Because He allowed
even those things, not that we should do them one to another, but that
through the fear of suffering, we might abstain from the commission of
crime. And besides, those acts are the fruits of a short-lived anger,
but to remember injuries is the part of a soul that practises itself in
evil.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p109"></span>But hast thou suffered evil? yet nothing
so great, as thou wilt do to thyself by remembering injuries. And
besides, it is not so much as possible for a good man to suffer any
evil. For suppose there to be any man, having both children and a wife,
and let him practise virtue, and let him have moreover many occasions of
being injured, as well abundance of possessions, as sovereign power, and
many friends, and let him enjoy honor; only let him practise virtue, for
this must be added, and let us in supposition lay plagues upon him. And
let some wicked man come unto him, and involve him in losses. What then
is that to him who accounts money nothing? Let him kill his children.
What this to him, who learns to be wise touching the resurrection? Let
him slay his wife; what is this to him who is instructed not to sorrow
for them that are fallen asleep? let him cast him into dishonor. What
this to him who accounts the things present, the flower of the grass? If
thou wilt, let him also torture his body, and cast him into prison, what
this to him that hath learnt, “Though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed;” <span id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898) and
that “tribulation worketh approval?” <span
id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899)

<span id="iii.LXXV-p112"></span>Now I had undertaken that he should
receive no harm; but the account as it proceeded hath shown that he is
even advantaged, being renewed, and becoming approved.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p113"></span>Let us not then vex ourselves with
others, injuring ourselves, and rendering our soul weak. For the
vexation is not so much from our neighbors’ wickedness, as from our
weakness. Because of this, should any one insult us, we weep, and frown;
should any one rob us, we suffer the same like those little children,
which the more clever of their companions provoke for nothing, grieving
them for small causes; but nevertheless these too, if they should see
them vexed, continue to tease them, but if laughing, they on the
contrary leave off. But we are more foolish even than these, lamenting
for these things, about which we ought to laugh.

<span id="iii.LXXV-p114"></span>Wherefore I entreat, let us let go this
childish mind, and lay hold of Heaven. For indeed, Christ willeth us to
be men, perfect men. On this wise did Paul also command, “Brethren, be
not children in understanding,” he saith, “howbeit in malice be ye
children.” <span id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900)

<span id="iii.LXXV-p116"></span>Let us therefore be children <span
id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901) in malice, and flee wickedness, and
lay hold on virtue, that we may attain also to the good things eternal,
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[451:2855](1100083.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p3"></span>\[The passage, as here given, corresponds
with that prefixed to the Homily in Field’s text. There are some
omissions, and some variations from the received text. It seemed
unnecessary to annotate it to any extent, since the variations appear in
the rendering. In Migne’s edition, the citation ends with the words,
“while the bridegroom tarried.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[452:2856](1100083.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p10"></span>[Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXXV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[452:2857](1100083.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p11"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="iii.LXXV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[452:2858](1100083.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p12.1"></span>α δ</span>.

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[452:2859](1100083.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p13.1"></span>α νικηθεσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[452:2860](1100083.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p16"></span>[1 Thess.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016), [1 Cor.
15:52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span
id="iii.LXXV-p16.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[453:2861](1100083.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p18"></span>[Luke xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)<span id="iii.LXXV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[453:2862](1100083.htm#fr_2861) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p22"></span>[Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXXV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[453:2863](1100083.htm#fr_2862) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p23"></span>See [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXXV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[453:2864](1100083.htm#fr_2863) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p25"></span>[Matt. xxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[453:2865](1100083.htm#fr_2864) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p28"></span>[1 Cor.
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)<span id="iii.LXXV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[454:2866](1100083.htm#fr_2865) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p32"></span>[Matt. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXXV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[454:2867](1100083.htm#fr_2866) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p34"></span>[Matt.
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#025)<span id="iii.LXXV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[454:2868](1100083.htm#fr_2867) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p35"></span>[Matt. xxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span id="iii.LXXV-p35.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “bankers.”\]

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[454:2869](1100083.htm#fr_2868) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p37"></span>\[R.V., “the ten talents.”\]

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[454:2870](1100083.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p38"></span>[Matt.
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXXV-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[454:2871](1100083.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p39"></span>[Matt. xxv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXXV-p39.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “cast ye out,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[454:2872](1100083.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p42.1"></span>προστασαν</span> .

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[454:2873](1100083.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p43"></span>[Acts iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXV-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[455:2874](1100083.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p46"></span>[Matt. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXV-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[455:2875](1100083.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p47"></span>[Acts ix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#040)<span id="iii.LXXV-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[455:2876](1100083.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p48"></span>[John viii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#049)<span id="iii.LXXV-p48.1"></span>.
\[Greek, “demon.”\]

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[455:2877](1100083.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p49"></span>[John xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXXV-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[455:2878](1100083.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p50"></span>[Jer. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019)<span id="iii.LXXV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[456:2879](1100083.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p57"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p57.1"></span>κατ τν τ οκονομα λγον</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXV-p57.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXV-p57.3"></span>ρφια</span>, *hædos*, not
*capras*; St. Jerome.

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[456:2880](1100083.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p57.4"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p58"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p58.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p58.2"></span>ριφο</span>.

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[456:2881](1100083.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p60"></span>[Hosea vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXXV-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[456:2882](1100083.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p64"></span>[Matt.
25:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="iii.LXXV-p64.1"></span>.
\[“My brethren” is added here from [Matt.
25.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span
id="iii.LXXV-p64.2"></span>. The order of words varies from that found
in that verse.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[457:2883](1100083.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p66"></span>[Matt. xxv.
34-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span
id="iii.LXXV-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[457:2884](1100083.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p68"></span>[Matt.
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)<span id="iii.LXXV-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[457:2885](1100083.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p69"></span>[Matt. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#027)<span id="iii.LXXV-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[457:2886](1100083.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p70"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXV-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[458:2887](1100083.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p79"></span>\[R.V., “words;” the word “all” is
omitted.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[458:2888](1100083.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p80"></span>[Matt.
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXXV-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[458:2889](1100083.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p82"></span>\[A clause is omitted here: “and then He
brings in ‘is delivered up to be crucified.’” But some editors read:
“‘And the Son of Man is delivered up,’ and then He brings in ‘to be
crucified.’” For the latter reading there is no good authority.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[458:2890](1100083.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p84"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXV-p84.1"></span>.
\[This passage contains some peculiar variations: in [Matt
26.3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXV-p84.2"></span>,
“in the palace” (court) is substituted for “unto;” in [Matt.
26.4](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXXV-p84.3"></span>,
the more probable reading should be rendered, “were consulting” (or
taking counsel together). [Matt.
26.5](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXV-p84.4"></span>
shows no variations but should be rendered as in the R.V., “Not during
the feast, lest a tumult arise among the people.” The comments show that
Chrysostom understood the verse as referring to the entire
festival.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[458:2891](1100083.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p88"></span>\[“Not during the feast.”\]

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[458:2892](1100083.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p90"></span>\[The words in italics are not sustained
by the <span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXV-p90.1"></span>mss</span>.
collated by Field.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[458:2893](1100083.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p91"></span>[2 Cor. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="iii.LXXV-p91.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “on behalf of Christ.”\]

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[459:2894](1100083.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p93"></span>[Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXV-p93.1"></span>.
\[Freely cited.\]

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[459:2895](1100083.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p100"></span>[Amos vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXXV-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[459:2896](1100083.htm#fr_2895) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p100.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p101"></span>[Micah i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)<span id="iii.LXXV-p101.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXV-p101.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[460:2897](1100083.htm#fr_2896) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p107"></span>[Prov. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXXV-p107.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXV-p107.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[460:2898](1100083.htm#fr_2897) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p107.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p108"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
18.3](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#003)<span
id="iii.LXXV-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[460:2899](1100083.htm#fr_2898) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p110"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="iii.LXXV-p110.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “our outward man is decaying.”\]

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[460:2900](1100083.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p110.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p111"></span>[Rom. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXXV-p111.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “probation;” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXV-p111.2"></span>δοκιμν</span> cannot be accurately rendered
by any single English term.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[460:2901](1100083.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p115"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span id="iii.LXXV-p115.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “be not children in mind; howbeit in malice be ye babes.”\]

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[460:2902](1100083.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="iii.LXXV-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXV-p117"></span>\[“babes.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXVI](1100084)
