[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100041)  [Next](1100043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXXIV"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. X.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span
id="iii.XXXIV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p3"></span>“But when they persecute you in this
city, flee ye into the other; for verily I say unto you, ye shall not
have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be come.”

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p4.1"></span>Having</span> spoken of those fearful and
horrible things, enough to melt very adamant, which after His cross, and
resurrection, and assumption, were to befall them, He directs again His
discourse to what was of more tranquil character, allowing those whom He
is training to recover breath, and affording them full security. For He
did not at all command them, when persecuted, to close with the enemy,
but to fly. That is, it being so far but a beginning, and a prelude, He
gave His discourse a very condescending turn. For not now of the ensuing
persecutions is He speaking, but of those before the cross and the
passion. And this He showed by saying, “Ye shall not have gone over the
cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be come.” That is, lest they
should say, “What then, if when persecuted we flee, and there again they
overtake us, and drive us out?”—to destroy this fear, He saith, “Ye
shall not have gone round Palestine first, but I will straightway come
upon you.”

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p5"></span>And see how here again He doeth not <span
id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span id="iii.XXXIV-Page_222"></span> away
with the terrors, but stands by them in their perils. For He said not,
“I will snatch you out, and will put an end to the persecutions;” but
what? “Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of
Man be come.” Yea, for it sufficed for their consolation, simply to see
Him.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p6"></span>But do thou observe, I pray thee, how He
doth not on every occasion leave all to grace, but requires something
also to be contributed on their part. “For if ye fear,” saith He,
“flee,” for this He signified by saying, “flee ye,” and “fear
not.” <span id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437) And He did not command
them to flee at first, but when persecuted to withdraw; neither is it a
great distance that He allows them, but so much as to go about the
cities of Israel.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p8"></span>Then again, He trains them for another
branch of self-command; first, casting out all care for their food:
secondly, all fear of their perils; and now, that of calumny. Since from
that first anxiety He freed them, by saying, “The workman is worthy of
his hire,” <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) and by signifying
that many would receive them; and from their distress about their
dangers, by saying, “Take no thought how or what ye shall speak,” and,
“He that endureth unto the end, the same shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439)

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p11"></span>But since withal it was likely that they
should also bring upon themselves an evil report, which to many seems
harder to bear than all; see whence He comforts them even in this case,
deriving the encouragement from Himself, and from all that had been said
touching Himself; to which nothing else was equal. For as He said in
that other place, “Ye shall be hated of all men,” and added, “for my
name’s sake,” so also here.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p12"></span>And in another way He mitigates it,
joining a fresh topic to that former. What kind of one then is it?

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p13"></span>“The disciple,” saith He, “is not above
his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the
disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord. If they
have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they
call them of His household? Fear them not therefore.” <span
id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440)

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p15"></span>See how He discovers Himself to be the
Lord and God and Creator of all things. What then? Is there not any
disciple above his Master, or servant above his Lord? <span
id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441) So long as he is a disciple, and a
servant, he is not, by the nature of that honor. For tell me not here of
the rare instances, but take the principle from the majority. And He
saith not, “How much more His servants,” but “them of His household,” to
show how very near He felt them to be to Him. <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442) And elsewhere too He said,
“Henceforth I call you not servants; ye are my friends.” <span
id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443) And He said not, If they have
insulted the Master of the house, and calumniated Him; but states also
the very form of the insult, that they “called Him Beelzebub.”

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p19"></span>Then He gives also another consolation,
not inferior to this: for this indeed is the greatest; but because for
them who were not yet living strictly, there was need also of another,
such as might have special power to refresh them, He states it likewise.
And the saying seems indeed in form to be an universal proposition,
nevertheless not of all matters, but of those in hand only, is it
spoken. For what saith He?

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p20"></span>“There is nothing covered, that shall
not be revealed; nor hid, that shall not be known.” <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444) Now what He saith is like this. It
is indeed sufficient for your encouragement, that I also shared with you
in the same reproach; I who am your Master and Lord. But if it still
grieve you to hear these words, consider this other thing too, that even
from this suspicion ye will soon be released. For why do ye grieve? At
their calling you sorcerers and deceivers? But wait a little, and all
men will address you as saviors, and benefactors of the world. Yea, for
time discovers all things that are concealed, it will both refute their
false accusation, and make manifest your virtue. For when the event
shows you saviors, and benefactors, and examples of all virtue, men will
not give heed to their words, but to the real state of the case; and
they will appear false accusers, and liars, and slanderers, but ye
brighter than the sun, length of time revealing and proclaiming you, and
uttering a voice clearer than a trumpet, and making all men witnesses of
your virtue. Let not therefore what is now said humble you, but let the
hope of the good things to come raise you up. For it cannot be, that
what relates to you should be hid.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p22"></span>2. Then, having rid them of all
distress, and fears, and anxiety, and set them above men’s reproaches,
then, and not till then, He seasonably discourses to them also of
boldness in their preaching.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p23"></span>For, “What I tell you,” saith He, “in
darkness, that speak ye in light; and what ye have heard in the ear,
that preach ye <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445) upon the
housetops.” <span id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446)

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p26"></span>Yet it was not at all darkness, when He
was saying these things; neither was He dis <span id="page_223">p.
223</span> <span id="iii.XXXIV-Page_223"></span> coursing unto them in
the ear; but He used a strong figure, thus speaking. That is, because He
was conversing with them alone, and in a small corner of Palestine,
therefore He said, “in darkness,” and “in the ear;” contrasting the
boldness of speech, which He was hereafter to confer on them, with the
tone of the conversation which was then going on. “For not to one, or
two, or three cities, but to the whole world ye shall preach,” saith He,
“traversing land and sea, the inhabited country, and the desert; to
princes alike and tribes, to philosophers and orators, saying all with
open face, <span id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447) and with all
boldness of speech.” Therefore, He said, “On the house tops,” and, “In
the light,” without any shrinking, and with all freedom.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p28"></span>And wherefore said He not only, “Preach
on the housetops,” and “Speak in the light,” but added also, “What I
tell you in darkness,” and “What ye hear in the ear”? It was to raise up
their spirits. As therefore when He said, “He that believeth on me, the
works that I do shall he do also, and greater works than these shall he
do;” <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448) even so here too, to
signify that He will do it all by them, and more than by Himself, He
inserted this. For “the beginning indeed,” saith He, “I have given, and
the prelude; but the greater part it is my will to effect through you.”
Now this is the language of one not commanding only, but also declaring
beforehand what was to be, and encouraging them with His sayings, and
implying that they should prevail over all, and quietly also
removing <span id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449) again their distress
at the evil report. For as this doctrine, after lying hid for a while,
shall overspread all things, so also the evil suspicion of the Jews
shall quickly perish.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p31"></span>Then, because He had lifted them up on
high, He again gives warning of the perils also, adding wings to their
mind, and exalting them high above all. For what saith He? “Fear not
them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.” <span
id="fr_1450"></span>[1451](#fn_1450) Seest thou how He set them far
above all things, persuading them to despise not anxiety only and
calumny, dangers and plots, but even that which is esteemed of all
things most terrible, death? And not death alone, but by violence too?
And He said not, “ye shall be slain,” but with the dignity that became
Him, He set this before them, saying, “Fear not them which kill the
body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear Him <span
id="fr_1451"></span>[1452](#fn_1451) which is able to destroy both soul
and body in hell;” bringing round the argument, as He ever doth, to its
opposite. For what? is your fear, saith He, of death? and are ye
therefore slow to preach? Nay for this very cause I bid you preach, that
ye fear death: for this shall deliver you from that which is really
death. What though they shall slay you? yet over the better part they
shall not prevail, though they strive ten thousand ways. Therefore He
said not, “Who do not kill the soul,” but, who “are not able to kill.”
For wish it as they may, they shall not prevail. Wherefore, if thou fear
punishment, fear that, the more grievous by far.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p34"></span>Seest thou how again He doth not promise
them deliverance from death, but permits them to die, granting them more
than if He had not allowed them to suffer it? Because deliverance from
death is not near so great as persuading men to despise death. You see
now, He doth not push them into dangers, but sets them above dangers,
and in a short sentence fixes in their mind the doctrines that relate to
the immortality of the soul, and having in two or three words implanted
a saving doctrine, He comforts them also by other considerations.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p35"></span>Thus, lest they should think, when
killed and butchered, that as men forsaken they suffered this, He
introduces again the argument of God’s providence, saying on this wise:
“Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not
fall into a snare <span id="fr_1452"></span>[1453](#fn_1452) without
your Father. But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.” <span
id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453) “For what is viler than they?”
saith He; “nevertheless, not even these shall be taken without God’s
knowledge.” For He means not this, “by His operation they fall,” for
this were unworthy of God; but, “nothing that is done is hid from Him.”
If then He is not ignorant of anything that befalls us, and loves us
more truly than a father, and so loves us, as to have numbered our very
hairs; we ought not to be afraid. And this He said, not that God numbers
our hairs, but that He might indicate His perfect knowledge, and His
great providence over them. If therefore He both knows all the things
that are done, and is able to save you, and willing; whatever ye may
have to suffer, think not that as persons forsaken ye suffer. For
neither is it His will to deliver you from the terrors, but to persuade
you to despise them, since this is, more than anything, deliverance from
the terrors.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="iii.XXXIV-Page_224"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p38"></span>3. “Fear ye not therefore; ye are of
more value than many sparrows.” <span
id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) Seest thou that the fear had
already prevailed over them? Yea, for He knew the secrets of the heart;
therefore He added, “Fear them not therefore;” for even should they
prevail, it will be over the inferior part, I mean, the body; which
though they should not kill, nature will surely take with her and
depart. So that not even this depends on them, but men have it from
nature. And if thou fear this, much more shouldest thou fear what is
greater, and dread “Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell.” And He saith not openly now, that it is Himself, “Who is able to
destroy both soul and body,” but where He before declared Himself to be
judge, He made it manifest.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p40"></span>But now the contrary takes place: Him,
namely, who is able to destroy the soul, that is, to punish it, we fear
not, but those who slay the body, we shudder at. Yet surely while He
together with the soul punishes the body also, they cannot even chasten
the body, much less the soul: and though they chasten it ever so
severely, yet in that way they rather make it more glorious.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p41"></span>Seest thou how He signifies the
conflicts to be easy? Because in truth, death did exceedingly agitate
their souls, inspiring terror for a time, for that it had not as yet
been made easy to overcome, neither had they that were to despise it
partaken of the grace of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p42"></span>Having, you see, cast out the fear and
distress that was agitating their soul; by what follows He also
encourages them again, casting out fear by fear; and not by fear only,
but also by the hope of great prizes; and He threatens with much
authority, in both ways urging them to speak boldly for the truth; and
saith further,

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p43"></span>“Whosoever therefore shall confess me
before men, him <span id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455) will I also
confess before my Father which is in Heaven. But whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in
Heaven.” <span id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456)

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p46"></span>Thus not from the good things only, but
also from the opposites, doth He urge them; and He concludes with the
dismal part.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p47"></span>And mark His exact care; He said not
“me,” but “in me,” implying that not by a power of his own, but by the
help of grace from above, the confessor makes his confession. But of him
that denies, He said not, “in me,” but “me;” for he having become
destitute of the gift, his denial ensues.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p48"></span>“Why then is he blamed,” one may say,
“if being forsaken, he denies?” Because the being forsaken is the fault
of the forsaken person himself.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p49"></span>But why is He not satisfied with the
faith in the mind, but requires also the confession with the mouth? To
train us up to boldness in speech, and a more abundant love and
determination, and to raise us on high. Wherefore also He addresses
Himself to all. Nor doth He at all apply this to the disciples only in
person, for not them, but their disciples too, He is now rendering noble
hearted. Because he that hath learnt this lesson will not only teach
with boldness, but will likewise suffer all things easily, and with
ready mind. This at any rate brought over many to the apostles, even
their belief in this word. Because both in the punishment the infliction
is heavier, and in the good things the recompense greater. I mean,
whereas he that doeth right hath the advantage in time, <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457) and the delay of the penalty is
counted for gain by the sinner: He hath introduced an equivalent, or
rather a much greater advantage, the increase of the recompenses. “Hast
thou the advantage,” saith He, “by having first confessed me here? I
also will have the advantage of thee, by giving thee greater things, and
unspeakably greater; for I will confess thee there.” Seest thou that
both the good things and the evil things are there to be dispensed? Why
then hasten and hurry thyself? and why seek thy rewards here, thou who
art “saved by hope?” <span id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458)
Wherefore, whether thou hast done anything good, and not received its
recompense here, be not troubled (for with increase, in the time to
come, the reward thereof awaits thee): or whether thou hast done any
evil, and not paid the penalty, be not easy; for there will vengeance
receive thee, if thou turn not and amend.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p52"></span>But if thou believe it not, from the
things here form thy conjecture about things to come also. Why, if in
the season of the conflicts they that confess are so glorious, imagine
what they will be in the season of the crowns. If the enemies here
applaud, how shall that tenderest of all fathers fail to admire and
proclaim thee? Yea, then shall we have both our gifts for the good, and
our punishments for the evil. So that such as deny shall suffer harm,
both here and there; <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iii.XXXIV-Page_225"></span> here living with an evil conscience,
though they were never to die, they shall be surely dead; and there,
undergoing the last penalty: but the other sort will profit both here
and there, both here making a gain of their death, and in this way
becoming more glorious than the living, and there enjoying those
unspeakable blessings.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p53"></span>God then is in no wise prompt to punish
only, but also to confer benefits; and for this last more than for the
first. But why hath He put the reward once only, the punishment twice?
He knows that this would be more apt to correct us. For this cause when
He had said, “Fear Him which is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell,” He saith again, “Him will I also deny.” So doth Paul also,
continually making mention of hell.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p54"></span>Thus we see that He, having by all ways
trained on His scholar (both by opening Heaven to him, and by setting
before him that fearful judgment-seat, and by pointing to the
amphitheatre of angels, and how in the midst of them the crowns shall be
proclaimed, which thing would thenceforth prepare the way for the word
of godliness to be very easily received); in what follows, lest they
grow timid and the word be hindered, He bids them be prepared even for
slaughter itself; to make them aware that such as continue in their
error, will have to suffer (among other things) for plotting against
them.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p55"></span>4. Let us therefore despise death,
although the time be not come that requires it of us; for indeed it will
translate us to a far better life. “But the body decays.” Why, on this
account most especially we ought to rejoice, because death decays, and
mortality perishes, not the substance of the body. For neither,
shouldest thou see a statue being cast, wouldest thou call the process
destruction, but an improved formation. Just so do thou reason also
concerning the body, and do not bewail. Then it were right to bewail,
had it remained in its chastisement.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p56"></span>“But,” saith one, “this ought to take
place without the decay of our bodies; they should continue entire.” And
what would this have advantaged either the living or the departed? How
long are ye lovers of the body? How long are ye rivetted to the earth
and gaping after shadows? Why, what good would this have done? or
rather, what harm would it not have done? For did our bodies not decay,
in the first place the greatest of all evils, pride, would have
continued with many. For if even while this is going on, and worms
gushing out, many have earnestly sought to be gods; what would not have
been the result did the body continue?

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p57"></span>In the second place, it would not be
believed to be of earth; for if, its end witnessing this, some yet
doubt; what would they not have suspected if they did not see this?
Thirdly, the bodies would have been excessively loved; and most men
would have become more carnal and gross; and if even now some cleave to
men’s tombs and coffins, after that themselves have perished, what would
they not have done, if they had even their image preserved? Fourthly,
they would not have earnestly desired the things to come. Fifthly, they
that say the world is eternal, would have been more confirmed, and would
have denied God as Creator. Sixthly, they would not have known the
excellence of the soul, and how great a thing is the presence of a soul
in a body. Seventhly, many of them that lose their relations would have
left their cities, and have dwelt in the tombs, and have become frantic,
conversing continually with their own dead. For if even now men form to
themselves images, since they cannot keep the body (for neither is it
possible, but whether they will or no it glides and hurries from them),
and are rivetted to the planks of wood; what monstrous thing would they
not then have devised? To my thinking, the generality would have even
built temples for such bodies, and they that are skilled in such
sorceries would have persuaded evil spirits to speak through them; since
at least even now, they that venture on the arts of necromancy attempt
many things more out of the way than these. And how many idolatries
would not have arisen from hence? when men even after the dust and
ashes, are yet eager in those practices.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p58"></span>God therefore, to take away all our
extravagances, and to teach us to stand off from all earthly things,
destroys the bodies before our eyes. For even he that is enamored of
bodies, and is greatly affected at the sight of a beautiful damsel, if
he will not learn by discourse the deformity of that substance, shall
know it by the very sight. Yea, many of the like age with her whom he
loves, and oftentimes also fairer, being dead, after the first or second
day, have emitted an ill savor, and foul matter, and decay with worms.
Imagine then what sort of beauty thou lovest, and what sort of elegance
has power so to disturb thee. But if bodies did not decay, this would
not be well known: but as evil spirits run unto men’s graves, so also
many of our lovers, continually sitting by the tombs, would have
received evil spirits in their soul, and would quickly have perished in
this grievous madness.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p59"></span>But as it is, together with all other
things <span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span
id="iii.XXXIV-Page_226"></span> this also comforts the soul, that the
form is not seen: it brings men to forgetfulness of their affliction.
Indeed, if this were not so, there would be no tombs at all, but thou
wouldest see our cities having corpses instead of statues, each man
desiring to look upon his own dead. And much confusion would arise
hence, and none of the ordinary sort would attend to his soul, nor would
give room to the doctrine of immortality to enter in: and many other
things too, more shocking than these, would have resulted, which even to
speak of were unseemly. Wherefore it decays presently, that thou
mightest see unveiled the beauty of the soul. For if she be the procurer
of all that beauty and life, much more excellent must she herself be.
And if she preserve that which is so deformed and unsightly, much more
herself.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p60"></span>5. For it is not the body wherein the
beauty lies, but the expression, <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459) and the bloom which is shed over
its substance by the soul. Now then, I bid thee love that which makes
the body also to appear such as it is. And why speak I of death? Nay
even in life itself, I would have thee mark how all is hers that is
beautiful. For whether she be pleased, she showers roses over the
cheeks; or whether she be pained, she takes that beauty, and involves it
all in a dark robe. And if she be continually in mirth, the body
improves in condition; if in grief, she renders the same thinner and
weaker than a spider’s web; if in wrath, she hath made it again
abominable and foul; if she show the eye calm, great is the beauty that
she bestows; if she express envy, very pale and livid is the hue she
sheds over us; if love, abundant the gracefulness she at once confers.
Thus in fact many women, not being beautiful in feature, have derived
much grace from the soul; others again of brilliant bloom, by having an
ungracious soul, have marred their beauty. Consider how a face that is
pale grows red, and by the variation of color produces great delight,
when there is need of shame and blushing. As, on the other hand, if it
be shameless, it makes the countenance more unpleasing than any monster.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p62"></span>For nothing is fairer, nothing sweeter
than a beauteous soul. For while as to bodies, the longing is with pain,
in the case of souls the pleasure is pure and calm. Why then let go the
king, and be wild about the herald? Why leave the philosopher, and gape
after his interpreter? Hast thou seen a beautiful eye? acquaint thyself
with that which is within; and if that be not beautiful, despise this
likewise. For surely, didst thou see an ill-favored woman wearing a
beautiful mask, she would make no impression on thee: just as on the
other hand, neither wouldest thou suffer one fair and beautiful to be
disguised by the mask, but wouldest take it away, as choosing to see her
beauty unveiled.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p63"></span>This then I bid thee do in regard of the
soul also, and acquaint thyself with it first; for this is clad with the
body instead of a mask; wherefore also that abides such as it is; but
the other, though it be mishapen, may quickly become beautiful. Though
it have an eye that is unsightly, and harsh, and fierce, it may become
beautiful, mild, calm, sweet-tempered, gentle.

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p64"></span>This beauty therefore let us seek, this
countenance let us adorn; that God also may “have pleasure in our
beauty,” <span id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) and impart to us of
His everlasting blessings, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[222:1438](1100042.htm#fr_1437) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p7"></span>[Matt. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[222:1439](1100042.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p9"></span>[Matt. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[222:1440](1100042.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p10"></span>[Matt.
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[222:1441](1100042.htm#fr_1440) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p14"></span>[Matt. x.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024)<span
id="iii.XXXIV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[222:1442](1100042.htm#fr_1441) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p16"></span>\[In the Greek this seems to be a
repetition of [Matt. 10.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024)<span
id="iii.XXXIV-p16.1"></span>, and not a question.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[222:1443](1100042.htm#fr_1442) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p17.1"></span>γνησιτητα πιδεικνμενο</span>.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[222:1444](1100042.htm#fr_1443) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p18"></span>[John
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[222:1445](1100042.htm#fr_1444) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p21"></span>[Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[222:1446](1100042.htm#fr_1445) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p24"></span>\[R.V., “proclaim.”\]

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[222:1447](1100042.htm#fr_1446) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p25"></span>[Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[223:1448](1100042.htm#fr_1447) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p27"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p27.1"></span>γυμν τ κεφαλ</span>.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[223:1449](1100042.htm#fr_1448) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p29"></span>[John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[223:1450](1100042.htm#fr_1449) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p30"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p30.1"></span>υπορττοντο</span>.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[223:1451](1100042.htm#fr_1450) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p32"></span>[Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[223:1452](1100042.htm#fr_1451) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p33"></span>\[Chrysostom plainly refers this to God,
not Satan. Hence the capital letter of the Oxford translator.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1452"></span>[223:1453](1100042.htm#fr_1452) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p36"></span>See received text above, Hom. IX. 4.
\[The reading here followed is accepted by several others of the Fathers
but has no <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p36.1"></span>mss</span>. authority. See Tischendorf, *in
loco*. In Homily IX. 4, there is no variation from the Greek text, as
now attested.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[223:1454](1100042.htm#fr_1453) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p37"></span>[Matt.
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[224:1455](1100042.htm#fr_1454) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p39"></span>[Matt. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#031)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[224:1456](1100042.htm#fr_1455) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p44"></span>\[R.V., “Every one, therefore, shall
confess me (Greek, in me) before men, him (Greek, in him),” etc. See the
use made in the Homily of the Greek preposition “in.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[224:1457](1100042.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p45"></span>[Matt.
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[224:1458](1100042.htm#fr_1457) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p50.1"></span>τ χρν πλεονεκτε</span>, “he is beforehand
with his rewarder:” his sufferings, and the sinner’s enjoyment, come
respectively first.

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[224:1459](1100042.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p51"></span>[Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p51.1"></span>.
\[“Saved in hope” or “for hope” expresses better, and agrees with the
argument in the Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[226:1460](1100042.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p61"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXIV-p61.1"></span>διπλασι</span>, “the moulding of it by the
informing soul.”

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[226:1461](1100042.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iii.XXXIV-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXIV-p65"></span>[Ps. xlv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXIV-p65.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXIV-p65.2"></span>LXX</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXV](1100043)
