[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100069)  [Next](1100071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXII"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXV.</span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XX.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017)<span
id="iii.LXII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p3"></span>“And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the
twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them, Behold, we go up
to Jerusalem; and the Son of Man shall be betrayed unto the chief
priests and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death, and
shall deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to
crucify Him; and the third day He shall be raised.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXII-p4.1"></span>He</span> goeth not up at once to Jerusalem
when He is come out of Galilee, but having first wrought miracles, and
having stopped the mouths of Pharisees, and having discoursed with His
disciples of renouncing possessions: for, “if thou wilt be perfect,”
saith He, “sell that thou hast:” <span
id="fr_2455"></span>[2456](#fn_2455) and of virginity, “He that is able
to receive, let him receive it:” <span
id="fr_2456"></span>[2457](#fn_2456) and of humility, “For except ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of Heaven:” <span id="fr_2457"></span>[2458](#fn_2457) and of a
recompense of the things here, “For whoso hath forsaken houses, or
brethren, or sisters, shall receive an hundredfold in this world:” <span
id="fr_2458"></span>[2459](#fn_2458) and of rewards there, “For he shall
also inherit,” it is said, “eternal life:” then He assails the city
next, and being on the point of going up, discourses again of His
passion. For since it was likely that they, because they were not
willing this should come to pass, would forget it, He is continually
putting them in remembrance, exercising their mind by the frequency with
which He reminded them, and diminishing their pain.

<span id="iii.LXII-p9"></span>But He speaks with them “apart,”
necessarily; for it was not meet that His discourse about these things
should be published to the many; neither that it should be spoken
plainly, for no advantage arose from this. For if the disciples were
confounded at hearing these things, much more the multitude of the
people.

<span id="iii.LXII-p10"></span>What then? was it not told to the people?
you may say. It was indeed told to the people also, but not so plainly.
For, “Destroy,” saith He, “this Temple, and in three days I will raise
it up;” <span id="fr_2459"></span>[2460](#fn_2459) and, “This generation
seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign
of Jonas;” <span id="fr_2460"></span>[2461](#fn_2460) and <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span id="iii.LXII-Page_380"></span> again,
“Yet a little while am I with you, and ye shall seek me, and shall not
find me.” <span id="fr_2461"></span>[2462](#fn_2461)

<span id="iii.LXII-p14"></span>But to the disciples not so, but as the
other things He spake unto them more plainly, so also spake He this too.
And for what purpose, if the multitude understood not the force of His
sayings, were they spoken at all? That they might learn after these
things, that fore-knowing it, He came to His passion, and willing it;
not in ignorance, nor by constraint. But to the disciples not for this
cause only did He foretell it; but, as I have said, in order that having
been exercised by the expectation, they might more easily endure the
passion, and that it might not confound them by coming upon them without
preparation. So for this cause, while at the beginning He spake of His
death only, when they were practised and trained to hear of it, He adds
the other circumstances also; as, for instance, that they should deliver
Him to the Gentiles, that they should mock and scourge Him; as well on
this account, as in order that when they saw the mournful events come to
pass, they might expect from this the resurrection also. For He who had
not cloaked from them what would give pain, and what seemed to be matter
of reproach, would reasonably be believed about good things too.

<span id="iii.LXII-p15"></span>But mark, I pray thee, how with regard to
the time also He orders the thing wisely. For neither at the beginning
did He tell them, lest He should disquiet them, neither at the time
itself, lest by this again He should confound them; but when they had
received sufficient proof of His power, when He had given them promises
that were very great concerning life everlasting, then He introduces
also what He had to say concerning these things, once and twice and
often interweaving it with His miracles and His instructions.

<span id="iii.LXII-p16"></span>But another evangelist saith, that He
brought in the prophets also as witnesses; <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462) and another again saith, that even
they themselves understood not His words, but the saying was hid from
them, and that they were amazed as they followed Him. <span
id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463)

<span id="iii.LXII-p19"></span>Surely then, one may say, the benefit of
the prediction is taken away. For if they knew not what they were
hearing, neither could they look for the event, and not looking for it,
neither could they be exercised by their expectations.

<span id="iii.LXII-p20"></span>But I say another thing also more
perplexing than this: If they did not know, how were they sorry. For
another saith, they were sorry. If therefore they knew it not, how were
they sorry? How did Peter say, “Be it far from Thee. This shall not be
unto Thee?” <span id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464)

<span id="iii.LXII-p22"></span>What then may we say? That He should die
indeed they knew, albeit they knew not clearly the mystery of the
Incarnation. <span id="fr_2465"></span>[2466](#fn_2465) Neither did they
know clearly about the resurrection, neither what He was to achieve; and
this was hid from them.

<span id="iii.LXII-p24"></span>For this cause also they felt pain. For
some they had known to have been raised again by other persons, but for
any one to have raised up himself again, and in such wise to have raised
himself as not to die any more, they had never known.

<span id="iii.LXII-p25"></span>This then they understood not, though
often said; nay nor of this self-same death did they clearly know what
it was, and how it should come on Him. Wherefore also they were amazed
as they followed Him, but not for this cause only; but to me at least He
seems even to amaze them by discoursing of His passion.

<span id="iii.LXII-p26"></span>2. Yet none of these things made them
take courage, and this when they were continually hearing about His
resurrection. For together with His death this also especially troubled
them, to hear that men should “mock and scourge Him,” and the like. For
when they considered His miracles, the possessed persons whom He had
delivered, the dead whom He had raised, all the other marvellous works
which He was doing, and then heard these things, they were amazed, if He
who doeth these works is thus to suffer. Therefore they fell even into
perplexity, and now believed, now disbelieved, and could not understand
His sayings. So far at least were they from understanding clearly what
He said, that the sons of Zebedee at the same time came to Him, and
spake to Him of precedence. “We desire,” it is said, “that one should
sit on Thy right hand, and one on Thy left.” <span
id="fr_2466"></span>[2467](#fn_2466) How then doth this evangelist say,
that their mother came to Him? It is probable both things were done. I
mean, that they took their mother with them, with the purpose of making
their entreaty stronger, and in this way to prevail with Christ.

<span id="iii.LXII-p28"></span>For in proof that this is true, as I say,
and the request was rather theirs, and that being ashamed they put
forward their mother, mark how Christ directs His words to them.

<span id="iii.LXII-p29"></span>But rather let us learn, first, what do
they ask, and with what disposition, and whence they were moved to this?
Whence then were they moved to this? They saw themselves honored above
the rest, and expected from that they should obtain this request also.
<span id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span id="iii.LXII-Page_381"></span>
But what can it be they ask? Hear another evangelist plainly declaring
this. For, “Because He was nigh,” it is said, “to Jerusalem, and because
they thought the kingdom of God should immediately appear,” <span
id="fr_2467"></span>[2468](#fn_2467) they asked these things. For they
supposed that this was at the doors, and visible, and that having
obtained what they asked, they would undergo none of the painful things.
For neither for its own sake only did they seek it, but as though they
would also escape the hardships.

<span id="iii.LXII-p31"></span>Wherefore also Christ in the first place
leads them off from these thoughts, commanding them to await slaughter
and dangers, and the utmost terrors. For, “Are ye able,” saith He, “to
drink of the cup that I drink of?” <span
id="fr_2468"></span>[2469](#fn_2468)

<span id="iii.LXII-p33"></span>But let no man be troubled at the
apostles being in such an imperfect state. For not yet was the cross
accomplished, not yet the grace of the Spirit given. But if thou
wouldest learn their virtue, notice them after these things, and thou
wilt see them superior to every passion. For with this object He reveals
their deficiencies, that after these things thou mightest know what
manner of men they became by grace.

<span id="iii.LXII-p34"></span>That then they were asking, in fact, for
nothing spiritual, neither had a thought of the kingdom above, is
manifest from hence. But let us see also, how they come unto Him, and
what they say. “We would,” it is said, “that whatsoever we shall desire
of Thee, Thou shouldest do it for us.” <span
id="fr_2469"></span>[2470](#fn_2469)

<span id="iii.LXII-p36"></span>And Christ saith to them, “What would
ye?” <span id="fr_2470"></span>[2471](#fn_2470) not being ignorant, but
that He may compel them to answer, and lay open the wound, and so apply
the medicine. But they out of shame and confusion of face, because under
the influence of a human passion they were come to do this, took Him
privately apart from the disciples, and asked Him. For they went before,
it is said, so that it might not be observable to them, and so said what
they wished. For it was their desire, as I suppose, because they heard,
“Ye shall sit on twelve thrones,” to have the first place of these
seats. And that they had an advantage over the others, they knew, but
they were afraid of Peter, and say, “Command, that one sit on Thy right
hand, one on Thy left;” and they urge Him, saying, “Command.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p38"></span>What then saith He? Showing, that they
asked nothing spiritual, neither, if they had known again what they were
asking, would they have ventured to ask for so much, He saith, “Ye know
not what ye ask,” how great, how marvellous, how surpassing even the
powers above. After that He adds, “Are ye able to drink of the cup that
I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with?” <span id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471) Seest thou, how He
straightway drew them off from their suspicion, by framing His discourse
from the contrary topics? For ye, He saith, talk to me of honor and
crowns, but I to you of conflicts and labors. For this is not the season
for rewards, neither shall that glory of mine appear now, but the
present time is one of slaughter, and wars, and dangers.

<span id="iii.LXII-p40"></span>And see how by the form of His question,
He both urges and attracts them. For He said not, “Are ye able to be
slain?” “Are ye able to pour forth your blood?” but how? “Are ye able to
drink of the cup?” Then to attract them to it, He saith, “Which I shall
drink of,” that by their fellowship with Him in it they might be made
more ready.

<span id="iii.LXII-p41"></span>And a baptism again calls He it; showing
that great was the cleansing the world was to have from the things that
were being done.

<span id="iii.LXII-p42"></span>“They say unto Him, We are able.” <span
id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472) Out of their forwardness they
straightway undertook it, not knowing even this which they were saying,
but looking to hear what they had asked.

<span id="iii.LXII-p44"></span>What then saith He? “Ye shall drink
indeed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with.” <span id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473) Great blessings did He
foretell to them. His meaning is, ye shall be counted worthy of
martyrdom, and shall suffer these things which I suffer; ye shall close
your life by a violent death, and in these things ye shall be partakers
with me; “But to sit on my right hand and on my left is not mine to
give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my
Father.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p46"></span>3. Having first elevated their souls, and
made them of a higher character, and having rendered them such as sorrow
could not subdue, then He reproves their request.

<span id="iii.LXII-p47"></span>But what can be this present saying? For
indeed there are two points that are subjects of inquiry to many: one,
if it be prepared for any to sit on His right hand; and then, if the
Lord of all hath not power to bestow it on them for whom it is prepared.

<span id="iii.LXII-p48"></span>What then is the saying? If we solve the
former point, then the second also will be clear to the inquirers. What
then is this? No one shall sit on His right hand nor on His left. For
that throne is inaccessible to all, I <span id="page_382">p. 382</span>
<span id="iii.LXII-Page_382"></span> do not say to men only, and saints,
and apostles, but even to angels, and archangels, and to all the powers
that are on high.

<span id="iii.LXII-p49"></span>At least Paul puts it as a peculiar
privilege of the Only-Begotten, saying, “To which of the angels said He
at any time, Sit thou on my right hand? <span
id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474) And of the angels He saith, who
maketh His angels spirits; but unto the Son, ‘Thy throne, O God.’” <span
id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475)

<span id="iii.LXII-p52"></span>How then saith He, “To sit on my right
hand and on my left is not mine to give,” as though there are some that
should sit there? Not as though there are; far from it; but He makes
answer to the thoughts of them who ask the favor, condescending to their
understanding. For neither did they know that lofty throne, and His
sitting at the right hand of the Father; how should they, when even the
things that were much lower than these, and were daily instilled into
them, they understood not? but they sought one thing only, to enjoy the
first honors, and to stand before the rest, and that no one should stand
before them with Him; even as I have already said before, that, since
they heard of twelve thrones, in ignorance what the saying could mean,
they asked for the first place.

<span id="iii.LXII-p53"></span>What therefore Christ saith is this: “Ye
shall die indeed for me, and shall be slain for the sake of the gospel,
and shall be partakers with me, as far as regards the passion: but this
is not sufficient to secure you the enjoyment of the first seat, and to
cause that ye should occupy the first place. For if any one else should
come, together with the martyrdom, possessed of all the other parts of
virtue far more fully than you, not because I love you now, and prefer
you to the rest, therefore shall I set aside him that is distinguished
by his good works, and give the first honors to you.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p54"></span>But thus indeed He did not say it, so as
not to pain them, but darkly He intimates the self-same thing, saying,
“Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and ye shall be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right hand and on my
left, this is not mine to give, but it shall be given to those for whom
it is prepared.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p55"></span>But for whom is it prepared? For them who
could become distinguished by their works. Therefore He said not, It is
not mine to give, but my Father’s, lest any should say that He was too
weak, or wanting in vigor for their recompense; but how? It is not mine,
but of those for whom it is prepared.

<span id="iii.LXII-p56"></span>And in order that what I say may be more
plain, let us work it on an illustration, and let us suppose there was
some master of the games, then that many excellent combatants went down
to the contest, and that some two of the combatants that were most
nearly connected with the master of the games were to come to him and
say, “Cause us to be crowned and proclaimed,” confiding in their
good-will and friendship with him; and that he were to say to them,
“This is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared, by their labors, and their toils;” should we indeed condemn
him as powerless? By no means, but we should approve him for his
justice, and for having no respect of persons. Like then as we should
not say that he did not give the crown from want of vigor, but as not
wishing to corrupt the law of the games, nor to disturb the order of
justice; in like manner now should I say Christ said this, from every
motive to compel them, after the grace of God, to set their hopes of
salvation and approval on the proof of their own good works.

<span id="iii.LXII-p57"></span>Therefore He saith, “For whom it is
prepared.” For what, saith He, if others should appear better than you?
What, if they should do greater things? For shall ye, because ye have
become my disciples, therefore enjoy the first honors, if ye yourselves
should not appear worthy of the choice?

<span id="iii.LXII-p58"></span>For that He Himself hath power over the
whole, is manifest from His having the entire judgment. For to Peter too
He speaks thus, “I will give thee the keys of the Heavens.” <span
id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476) And Paul also makes this clear
where he saith, “Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give me in that
day; and not to me only, but unto all them also which have loved His
appearing.” <span id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477) But the appearing
was of Christ. But that no one will stand before Paul, is surely clear
to every one.

<span id="iii.LXII-p61"></span>And if He hath expressed these things
somewhat obscurely, marvel not. For to lead them on by hidden
instruction, <span id="fr_2478"></span>[2479](#fn_2478) not to be rudely
pressing Him without object or cause for the first honors (for from a
human passion they felt this), and not wishing to give them pain, by the
obscurity He effects both these objects.

<span id="iii.LXII-p63"></span>“Then were the ten moved with indignation
with respect to the two.” Then. When.? When He had reproved them. So
long as the judgment was Christ’s, they were not moved with indignation;
but seeing them preferred, <span id="page_383">p. 383</span> <span
id="iii.LXII-Page_383"></span> they were contented, and held their
peace, out of reverence and honor to their Master.

<span id="iii.LXII-p64"></span>And if they were vexed in mind, yet they
dared not utter this. And when they had some feeling of human weakness
towards Peter, at the time that He gave the didrachmas, they did not
give way to anger, but asked only, “Who then is greatest?” But since
here the request was the disciples’, they are moved with indignation.
And not even here are they straightway moved with indignation, when they
asked, but when Christ had reproved them, and had said they should not
enjoy the first honors, unless they showed themselves worthy of these.

<span id="iii.LXII-p65"></span>4. Seest thou how they were all in an
imperfect state, when both these were lifting themselves up above the
ten, and those envying the two? But, as I said, show me them after these
things, and thou wilt see them delivered from all these passions. Hear
at least how this same John, he who now came to Him for these things,
everywhere gives up the first place to Peter, both in addressing the
people, and in working miracles, in the Acts of the Apostles.

<span id="iii.LXII-p66"></span>And he conceals not Peter’s good deeds,
but relates both the confession, which he openly made when all were
silent, <span id="fr_2479"></span>[2480](#fn_2479) and his entering into
the tomb, <span id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480) and puts the
apostle before himself. For, because both continued with Him at His
crucifixion, taking away the ground of his own commendation, he saith,
“That disciple was known unto the high priest.” <span
id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481)

<span id="iii.LXII-p70"></span>But James survived not a long time, but
from the beginning he was so greatly filled with warmth, and so forsook
all the things of men, and mounted up to an height unutterable, as
straightway to be slain. Thus, in all respects, they after these things
became excellent. <span id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482)

<span id="iii.LXII-p72"></span>But then, “they were moved with
indignation.” What then saith Christ? “He called them unto Him, and
said, The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them.” <span
id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483) For, as they were disturbed and
troubled, He soothes them by His call before His word, and by drawing
them near Him. For the two having separated themselves from the company
of the ten, had stood nearer Him, pleading their own interests.
Therefore He brings near Him these also, by this very act, and by
exposing and revealing it before the rest, soothing the passion both of
the one and of the other.

<span id="iii.LXII-p74"></span>And not as before, so now also doth He
check them. For whereas before He brings little children into the midst,
and commands to imitate their simplicity and lowliness; here He reproves
them in a sharper way from the contrary side, saying, “The princes of
the Gentiles exercise dominion <span
id="fr_2484"></span>[2485](#fn_2484) over them, and their great ones
exercise authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you; <span
id="fr_2485"></span>[2486](#fn_2485) but he that will be great among
you, let this man be minister to all; and he that will be first, let him
be last of all;” <span id="fr_2486"></span>[2487](#fn_2486) showing that
such a feeling as this is that of heathens, I mean, to love the first
place. For the passion is tyrannical, and is continually hindering even
great men; therefore also it needs a severer stripe. Whence He too
strikes deeper into them, by comparison with the Gentiles shaming their
inflamed soul, and removes the envy of the one and the arrogance of the
other, all but saying, “Be not moved with indignation, as insulted. For
they harm and disgrace themselves most, who on this wise seek the first
places, for they are amongst the last. For matters with us are not like
matters without. ‘For the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them,’ but with me the last, even he is first.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p78"></span>“And in proof that I say not these things
without cause, by the things which I do and suffer, receive the proof of
my sayings. For I have myself done something even more. For being King
of the powers above, I was willing to become man, and I submitted to be
despised, and despitefully entreated. And not even with these things was
I satisfied, but even unto death did I come. Therefore,” He saith,

<span id="iii.LXII-p79"></span>“Even as the Son of Man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life a ransom for
many.” <span id="fr_2487"></span>[2488](#fn_2487) “For not even at this
did I stop,” saith He, “but even my life did I give a ransom; and for
whom? For enemies. But thou if thou art abused, it is for thyself, but I
for thee.”

<span id="iii.LXII-p81"></span>Be not then afraid, as though thine honor
were plucked down. For how much soever thou humblest thyself, thou canst
not descend so much as thy Lord. And yet His descent hath become the
ascent of all, and hath made His own glory shine forth. For before He
was made man, He was known amongst angels only; but after He was made
man and was crucified, so far from lessening that glory, He acquired
other besides, even that from the knowledge of the world.

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span> <span id="iii.LXII-Page_384"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p82"></span>Fear not then, as though thine honor were
put down, if thou shouldest abase thyself, for in this way is thy glory
more exalted, in this way it becomes greater. This is the door of the
kingdom. Let us not then go the opposite way, neither let us war against
ourselves. For if we desire to appear great, we shall not be great, but
even the most dishonored of all.

<span id="iii.LXII-p83"></span>Seest thou how everywhere He urges them
by the opposite things, giving them what they desire? For in the
preceding parts also we have shown this in many instances, and in the
cases of the covetous, and of the vain-glorious, He did thus. For
wherefore, He saith, dost thou give alms before men? That thou mayest
enjoy glory? Thou must then not do so, and thou shalt surely enjoy it.
Wherefore dost thou lay up treasures? That thou mayest be rich? Thou
must then not lay up treasures, and thou shalt be rich. Even so here
too, wherefore dost thou set thy heart on the first places? That thou
mayest be before others? Choose then the last place, and then thou wilt
enjoy the first. So that if it be thy will to become great, seek not to
become great, and then thou wilt be great. For the other is to be
little.

<span id="iii.LXII-p84"></span>5. Seest thou how He drew them off from
the disease, by showing them both from thence failing of their object,
and from hence gaining, that they might flee the one, and follow after
the other.

<span id="iii.LXII-p85"></span>And of the Gentiles, too, He for this
cause reminded them, that in this way again He might show the thing to
be disgraceful and to be abhorred.

<span id="iii.LXII-p86"></span>For the arrogant is of necessity base,
and, on the contrary, the lowly-minded is high. For this is the height
that is true and genuine, and exists not in name only, nor in manner of
address. And that which is from without is of necessity and fear, but
this is like to God’s. Such a one, though he be admired by no one,
continues high; even as again the other, though he be courted by all, is
of all men the basest. And the one is an honor rendered of necessity,
whence also it easily passes away; but the other is of principle, whence
also it continues steadfast. Since for this we admire the saints also,
that being greater than all, they humbled themselves more than all.
Wherefore even to this day they continue to be high, and not even death
hath brought down that height.

<span id="iii.LXII-p87"></span>And if ye be minded, let us by reasonings
also inquire into this very thing. Any one is said to be high, either
when he is so by greatness of stature, or when he hath chanced to be set
on a high place, and low in like manner, from the opposite things.

<span id="iii.LXII-p88"></span>Let us see then who is like this, the
boaster, or he that keeps within measure, that thou mayest perceive that
nothing is higher than lowliness of mind, and nothing lower than
boastfulness.

<span id="iii.LXII-p89"></span>The boaster then desires to be greater
than all, and affirms no one to be equal in worth with him; and how much
soever honor he may obtain, he sets his heart on more and claims it, and
accounts himself to have obtained none, and treats men with utter
contempt, and yet seeks after the honor that comes from them; than which
what can be more unreasonable? For this surely is like an enigma. By
those, whom he holds in no esteem, he desires to be glorified.

<span id="iii.LXII-p90"></span>Seest thou how he who desires to be
exalted falls down and is set on the ground? For that he accounts all
men to be nothing compared with himself, he himself declares, for this
is boasting. Why then dost cast thyself upon him who is nothing? why
dost thou seek honor of him? Why dost thou lead about with thee such
great multitudes?

<span id="iii.LXII-p91"></span>Seest thou one low, and set on a low
place. Come then, let us inquire about the high man. This one knows what
man is, and that man is a great thing, and that he himself is last of
all, and therefore whatever honor he may enjoy, he reckons this great,
so that this one is consistent with himself and is high, and shifts not
his judgment; for whom he accounts great, the honors that come from them
he esteems great also, though they should chance to be small, because he
accounts those who bestow them to be great. But the boastful man
accounts them that give the honors to be nothing, yet the honors
bestowed by them he reckons to be great.

<span id="iii.LXII-p92"></span>Again, the lowly man is seized by no
passion, no anger can much trouble this man, no love of glory, no envy,
no jealousy: and what can be higher than the soul that is delivered from
these things? But the boastful man is held in subjection by all these
things, like any worm crawling in the mire, for jealousy and envy and
anger are forever troubling his soul.

<span id="iii.LXII-p93"></span>Which then is high? He that is superior
to his passions, or he that is their slave? He that trembles at them and
is afraid of them, or he that is unsubdued, and never taken by them?
Which kind of bird should we say flies higher? that which is higher than
the hands and the arrows of the hunter, or that which does not even
suffer the hunters to need an arrow, from his flying along the ground,
and from not being able ever to elevate himself? Is not then the
arrogant man like this? for indeed every net readily catches him as
crawling on the ground.

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span id="iii.LXII-Page_385"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p94"></span>6. But if thou wilt, even from that
wicked demon prove thou this. For what can be baser than the devil,
because he had exalted himself; what higher than the man who is willing
to abase himself? For the former crawls on the ground under our heel
(For, “ye tread,” He saith, <span id="fr_2488"></span>[2489](#fn_2488)
“upon serpents and scorpions”), but the latter is set with the angels on
high.

<span id="iii.LXII-p96"></span>But if thou desirest to learn this from
the example of haughty men also, consider that barbarian king, that led
so great an army, who knew not so much as the things that are manifest
to all; as, for instance, that stone was stone, and the images, images;
wherefore he was inferior even to these. But the godly and faithful are
raised even above the sun; than whom what can be higher, who rise above
even the vaults of heaven, and passing beyond angels, stand by the very
throne of the king.

<span id="iii.LXII-p97"></span>And that thou mayest learn in another way
their vileness; who will be abased? He who has God for his ally, or he
with whom God is at war? It is quite plain that it is he with whom He is
at war. Hear then touching either of these what saith the Scripture.
“God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble.” <span
id="fr_2489"></span>[2490](#fn_2489)

<span id="iii.LXII-p99"></span>Again, I will ask you another thing also.
Which is higher? He who acts as a priest to God and offers sacrifice? or
he who is somewhere far removed from confidence towards Him? And what
manner of sacrifice doth the lowly man offer? one may say. Hear David
saying, “The sacrifice of God is a contrite spirit; a contrite and
humbled heart God will not despise.” <span
id="fr_2490"></span>[2491](#fn_2490)

<span id="iii.LXII-p101"></span>Seest thou the purity of this man?
Behold also the uncleanness of the other; for “every one that is proud
in heart is unclean before God.” <span
id="fr_2491"></span>[2492](#fn_2491) Besides, the one hath God resting
upon him, (“For unto whom will I look,” saith He, “but to him that is
meek and quiet, and trembleth at my words”), <span
id="fr_2492"></span>[2493](#fn_2492) but the other crawls with the
devil, for he that is lifted up with pride shall suffer the devil’s
punishment. Wherefore Paul also said, “Lest, being lifted up with pride,
he should fall into the condemnation of the devil.” <span
id="fr_2493"></span>[2494](#fn_2493)

<span id="iii.LXII-p105"></span>And the thing opposite to what he
wishes, befalls him. For his wish is to be arrogant, that he may be
honored; but the most contemned of all is this character. For these most
of all are laughing stocks, foes and enemies to all men, the most easy
to be subdued by their enemies, the men that easily fall into anger, the
unclean before God.

<span id="iii.LXII-p106"></span>What then can be worse than this, for
this is the extremity of evils? And what is sweeter than the lowly, what
more blessed, since they are longed after, and beloved of God? And the
glory too that cometh of men, these do most of all enjoy, and all honor
them as fathers, embrace them as brothers, receive them as their own
members.

<span id="iii.LXII-p107"></span>Let us then become lowly, that we may be
high. For most utterly doth arrogance abase. This abased Pharaoh. For,
“I know not,” he saith, “the Lord,” <span
id="fr_2494"></span>[2495](#fn_2494) and he became inferior to flies and
frogs, and the locusts, and after that with his very arms and horses was
he drowned in the sea. In direct opposition to him, Abraham saith, “I am
dust and ashes,” <span id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495) and
prevailed over countless barbarians, and having fallen into the midst of
Egyptians, returned, bearing a trophy more glorious than the former,
and, cleaving to this virtue, grew ever more high. Therefore he is
celebrated everywhere, therefore he is crowned and proclaimed; but
Pharaoh is both earth and ashes, and if there is anything else more vile
than these. For nothing doth God so abhor as arrogance. For this object
hath He done all things from the beginning, in order that He might root
out this passion. Because of this are we become mortal, and are in
sorrows, and wailings. Because of this are we in toil, and sweat, and in
labor continual, and mingled with affliction. For indeed out of
arrogance did the first man sin, looking for an equality with God.
Therefore, not even what things he had, did he continue to possess, but
lost even these.

<span id="iii.LXII-p110"></span>For arrogance is like this, so far from
adding to us any improvement of our life, it subtracts even what we
have; as, on the contrary, humility, so far from subtracting from what
we have, adds to us also what we have not.

<span id="iii.LXII-p111"></span>This virtue then let us emulate, this
let us pursue, that we may both enjoy present honor, and attain unto the
glory to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom be unto the Father glory and might, together with the
Holy Ghost, now and always, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2455"></span>[379:2456](1100070.htm#fr_2455) <span
id="iii.LXII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p5"></span>[Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2456"></span>[379:2457](1100070.htm#fr_2456) <span
id="iii.LXII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p6"></span>[Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2457"></span>[379:2458](1100070.htm#fr_2457) <span
id="iii.LXII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p7"></span>[Matt. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2458"></span>[379:2459](1100070.htm#fr_2458) <span
id="iii.LXII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p8"></span>[Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2459"></span>[379:2460](1100070.htm#fr_2459) <span
id="iii.LXII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p11"></span>[John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iii.LXII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2460"></span>[379:2461](1100070.htm#fr_2460) <span
id="iii.LXII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p12"></span>[Matt. xii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)<span id="iii.LXII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2461"></span>[380:2462](1100070.htm#fr_2461) <span
id="iii.LXII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p13"></span>[John
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[380:2463](1100070.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="iii.LXII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p17"></span>[Luke xviii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031)<span id="iii.LXII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[380:2464](1100070.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="iii.LXII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p18"></span>[Mark
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032), [Mark
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#032), [Luke
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#034)<span
id="iii.LXII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[380:2465](1100070.htm#fr_2464) <span
id="iii.LXII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p21"></span>[Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2465"></span>[380:2466](1100070.htm#fr_2465) <span
id="iii.LXII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p23"></span>Lit., “economy.”

<span id="fn_2466"></span>[380:2467](1100070.htm#fr_2466) <span
id="iii.LXII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p27"></span>[Matt.
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021), [Mark
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#037)<span
id="iii.LXII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2467"></span>[381:2468](1100070.htm#fr_2467) <span
id="iii.LXII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p30"></span>[Luke xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)<span id="iii.LXII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2468"></span>[381:2469](1100070.htm#fr_2468) <span
id="iii.LXII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p32"></span>[Matt. xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2469"></span>[381:2470](1100070.htm#fr_2469) <span
id="iii.LXII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p35"></span>[Mark x.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035)<span id="iii.LXII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2470"></span>[381:2471](1100070.htm#fr_2470) <span
id="iii.LXII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p37"></span>[Mark x.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#036)<span id="iii.LXII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[381:2472](1100070.htm#fr_2471) <span
id="iii.LXII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p39"></span>\[The longer reading is here accepted.
The R.V. follows a briefer reading here and in [Matt.
20.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span
id="iii.LXII-p39.1"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[381:2473](1100070.htm#fr_2472) <span
id="iii.LXII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p43"></span>[Matt. xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[381:2474](1100070.htm#fr_2473) <span
id="iii.LXII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p45"></span>[Matt. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXII-p45.1"></span>.
\[The latter clause is omitted in the R.V.\]

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[382:2475](1100070.htm#fr_2474) <span
id="iii.LXII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p50"></span>[Heb. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[382:2476](1100070.htm#fr_2475) <span
id="iii.LXII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p51"></span>[Heb.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[382:2477](1100070.htm#fr_2476) <span
id="iii.LXII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p59"></span>[Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="iii.LXII-p59.1"></span>.
\[This peculiar reading and rendering is commented on in the note on
Homily LIV. 3.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[382:2478](1100070.htm#fr_2477) <span
id="iii.LXII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p60"></span>[2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2478"></span>[382:2479](1100070.htm#fr_2478) <span
id="iii.LXII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p62"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXII-p62.1"></span>οκονομικ</span>.

<span id="fn_2479"></span>[383:2480](1100070.htm#fr_2479) <span
id="iii.LXII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p67"></span>[John
6:68](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068),
[69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069)<span id="iii.LXII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[383:2481](1100070.htm#fr_2480) <span
id="iii.LXII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p68"></span>[John xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[383:2482](1100070.htm#fr_2481) <span
id="iii.LXII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p69"></span>[John xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[383:2483](1100070.htm#fr_2482) <span
id="iii.LXII-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p71"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXII-p71.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXII-p71.2"></span>κροι</span>.

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[383:2484](1100070.htm#fr_2483) <span
id="iii.LXII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p73"></span>[Matt. xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025)<span id="iii.LXII-p73.1"></span>.
\[“Ye know that” omitted.\]

<span id="fn_2484"></span>[383:2485](1100070.htm#fr_2484) <span
id="iii.LXII-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p75"></span>\[R.V., “lord it.”\]

<span id="fn_2485"></span>[383:2486](1100070.htm#fr_2485) <span
id="iii.LXII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p76"></span>\[The form of this clause in Greek
differs from that of all our New Testament <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXII-p76.1"></span>mss</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2486"></span>[383:2487](1100070.htm#fr_2486) <span
id="iii.LXII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p77"></span>[Matt. xx.
25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025)<span
id="iii.LXII-p77.1"></span>. \[The variations in text, especially in
[Matt. 20.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027)<span
id="iii.LXII-p77.2"></span>, are peculiar; compare with the A.V. and
R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2487"></span>[383:2488](1100070.htm#fr_2487) <span
id="iii.LXII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p80"></span>[Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2488"></span>[385:2489](1100070.htm#fr_2488) <span
id="iii.LXII-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p95"></span>[Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span id="iii.LXII-p95.1"></span>.
\[Freely cited.\]

<span id="fn_2489"></span>[385:2490](1100070.htm#fr_2489) <span
id="iii.LXII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p98"></span>[James iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXII-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2490"></span>[385:2491](1100070.htm#fr_2490) <span
id="iii.LXII-p99.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p100"></span>[Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="iii.LXII-p100.1"></span>.
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXII-p100.2"></span>LXX</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2491"></span>[385:2492](1100070.htm#fr_2491) <span
id="iii.LXII-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p102"></span>[Prov. xvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXII-p102.1"></span>.
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXII-p102.2"></span>LXX</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2492"></span>[385:2493](1100070.htm#fr_2492) <span
id="iii.LXII-p102.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p103"></span>[Is. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXII-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2493"></span>[385:2494](1100070.htm#fr_2493) <span
id="iii.LXII-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p104"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXII-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2494"></span>[385:2495](1100070.htm#fr_2494) <span
id="iii.LXII-p107.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p108"></span>[Exod. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXII-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[385:2496](1100070.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="iii.LXII-p108.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXII-p109"></span>[Gen. xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)<span id="iii.LXII-p109.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXIII](1100071)
