[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100064)  [Next](1100066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LVII"></span> <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="iii.LVII-Page_354"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LVII-p1.1"></span>Homily LX.</span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LVII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XVIII.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span
id="iii.LVII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p3"></span>“If thy brother shall trespass <span
id="fr_2322"></span>[2323](#fn_2322) against thee, go and tell him his
fault <span id="fr_2323"></span>[2324](#fn_2323) *between thee and him
alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.”*

<span id="iii.LVII-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LVII-p6.1"></span>For</span>, since He had used vehement
language against them that cause offense, and on every hand had moved
them to fear; in order that the offended might not in this way on the
other hand become supine, neither supposing all to be cast upon others,
should be led on to another vice, soften in themselves, and desiring to
be humored in everything, and run upon the shoal of pride; seest thou
how He again checks them also, and commands the telling of the faults to
be between the two alone, lest by the testimony of the many he should
render his accusation heavier, and the other, become excited to
opposition, should continue incorrigible.

<span id="iii.LVII-p7"></span>Wherefore He saith, “Between thee and him
alone,” and, “If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother.” What
is, “If he shall hear thee?” If he shall condemn himself, if he shall be
persuaded that he has done wrong.

<span id="iii.LVII-p8"></span>“Thou hast gained thy brother.” He did not
say, Thou hast a sufficient revenge, but, “Thou hast gained thy
brother,” to show that there is a common loss from the enmity. For He
said not, “He hath gained himself only,” but, “thou too hast gained
him,” whereby He showed that both the one and the other were losers
before this, the one of his brother, the other of his own salvation.

<span id="iii.LVII-p9"></span>This, when He sat on the mount also, He
advised; at one time bringing him who has given the pain to him that had
been pained, and saying, “Be reconciled to thy brother,” <span
id="fr_2324"></span>[2325](#fn_2324) and at another commanding him that
had been wronged to forgive his neighbor. For He taught men to say,
“Forgive us our debts, like as we forgive our debtors.” <span
id="fr_2325"></span>[2326](#fn_2325)

<span id="iii.LVII-p12"></span>But here He is devising another mode. For
not him that gave the pain, *doth He now call upon*, <span
id="fr_2326"></span>[2327](#fn_2326) but him that was pained He brings
to this one. For because this who hath done the wrong would not easily
come to make excuse, out of shame, and confusion of face, He draws that
other to him, and not merely so, but in such way as also to correct what
hath been done. And He saith not, “Accuse,” nor “Charge him,” nor
“Demand satisfaction, and an account,” but, “Tell him of his
fault,” <span id="fr_2327"></span>[2328](#fn_2327) saith He. For he is
held in a kind of stupor through anger and shame with which he is
intoxicated; and thou, who art in health, must go thy way to him that is
ill, and make the tribunal private, and the remedy such as may be
readily received. For to say, “Tell him of his fault,” is nothing else
than “Remind him of his error,” tell him what thou hast suffered at his
hand, which very thing, if it be done as it ought, is the part of one
making excuse for him, and drawing him over earnestly to a
reconciliation.

<span id="iii.LVII-p15"></span>What then, if he should disobey, and be
disposed to abide in hardness? “Take with thyself yet one or two, that
in the mouth of two witnesses every word may be established.” <span
id="fr_2328"></span>[2329](#fn_2328) For the more he is shameless, and
bold, the more ought we to be active for his cure, not in anger and
indignation. For the physician in like manner, when he sees the malady
obstinate, doth not give up nor grow impatient, but then makes the more
preparation; which He commands us to do in this case too.

<span id="iii.LVII-p17"></span>For since thou appearedst to be too weak
alone, make thyself more powerful by this addition. For surely the two
are sufficient to convict him that hath sinned. Seest thou how He
seeketh not the good of him that hath been pained only, but of him also
that hath given the pain. For the person injured is this one who is
taken captive by his passion, he it is that is diseased, and weak, and
infirm. Wherefore He often sends the other to this one, now alone, and
now with others; but if he continue in it, even with the church. For,
“Tell it,” saith He, “to the Church.” <span
id="fr_2329"></span>[2330](#fn_2329) <span id="page_355">p. 355</span>
<span id="iii.LVII-Page_355"></span> For if He were seeking this one’s
advantage only, He would not have commanded to pardon, seventy times
seven, one repenting. He would not so often have set so many over him to
correct his passion; but if he had remained incorrigible after the first
conference would have let him be; but now once, and twice, and thrice,
He commands to attempt his cure, and now alone and now with two, now
with more.

<span id="iii.LVII-p19"></span>Wherefore, with respect to them that are
without He saith no such thing, but, “If any one smite thee,” He saith,
“on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also,” <span
id="fr_2330"></span>[2331](#fn_2330) but here not in such wise. For what
Paul meaneth, saying, “What have I to do to judge them also that are
without?” <span id="fr_2331"></span>[2332](#fn_2331) but the brethren he
commands both to tell of their faults, and to avoid them, and to cut
them off, not being obedient, that they may be ashamed; this Himself
also doeth here, making these laws about the brethren; and He sets
three <span id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332) over him for teachers
and judges, to teach him the things that are done at the time of his
drunkenness. For though it be himself that hath said and done all those
unreasonable things, yet he will need others to teach him this, like as
the drunken man. For anger and sin is a more frantic thing <span
id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333) than any drunkenness, and puts the
soul in greater distraction.

<span id="iii.LVII-p24"></span>Who, for instance, was wiser than David?
Yet for all that, when he had sinned he perceived it not, his lust
keeping in subjection all his reasoning powers, and like some smoke
filling his soul. Therefore he stood in need of a lantern from the
prophet, and of words calling to his mind what he had done. Wherefore
here also He brings these to him that hath sinned, to reason with him
about the things he had done.

<span id="iii.LVII-p25"></span>2. But for what reason doth He command
this one to tell him of his fault, and not another? Because this man he
would endure more quietly, this, who hath been wronged, who hath been
pained, who hath been despitefully used. For one doth not bear in the
same way being told by another of one’s fault concerning him that hath
been insulted, as by the insulted person himself, especially when this
person is alone convicting him. For when he who should demand justice
against him, even this one appears to be caring for his salvation, this
will have more power than anything in the world to shame him.

<span id="iii.LVII-p26"></span>Seest thou how this is done not for the
sake of just punishment, but of amendment? Therefore He doth not at once
command to take with him the two, but when himself hath failed; and not
even then doth He send forth a multitude against him; but makes the
addition no further than two, or even one; but when he has contemned
these too, then and not till then He brings him out to the church.

<span id="iii.LVII-p27"></span>So much earnestness doth He show, that
our neighbor’s sins be not exposed by us. And indeed He might have
commanded this from the first, but that this might not be, He did not
command it, but after a first and second admonition He appoints this.

<span id="iii.LVII-p28"></span>But what is, “In the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word shall be established?” Thou hast a sufficient
testimony. His meaning is, that thou hast done all thy part, that thou
hast left undone none of the things which it pertained to thee to do.

<span id="iii.LVII-p29"></span>“But if he shall neglect to hear them
also, tell it to the church,” that is, to the rulers of it; “but if he
neglect to hear the church, let him be to thee as an heathen man and a
publican.” For after this such a one is incurably diseased.

<span id="iii.LVII-p30"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, how
everywhere He putteth the publican for an example of the greatest
wickedness. For above too He saith, “Do not even the publicans the
same?” <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334) And further on again,
“Even the publicans and the harlots shall go before you into the Kingdom
of Heaven,” <span id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335) that is, they who
are utterly reprobated and condemned. Let them hearken, who are rushing
upon unjust gains, who are counting up usuries upon usuries.

<span id="iii.LVII-p33"></span>But why did He set him with these? To
soothe the person wronged, and to alarm him. Is this only then the
punishment? Nay, but hear also what follows. “Whatsoever ye shall bind
on earth shall be bound in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336) And He did not say to the ruler of
the church, “Bind such a man,” but, “If thou bind,” committing the whole
matter to the person himself, who is aggrieved, and the bonds abide
indissoluble. Therefore he will suffer the utmost ills; but not he who
hath brought him to account is to blame, but he who hath not been
willing to be persuaded.

<span id="iii.LVII-p35"></span>Seest thou how He hath bound him down
with twofold constraint, both by the vengeance here, and by the
punishment hereafter? But these things hath He threatened, that these
circumstances may not arise, but that fearing, at once the being cast
out of the <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="iii.LVII-Page_356"></span> church, and the danger from the bond, and
the being bound in Heaven, he may become more gentle. And knowing these
things, if not at the beginning, at any rate in the multitude of the
tribunals he will put off his anger. Wherefore, I tell you, He hath set
over him a first, and a second, and a third court, <span
id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337) so that though he should neglect to
hear the first, he may yield to the second; and even if he should reject
that, he may fear the third; and though he should make no account of
this, he may be dismayed at the vengeance to come, and at the sentence
and judgment to proceed from God.

<span id="iii.LVII-p37"></span>“And again I say unto you, that if two of
you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven. For where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.” <span id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338)

<span id="iii.LVII-p39"></span>Seest thou how by another motive also He
puts down our enmities, and takes away our petty dissensions, <span
id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339) and draws us one to another, and
this not from the punishment only which hath been mentioned, but also
from the good things which spring from charity? For having denounced
those threats against contentiousness, He putteth here the great rewards
of concord, if at least they who are of one accord do even prevail with
the Father, as touching the things they ask, and have Christ in the
midst of them.

<span id="iii.LVII-p41"></span>“Are there then indeed nowhere two of one
accord?” Nay, in many places, perchance even everywhere. “How then do
they not obtain all things?” Because many are causes of their failing.
For either they often ask things inexpedient. And why marvellest thou,
if this is the case with some others, whereas it was so even with Paul,
when he heard, “My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is
perfected in weakness.” <span id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340) Or
they are unworthy to be reckoned with them that heard these words, and
contribute not their own part, but He seeks for such as are like them;
therefore He saith “of you,” of the virtuous, of them that show forth an
angelic rule of life. <span id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341) Or they
pray against them that have aggrieved them, seeking for redress and
vengeance; and this kind of thing is forbidden, for, “Pray,” saith He,
“for your enemies.” <span id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342) Or having
sins unrepented they ask mercy, which thing it is impossible to receive,
not only if themselves ask it, but although others having much
confidence towards God entreat for them, like as even Jeremiah praying
for the Jews did hear, “Pray not thou for this people, because I will
not hear thee.” <span id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343)

<span id="iii.LVII-p46"></span>But if all things are there, and thou ask
things expedient, and contribute all thine own part, and exhibit an
apostolical life, and have concord and love towards thy neighbor, thou
wilt obtain on thy entreaty; for the Lord is loving towards man.

<span id="iii.LVII-p47"></span>3. Then because He had said, “Of my
Father,” in order that He might show that it is Himself that giveth, and
not He who begat Him only, He added, “For wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.”

<span id="iii.LVII-p48"></span>What then? are there not two or three
gathered together in His name? There are indeed, but rarely. For not
merely of the assembling doth He speak, neither this doth He require
only; but most surely, as I said before also, the rest of virtue too
together with this, and besides, even this itself He requires with great
strictness. For what He saith is like this, “If any holds me the
principal ground of his love to his neighbors, I will be with Him, if he
be a virtuous man in other respects.”

<span id="iii.LVII-p49"></span>But now we see the more part having other
motives of friendship. For one loves, because he is loved, another
because he hath been honored, a third because such a one has been useful
to him in some other worldly matter, a fourth for some other like cause;
but for Christ’s sake it is a difficult thing to find any one loving his
neighbor sincerely, and as he ought to love him. For the more part are
bound one to another by their worldly affairs. But Paul did not love
thus, but for Christ’s sake; wherefore even when not loved in such wise
as he loved, he did not cease his love, because he had planted a strong
root of his affection; but not so our present state, but on inquiry we
shall find with most men anything likely to produce friendship rather
than this. And if any one bestowed on me power in so great a multitude
to make this inquiry, I would show the more part bound one to another by
worldly motives.

<span id="iii.LVII-p50"></span>And this is evident from the causes that
work enmity. For because they are bound one to another by these
temporal <span id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344) motives, therefore
they are neither fervent towards one another, nor constant, but insult,
and loss of money, and envy, and love of vainglory, and every such thing
coming upon them, severs the love-tie. For it finds not the root
spiritual. Since if indeed it were <span id="page_357">p. 357</span>
<span id="iii.LVII-Page_357"></span> such, no worldly thing would
dissolve things spiritual. For love for Christ’s sake is firm, and not
to be broken, and impregnable, and nothing can tear it asunder; not
calumnies, not dangers, not death, no other thing of this kind. For
though he suffer ten thousand things, who thus loves; looking to the
ground of his love, he will not desist. For he who loves because of
being loved, should he meet with anything painful, puts an end to his
love; but he who is bound by this, will never desist.

<span id="iii.LVII-p52"></span>Wherefore Paul also said, “Charity never
faileth.” <span id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345) For what hast thou
to say? That when honored he insults? that receiving benefits he was
minded to slay thee? But even this works upon thee to love more, if thou
lovest for Christ’s sake. For what things are in the rest subversive of
love, these here become apt to produce it. How? First, because such a
one is to thee a cause of rewards; secondly, because he that is so
disposed stands in need of more succor, and much attention. Therefore I
say, he who thus loves inquires not about race, nor country, nor wealth,
nor his love to himself, nor any other such matter, but though he be
hated, though he be insulted, though he be slain, continues to love,
having as a sufficient ground for love, Christ; wherefore also he stands
steadfast, firm, not to be overthrown, looking unto Him.

<span id="iii.LVII-p54"></span>For Christ too so loved his enemies,
having loved the obstinate, the injurious, the blasphemers, them that
hated Him, them that would not so much as see Him; them that were
preferring wood and stones to Him, and with the highest love beyond
which one cannot find another. “For greater love hath no man than this,”
He saith, “that one lay down his life for his friends.” <span
id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346)

<span id="iii.LVII-p56"></span>And those even that crucified Him, and
acted in so many instances with contumely against Him, see how He
continues to treat with kindness. For even to His Father He speaks for
them, saying, “Forgive them, for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347) And He sent His disciples moreover,
after these things, unto them.

<span id="iii.LVII-p58"></span>This love then let us also imitate, unto
this let us look, that being followers of Christ, we may attain both
unto the good things here, and unto those to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2322"></span>[354:2323](1100065.htm#fr_2322) <span
id="iii.LVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p4"></span>\[The form of the Greek verb here is
peculiar to the text of the Homily. R.V., “sin,” for “trespass.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2323"></span>[354:2324](1100065.htm#fr_2323) <span
id="iii.LVII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p5"></span>Lit. “reprove” or “convict him.”

<span id="fn_2324"></span>[354:2325](1100065.htm#fr_2324) <span
id="iii.LVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p10"></span>[Matt. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span id="iii.LVII-p10.1"></span>.
\[But the citation is fuller: “If thou art standing by the altar and
rememberest that thy brother hath aught against thee, go away, be
reconciled,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2325"></span>[354:2326](1100065.htm#fr_2325) <span
id="iii.LVII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p11"></span>[Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="iii.LVII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2326"></span>[354:2327](1100065.htm#fr_2326) <span
id="iii.LVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p13"></span>\[Supplied by translator.\]

<span id="fn_2327"></span>[354:2328](1100065.htm#fr_2327) <span
id="iii.LVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p14"></span>Or, “Convict him.”

<span id="fn_2328"></span>[354:2329](1100065.htm#fr_2328) <span
id="iii.LVII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p16"></span>[Matt. xviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016)<span id="iii.LVII-p16.1"></span>.
\[The words “or three” are omitted in the Homily here, but not below. In
both cases the form of the verb is changed.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2329"></span>[354:2330](1100065.htm#fr_2329) <span
id="iii.LVII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p18"></span>[Matt. xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)<span id="iii.LVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2330"></span>[355:2331](1100065.htm#fr_2330) <span
id="iii.LVII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p20"></span>[Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span id="iii.LVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2331"></span>[355:2332](1100065.htm#fr_2331) <span
id="iii.LVII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p21"></span>[1 Cor. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span id="iii.LVII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[355:2333](1100065.htm#fr_2332) <span
id="iii.LVII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p22"></span>\[Oxford edition, “these,” misprint,
since the Greek word is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p22.1"></span>τρε</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[355:2334](1100065.htm#fr_2333) <span
id="iii.LVII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p23"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p23.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p23.2"></span>κστατικτερον</span>.

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[355:2335](1100065.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="iii.LVII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p31"></span>[Matt. v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)<span id="iii.LVII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[355:2336](1100065.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="iii.LVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p32"></span>[Matt. xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#031)<span id="iii.LVII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[355:2337](1100065.htm#fr_2336) <span
id="iii.LVII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p34"></span>[Matt. xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#018)<span id="iii.LVII-p34.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “What things soever,” etc. But the singular pronoun is
substituted in the text of the Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[356:2338](1100065.htm#fr_2337) <span
id="iii.LVII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p36"></span>\[A clause is omitted here, “and doth not
straightway cut him off.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[356:2339](1100065.htm#fr_2338) <span
id="iii.LVII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p38"></span>[Matt.
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span id="iii.LVII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[356:2340](1100065.htm#fr_2339) <span
id="iii.LVII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p40.1"></span>μικροψυχα</span> .

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[356:2341](1100065.htm#fr_2340) <span
id="iii.LVII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p42"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="iii.LVII-p42.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “for *my* power is made perfect in weakness.”\]

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[356:2342](1100065.htm#fr_2341) <span
id="iii.LVII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p43"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p43.1"></span>πολιτεαν</span>.

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[356:2343](1100065.htm#fr_2342) <span
id="iii.LVII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p44"></span>[Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="iii.LVII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[356:2344](1100065.htm#fr_2343) <span
id="iii.LVII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p45"></span>[Jer. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014)<span id="iii.LVII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[356:2345](1100065.htm#fr_2344) <span
id="iii.LVII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p51"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p51.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LVII-p51.2"></span>πικηρων</span>.

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[357:2346](1100065.htm#fr_2345) <span
id="iii.LVII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p53"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)<span id="iii.LVII-p53.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Love never faileth.” The Greek word is rendered “love”
throughout this part of the Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[357:2347](1100065.htm#fr_2346) <span
id="iii.LVII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p55"></span>[John xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span id="iii.LVII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[357:2348](1100065.htm#fr_2347) <span
id="iii.LVII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LVII-p57"></span>[Luke xxiii.
34.](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iii.LVII-p57.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LVIII](1100066)
