[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100081)  [Next](1100083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXIV"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXIV-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXIV-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
24:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p3"></span>*“Now learn a parable of the fig tree;
when his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that
summer is nigh: so likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know
that it is near, even at the doors.”* <span
id="fr_2805"></span>[2806](#fn_2805)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXIV-p5.1"></span>Forasmuch</span> as He had said, “Immediately
after the tribulation of those days;” but they sought of this, after how
long a time it should be, and desired to know in particular the very
day, therefore He puts also the similitude of the fig tree, indicating
that the interval was not great, but that in quick succession would
occur His advent also. And this He declared not by the parable alone,
but by the words that follow, saying, “know that it is near, even at the
doors.” <span id="fr_2806"></span>[2807](#fn_2806)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p7"></span>Whereby He foretells another thing also,
a spiritual summer, and a calm that should be on that day (after the
present tempest) for the righteous; but to the sinners the contrary,
winter after summer, which He declares in what follows, saying, that the
day shall come upon them, when they are living in luxury.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p8"></span>But not for this intent only did He put
forward this about the fig tree, in order to declare the interval; for
it was possible to have set this before them in other ways as well; but
that he might hereby also confirm His saying, as assuredly thus to come
to pass. For as this *of the fig tree* is of necessity, so that too. For
thus, wherever He is minded to speak of that which will assuredly come
to pass, He brings forward the necessary courses of nature, both
Himself, and the blessed Paul imitating Him. Therefore also when
speaking of His resurrection, He saith, “When the corn of wheat hath
fallen into the earth, except it die, it abideth alone; but if it die,
it bringeth forth much fruit.” <span
id="fr_2807"></span>[2808](#fn_2807) Whereby also the blessed Paul being
instructed uses the same similitude, <span
id="fr_2808"></span>[2809](#fn_2808) “Thou fool,” he saith, “that which
thou sowest is not quickened, except it die.” <span
id="fr_2809"></span>[2810](#fn_2809)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p12"></span>After this, that they might not
straightway return to it again, and say, “When?” he brings to their
remembrance the things that had been said, saying, “Verily I say unto
you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled!” <span id="fr_2810"></span>[2811](#fn_2810) All these things.
What things? I pray thee. Those about Jerusalem, those about the wars,
about the famines, about the pestilences, about the earthquakes, about
the false Christs, about the false prophets, about the sowing of the
gospel everywhere, the seditions, the tumults, all the other things,
which we said were to occur until His coming. How then, one may ask, did
He say, “This generation?” Speaking not of the generation then living,
but of that of the believers. For He is wont to distinguish a generation
not by times only, <span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="iii.LXXIV-Page_445"></span> but also by the mode of religious
service, and practice; as when He saith, “This is the generation of them
that seek the Lord.” <span id="fr_2811"></span>[2812](#fn_2811)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p15"></span>For what He said above, “All these must
come to pass,” <span id="fr_2812"></span>[2813](#fn_2812) and again,
“the gospel shall be preached,” <span
id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813) this He declares here also, saying,
All these things shall surely come to pass, and the generation of the
faithful shall remain, cut off by none of the things that have been
mentioned. For both Jerusalem shall perish, and the more part of the
Jews shall be destroyed, but over this generation shall nothing prevail,
not famine, not pestilence, not earthquake, nor the tumults of wars, not
false Christs, not false prophets, not deceivers, not traitors, not
those that cause to offend, not the false brethren, nor any other such
like temptation whatever.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p18"></span>Then to lead them on more in faith, He
saith, “Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away;” <span id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814) that is, it were more
easy for these firm, fixed, and immoveable bodies to be blotted out,
than for ought of my words to fall to the ground. And he who gainsays
these things, let him test His sayings, and when he hath found them true
(for so he surely will find them) from what is past, let him believe
also the things to come, and let him search out all things with
diligence, and he will see the actual events bearing witness to the
truth of the prophecy. And the elements He hath brought forward, at once
to declare, that the church is of more honor than Heaven and earth, and
at the same time to indicate Himself by this also to be maker of all.
For since He was speaking of the end, a thing disbelieved by many, He
brought forward Heaven and earth, indicating His unspeakable power, and
showing with great authority, that He is Lord of all, and by these
things rendering His sayings deserving of credit, even with those who
are much given to doubt.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p20"></span>“But of that day and hour knoweth no
man, no, not the angels of Heaven, <span
id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815) neither the Son, <span
id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) but the Father.” By saying, not the
angels, He stopped their mouths, that they should not seek to learn what
these angels know not; and by saying, “neither the Son,” forbids them
not only to learn, but even to inquire. For in proof that therefore He
said this, see after His resurrection, when He saw they were become over
curious, how He stopped their mouths more decidedly. For now indeed He
hath mentioned infallible signs, many and endless; but then He saith
merely, “It is not for you to know times or seasons.” And then that they
might not say, we are driven to perplexity, we are utterly scorned, we
are not held worthy so much as of this, He says, “which the Father hath
put in His own power.” <span id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) And
this, because He was exceedingly careful to honor them, and to conceal
nothing from them. Therefore He refers it to His Father, both to make
the thing awful, and to exclude that of which He had spoken from their
inquiry. Since if it be not this, but He is ignorant of it, when will He
know it? Will it be together with us? But who would say this? And the
Father He knoweth clearly, even as clearly as He knoweth the Son; and of
the day is He ignorant? Moreover, “the Spirit indeed searcheth even the
deep things of God,” <span id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) and doth
not He know so much as the time of the judgment? But how He ought to
judge He knoweth, and of the secrets of each He hath a full perception;
and what is far more common than that, of this could He be ignorant? And
how, if “all things were made by Him, and without Him was not even one
thing made,” <span id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819) was He ignorant
of the day? For He who made the worlds, <span
id="fr_2820"></span>[2821](#fn_2820) it is quite plain that He made the
times also; and if the times, even that day. How then is He ignorant of
that which He made?

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p27"></span>2. And ye indeed say that ye know even
His substance, <span id="fr_2821"></span>[2822](#fn_2821) but that the
Son not even the day, the Son, who is always in the bosom of the Father;
and yet His substance is much greater than the days, even infinitely
greater. How then, while assigning to yourselves the greater things, do
you not allow even the less to the Son, “in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” <span
id="fr_2822"></span>[2823](#fn_2822) But neither do you know what God is
in His substance, though ten thousand times ye talk thus madly, neither
is the Son ignorant of the day, but is even in full certainty thereof.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p30"></span>For this cause, I say, when He had told
all things, both the times and the seasons, and had brought it to the
very doors (“for it is near,” He saith, “even at the doors”), He was
silent as to the day. For if thou seek after the day and hour, thou
shalt not hear them of me, saith He; but if of times and preludes,
without hiding anything, I will tell thee all exactly.

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span id="iii.LXXIV-Page_446"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p31"></span>For that indeed I am not ignorant of it,
I have shown by many things; having mentioned intervals, and all the
things that are to occur, and how short from this present time until the
day itself (for this did the parable of the fig tree indicate), and I
lead thee to the very vestibule; and if I do not open unto thee the
doors, this also I do for your good.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p32"></span>And that thou mayest learn by another
thing also, that the silence is not a mark of ignorance on His part,
see, together with what we have mentioned, how He sets forth another
sign also. “But as in the days of Noe they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that the flood came, and
took all away; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.” <span
id="fr_2823"></span>[2824](#fn_2823) And these things He spake, showing
that He should come on a sudden, and unexpectedly, and when the more
part were living luxuriously. For Paul too saith this, writing on this
wise, “When they shall speak of peace and safety, then sudden
destruction cometh upon them;” and to show how unexpected, He said, “as
travail upon a woman with child.” <span
id="fr_2824"></span>[2825](#fn_2824) How then doth He say, “after the
tribulation of those days?” For if there be luxury then, and peace, and
safety, as Paul saith, how doth He say, “after the tribulation of those
days?” If there be luxury, how is there tribulation? Luxury for them
that are in a state of insensibility and peace. Therefore He said not,
when there is peace, but “when they speak of peace and safety,”
indicating their insensibility to be such as of those in Noah’s time,
for that amid such evils they lived in luxury.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p35"></span>But not so the righteous, but they were
passing their time in tribulation and dejection. Whereby He shows, that
when Antichrist is come, the pursuit of unlawful pleasures shall be more
eager among the transgressors, and those that have learnt to despair of
their own salvation. Then shall be gluttony, then revellings, and
drunkenness. Wherefore also most of all He puts forth an example
corresponding to the thing. For like as when the ark was making, they
believed not, saith He; but while it was set in the midst of them,
proclaiming beforehand the evils that are to come, they, when they saw
it, lived in pleasure, just as though nothing dreadful were about to
take place; so also now, Antichrist indeed shall appear, after whom is
the end, and the punishments at the end, and vengeance intolerable; but
they that are held by the intoxication of wickedness shall not so much
as perceive the dreadful nature of the things that are on the point of
being done. Wherefore also Paul saith, “as travail upon a woman with
child,” even so shall those fearful and incurable evils come upon them.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p36"></span>And wherefore did He not speak of the
ills in Sodom? It was His will to introduce an example embracing all
men, <span id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825) and disbelieved after it
was foretold. So therefore, as by the more part the things to come are
disbelieved, He confirms those things by the past, terrifying their
minds. And together with the points I have mentioned, He shows this
also, that of the former things also He was the doer. Then again He sets
another sign, by all which things He makes it evident, that He is not
ignorant of the day. And what is the sign? “Then shall two be in the
field; one shall be taken, and one left. Two women shall be grinding at
the mill, one shall be taken, and one left. Watch therefore, for ye know
not what hour your Lord doth come.” <span
id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826) And all these things are both
proofs that He knew, and calculated to turn them from their inquiry. So
for this cause He spake also of the days of Noe, for this cause He said
too, “Two shall be on the bed,” signifying this, that He should come
upon them thus unexpectedly, when they were thus without thought, and
“two women grinding at the mill,” which also of itself is not the
employment of them that are taking thought.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p39"></span>And together with this, He declares that
as well servants as masters should be both taken and left, both those
who are at ease, and those in toil, as well from the one rank as from
the other; even as in the Old Testament He saith, “From him that sitteth
upon the throne to the captive woman that is at the mill.” <span
id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827) For since He had said, that hardly
are the rich saved, He shows that not even these are altogether lost,
neither are the poor saved all of them, but both out of these and out of
those are men saved, and lost.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p41"></span>And to me He seems to declare, that at
night will be the advent. For this Luke too saith. <span
id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828) Seest thou how accurately He knows
all things?

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p43"></span>After this again, that they may not ask
about it, He added, “Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your
Lord doth come.” <span id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829) He said not,
“I know not,” but, “ye know not.” For when He had brought <span
id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span id="iii.LXXIV-Page_447"></span> them
well nigh to the very hour, and had placed them there, again He deters
them from the inquiry, from a desire that they should be striving
always. Therefore He saith, “Watch,” showing that for the sake of this,
He did not tell it.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p45"></span>“But know this, that if the good man of
the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have
watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken up.
Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not the Son
of Man cometh.” <span id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p47"></span>For this intent He tells them not, in
order that they may watch, that they may be always ready; therefore He
saith, When ye look not for it, then He will come, desiring that they
should be anxiously waiting, and continually in virtuous action.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p48"></span>But His meaning is like this: if the
common sort of men knew when they were to die, they would surely strive
earnestly at that hour.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p49"></span>3. In order therefore that they may
strive, not at that hour only, therefore He tells them not either the
common hour, or the hour of each, desiring them to be ever looking for
this, that they may be always striving. Wherefore He made the end of
each man’s life also uncertain.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p50"></span>After this, He openly calls Himself
Lord, having nowhere spoken so distinctly. But here He seems to me also
to put to shame the careless, that not even as much care as they that
expect a thief have taken for their money, not even this much do these
take for their own soul. For they indeed, when they expect it, watch,
and suffer none of the things in their house to be carried off; but ye,
although knowing that He will come, and come assuredly, continue not
watching, saith He, and ready so as not to be carried away hence
unprepared. So that the day cometh unto destruction for them that sleep.
For as that man, if he had known, would have escaped, so also ye, if ye
be ready, escape free.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p51"></span>Then, as He had fallen upon the mention
of the judgment, He directs His discourse to the teachers next, speaking
of punishment and honors; and having put first them that do right, He
ends with them that continue in sin, making His discourse to close with
that which is alarming.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p52"></span>Wherefore He first saith this, “Who then
is the faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord shall set over <span
id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831) His household to give them their
meat in their <span id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832) due season?
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when He cometh shall find so
doing. Verily I say unto you, that He shall make him ruler over all His
goods.” <span id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p56"></span>Tell me, is this too the language of one
who is in ignorance? For if because He said, “neither doth the Son
know,” thou sayest He is ignorant of it; as He saith, “who then?” what
wilt thou say? Wilt thou say He is ignorant of this too? Away with the
thought. For not even one of them that are frantic would say this. And
yet in the former case one might assign a cause; but here not even this.
And what when He said, “Peter, lovest thou me?” <span
id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834) asking it, knew He not so much as
this? nor when He said, “Where have ye laid him?” <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p59"></span>And the Father too will be found to be
saying such things. For He Himself likewise saith, “Adam, where art
thou?” <span id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836) and, “The cry of Sodom
and Gomorrah is waxed great before me. I will go down therefore, and see
whether their doings be according to their cry which cometh unto me, and
if not, I will know.” <span id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837) And
elsewhere He saith, “Whether they will hear, whether they will
understand.” <span id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838) And in the
gospel too, “It may be they will reverence my Son:” <span
id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839) all which are expressions of
ignorance. But not in ignorance did He say these things, but as
compassing objects such as became Him: in the case of Adam, that He
might drive him to make an excuse for his sin: in that of the Sodomites,
that He might teach us never to be positive, till we are present at the
very deeds; in that of the prophet, that the prediction might not appear
in the judgment of the foolish a kind of compulsion to disobedience; and
in the parable in the gospel, that He might show that they ought to have
done this, and to have reverenced the Son: but here, as well that they
may not be curious, nor over busy again, as that He might indicate that
this was a rare and precious thing. And see of what great ignorance this
saying is indicative, if at least He know not even him that is set over.
For He blesses him indeed, “For blessed,” saith He, “is that servant;”
but He saith not who this is. “For who is he,” He saith, “whom His Lord
shall set over?” and, “Blessed is he whom He shall find so doing.”

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p64"></span>But these things are spoken not of money
<span id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span id="iii.LXXIV-Page_448"></span>
only, but also of speech, and of power, and of gifts, and of every
stewardship, wherewith each is entrusted. This parable would suit rulers
in the state also, for every one is bound to make full use of what he
hath for the common advantage. If it be wisdom thou hast, if power, if
wealth, if what it may, let it not be for the hurt of thy
fellow-servants, neither for thine own ruin. For this cause, therefore,
He requires both things of him, wisdom, and fidelity: for sin arises
from folly also. He calls him faithful then, because he hath purloined
nothing, neither misspent his Lord’s goods without aim or fruit; and
wise, because he knew how to dispense the things given him, according as
was fit. For indeed we have need of both things, as well not to purloin
the goods of our Master, as also to dispense them as is fit. But if the
one be wanting, the other halteth. For if he be faithful and steal not,
yet were to waste and to spend upon that which concerned him not, great
were the blame; and if he should know how to dispense it well, yet were
to purloin, again there is no common charge against him.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p65"></span>And let us also that have money listen
to these things. For not unto teachers only doth He discourse, but also
unto the rich. For either sort were entrusted with riches; those that
teach with the more necessary wealth, ye with what is inferior. When
then at the time that the teachers are scattering abroad the greater, ye
are not willing to show forth your liberality even in the less, or
rather not liberality but honesty (for ye give the things of another),
what excuse will you have? But now, before the punishment of them that
do the contrary things, let us hear the honor of him that approveth
himself. “For verily I say unto you, He will set him over all His
goods.”

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p66"></span>What can be equal to this honor? what
manner of speech will be able to set forth the dignity, the blessedness,
when the King of Heaven, He that possesseth all things, is about to set
a man over “all His goods?” Wherefore also He calleth him wise, because
he knew, not to give up great things for small, but having been
temperate here, hath attained to Heaven.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p67"></span>4. After this, as He ever doth, not by
the honor only laid up for the good, but also by the punishment
threatened against the wicked, doth He correct the hearers. Wherefore
also He added, “But and if the evil servant say in his heart, my Lord
delayeth His coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and
shall eat and drink with the drunken: the Lord of that servant shall
come in a day when he looketh not for Him, and in an hour that he is not
aware of, <span id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840) and shall cut him
asunder, <span id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841) and shall appoint
him his portion with the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.” <span id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p71"></span>But if any one should say, Seest thou
what a thought hath entered into his mind, because of the day’s not
being known, “my Lord,” he saith, “delayeth His coming?” we should
affirm, that it was not because the day is not known, but because the
servant is evil. Else wherefore came not this thought into the heart of
the faithful and wise servant. For what, even though the Lord tarry, O
wretched man, surely thou lookest that He will come. Why then dost thou
not take care?

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p72"></span>Hence then we learn, that He doth not so
much as tarry. For this judgment is not the Lord’s, but that of the evil
servant’s mind, wherefore also he is blamed for this. For in proof that
He doth not tarry, hear Paul saying, “The Lord is at hand, be careful
for nothing;” <span id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) and, “He that
cometh will come, and will not tarry.” <span
id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p75"></span>But do thou hear also what followeth,
and learn how continually He reminds them of their ignorance of the day,
showing that this is profitable to the servants, and fitted to waken and
thoroughly to rouse them. For what though some gained nothing hereby?
For neither by other things profitable for them were some profited, but
nevertheless He ceaseth not to do His part.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p76"></span>What then is the purport of that which
followeth? “For He shall come in a day when he looketh not for Him, and
in an hour that he is not aware of;” <span
id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845) and shall inflict upon him extreme
punishment. Seest thou how even everywhere He puts this, the fact of
their ignorance, indicating that it was profitable, and by this making
them always earnest minded? For this is the point at which He labors,
that we should be always on the watch; and since it is always in luxury
that we are supine, but in afflictions we are braced up, therefore
everywhere He saith this, that when there is relaxation, then come the
terrors. And as further back He showed this by the example of Noah, even
so here He saith it is, when that servant is drunken, when he is
beating, and that his punishment shall be intolerable.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p78"></span>But let us not regard only the
punishment appointed for him, but let us look to this other point too,
lest we ourselves also be un <span id="page_449">p. 449</span> <span
id="iii.LXXIV-Page_449"></span> awares to ourselves doing the same
things. For to this servant are they like, who have money, and give not
to the needy. For thou too art steward of thine own possessions, not
less than he who dispenses the alms of the church. As then he has not a
right to squander at random and at hazard the things given by you for
the poor, since they were given for the maintenance of the poor; even so
neither mayest thou squander thine own. For even though thou hast
received an inheritance from thy father, and hast in this way all thou
possessest: even thus all are God’s. And then thou for thy part desirest
that what thou hast given should be thus carefully dispensed, and
thinkest thou not that God will require His own of us with greater
strictness, or that He suffers them to be wasted at random? These things
are not, they are not so. Because for this end, He left these things in
thine hand, in order “to give them their meat in due season.” But what
meaneth, “in due season?” To the needy, to the hungry. For like as thou
gavest to thy fellow-servant to dispense, even so doth the Lord will
thee too to spend these things on what is needful. Therefore though He
was able to take them away from thee, He left them, that thou mightest
have opportunity to show forth virtue; that bringing us into need one of
another, He might make our love for one another more fervent.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p79"></span>But thou, when thou hast received, so
far from giving, dost even beat. And yet if not to give be blame, what
excuse is there for beating? But this, it seems to me, He speaks,
hinting at the insolent, and the covetous, and indicating the charge to
be heavy, when they beat them, whom they were commanded to feed.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p80"></span>5. But He seemeth to be here hinting
also at those that live in luxury, since for luxury too there is laid up
a great punishment. “For He eateth and drinketh,” it is said, “with the
drunken,” pointing at gluttony. For not for this purpose didst thou
receive, that thou should spend it on luxury, but that thou shouldest
lay it out on alms. What! are they thine own things which thou hast?
With the goods of the poor hast thou been entrusted, though thou be
possessed of them by honest labor, or though it be by inheritance from
thy father. What, could not God have taken away these things from thee?
But He doth not this, to give thee power to be liberal to the poor.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p81"></span>But mark thou, I pray thee, how
throughout all the parables He punishes them that lay not out their
money upon the needy. For neither had the virgins robbed other men’s
goods, but they had not given their own; neither had he that buried the
one talent embezzled, but he had not doubled; neither are they that
overlooked the hungry punished, because they seized the possessions of
others, but because they did not lay out their own, like as also this
servant.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p82"></span>Let us hearken, as many as please the
belly, as many as lay out on costly banquets the riches that pertain not
at all to us, but belong to the needy. For do not, because out of great
love to man thou art commanded to give as of thine, therefore suppose
these things to be indeed thine own. He lent them to thee, that thou
mightest be able to approve thyself. Do not then suppose them to be
thine, when giving Him His own. For neither, if thou hadst lent to any
one, that he might go and be able to find means of gain, wouldest thou
say the money was his. To thee then also hath God given, that thou
mightest traffic for Heaven. Make not then the exceeding greatness of
His love to man a cause of ingratitude.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p83"></span>Consider of what prayer it were a worthy
object, to be able to find after baptism a way to do away one’s sins. If
He had not said this, Give alms, how many would have said, Would it were
possible to give money, and so be freed from the ills to come! But since
this hath become possible, again are they become supine.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p84"></span>“But I give,” thou sayest. And what is
this? Thou hast not yet given as much as she, who cast in the two mites;
or rather not so much as the half, nor a very small part of what she
gave, but thou layest out the greater part on useless expenses, on
banquets, and drunkenness, and extreme extravagance; now bidding, now
bidden; now spending, now constraining others to spend; so that the
punishment is even rendered twofold for thee, both from what thyself
doest, and what thou movest others to do. See at any rate how He Himself
blames His servant for this. “For he eateth,” He saith, “and drinketh
with the drunken.” For not the drunken only, but those that are with
them, doth He punish, and very fitly, because (together with corrupting
their own selves) they make light also of the salvation of others. But
nothing does so much provoke God, as for us to be inclined to overlook
the things that concern our neighbor. Wherefore showing His anger, He
commands him to be cut asunder. Therefore He also affirmed love to be a
distinguishing mark of His disciples, since it is altogether necessary
that he who loveth should take thought for the things of his beloved.

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span id="iii.LXXIV-Page_450"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p85"></span>To this way then let us hold, for this
is especially the way that leads up to Heaven, which renders men
followers of Christ, which makes them, as far as possible, like God. See
at any rate how these virtues are more needful, which have their
dwelling by this way. And, if ye will, let us make an inquiry into them,
and let us bring forth the sentences from the judgment of God.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p86"></span>Let there be then two ways of most holy
life, and let the one secure the goodness of him that practises it, but
the other of his neighbor also. Let us see whether is the more approved
and leads us to the summit of virtue. Surely he, who seeks his own
things only, will receive even from Paul endless blame, and when I say
from Paul, I mean from Christ, but the other commendations and crowns.
Whence is this evident? Hear what His language is to one, what to the
other. “Let no man seek his own, but every man another’s wealth.” <span
id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846) Seest thou he rejects the one, and
brings in the other? Again, “Let every one of you please his neighbor
for good to edification.” Then comes also the praise beyond words with
an admonition, “For even Christ pleased not Himself.” <span
id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p89"></span>Even these judgments then are sufficient
to show the victory; but that this may be done even superabundantly, let
us see amongst good works, which are confined to ourselves, and which
pass over from us to others also. Fasting then, and lying on the bare
ground, and keeping virginity, and a self-denying life, these things
bring their advantage to the persons themselves who do them; but those
that pass from ourselves to our neighbors are almsgiving, teaching,
charity. Hear then Paul in this matter also saying, “Though I bestow all
my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and
have not charity, I am nothing profited.” <span
id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848)

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p91"></span>6. Seest thou it in itself gloriously
celebrated, and crowned?

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p92"></span>But if ye be willing, from a third point
also let us compare them; and let the one fast, and deny himself, and be
a martyr, and be burnt to death, but let another delay his martyrdom for
his neighbor’s edification; and let him not only delay it, but let him
even depart without martyrdom; who will be the more approved after his
removal hence? We need not have many words, nor a long circumlocution.
For the blessed Paul is at hand, giving his judgment, and saying, “To
depart and to be with Christ is better, nevertheless to abide in the
flesh is more needful for you;” <span
id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849) even to his removal unto Christ did
he prefer his neighbor’s edification. For this is in the highest sense
to be with Christ, even to be doing His will, but nothing is so much His
will, as that which is for one’s neighbor’s good.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p94"></span>Wilt thou that I tell thee a fourth
proof also of these things? “Peter, lovest thou me,” saith He; “Feed my
sheep:” <span id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850) and having asked him
a third time, declared this to be an infallible proof of love. But not
to priests only is this said, but to every one of us also, who are also
entrusted with a little flock. For do not despise it, because it is a
little flock: For “my Father,” He saith, “hath pleasure in them.” <span
id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) Each of us hath a sheep, let him
lead that to the proper pastures. And let the man, as soon as he has
risen from his bed, seek after nothing else, but how he may do and say
something whereby he may render his whole house more reverent. The woman
again, let her be indeed a good housekeeper; but before attending to
this, let her have another more needful care, that the whole household
may work the works of Heaven. For if in worldly matters, before
attending to the affairs of our household, we labor diligently to pay
public dues, that we may not for our undutifulness in these matters be
beaten and dragged to the market places, and suffer ten thousand
unseemly things; much more ought we to do this in things spiritual, and
to render what is due to God, the King of all, first, that we may not
come to that place, “where is gnashing of teeth.”

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p97"></span>And after these virtues let us seek,
which together with our own salvation will be able in the greatest
degree to profit our neighbor. Such is almsgiving, such is prayer, or
rather even this latter is by the former made efficacious, and furnished
with wings. “For thy prayers,” it is said, “and thine alms are come up
for a memorial before God.” <span id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852)
But not prayers only, but fasting also hath its strength from hence.
Shouldest thou fast without almsgiving; the act is not so much as
counted for fasting; but such a one is worse than a gluttonous man and a
drunkard; and so much worse, as cruelty is a more grievous thing than
luxury. And why do I speak of fasting? Though thou practise self-denial,
though thou practise virginity, thou art set without the bridechamber,
if thou hast not almsgiving. And yet what is equal to virginity, which
not even in the new dispensation hath come under the compulsion of law,
on account of its high excellence? but nevertheless it is cast <span
id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span id="iii.LXXIV-Page_451"></span> out,
when it hath not almsgiving. But if virgins are cast out, because they
have not this in due abundance, who will be able without this to obtain
pardon? There is no man, but he must quite of necessity perish, who hath
not this.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p99"></span>For, if in worldly matters no man lives
for himself, but artisan, and soldier, and husbandman, and merchant, all
of them contribute to the common good, and to their neighbor’s
advantage; much more ought we to do this in things spiritual. For this
is most properly to live: since he at least who is living for himself
only, and overlooking all others, is useless, and is not so much as a
human being, nor of our race.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p100"></span>What then, thou wouldest say, if I
neglect my own interests, while seeking after the good of the rest? It
is not possible, for one who seeks after the good of the rest to
overlook his own; for he who seeks after the good of the rest pains no
man, but pities all, helps them to the utmost of his powers; will rob no
man, will covet the goods of no man, will not steal, will not bear false
witness; will abstain from all wickedness, will apply himself to all
virtue, and will pray for his enemies, and do good to them that plot
against him, and will neither revile any, nor speak ill of them, though
he hear from them ten thousand evil things; but will speak the words of
the apostle: “Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I
burn not?” <span id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) But when looking
to our own good, it is not quite sure that the good of the rest will
follow.

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p102"></span>By all which things being persuaded
that it is not possible for one to be saved, who hath not looked to the
common good, and seeing this man that was cut asunder, and him that
buried his talent, let us choose this way, that we may also attain unto
eternal life, unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2805"></span>[444:2806](1100082.htm#fr_2805) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p4"></span>\[R.V., “Now from the fig-tree learn her
parable: when her branch is now become tender, and putteth forth its
leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh; even so ye also, when ye see
all these things, know ye that he (or, it) is nigh, *even* at the
doors.”\]

<span id="fn_2806"></span>[444:2807](1100082.htm#fr_2806) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p6"></span>\[The comment seems to imply a preference
for the interpretation: “it is nigh,” *i.e.,* the day of the Lord’s
coming.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2807"></span>[444:2808](1100082.htm#fr_2807) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p9"></span>[John xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2808"></span>[444:2809](1100082.htm#fr_2808) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p10"></span>\[A clause is omitted here: “reasoning
with the Corinthians about the resurrection.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2809"></span>[444:2810](1100082.htm#fr_2809) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p11"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2810"></span>[444:2811](1100082.htm#fr_2810) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p13"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p13.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “pass away” and “accomplished.”\]

<span id="fn_2811"></span>[445:2812](1100082.htm#fr_2811) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p14"></span>[Ps. xxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2812"></span>[445:2813](1100082.htm#fr_2812) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p16"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[445:2814](1100082.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p17"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[445:2815](1100082.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p19"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[445:2816](1100082.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p21"></span>\[R.V., “no man, not even the angels of
heaven.”\]

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[445:2817](1100082.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p22"></span>[Matt.
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036), [Mark
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p22.1"></span>. \[The received text (and A.V.) omit
“neither the Son” in Matthew, but not in Mark. The R.V., with our best
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXIV-p22.2"></span>mss</span>., inserts
the phrase in Matthew. The Fathers vary, but Chrysostom accepts it and
comments upon it. Still the last clause, as given above, agrees exactly
with [Mark xiii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p22.3"></span>, and differs from [Matt. xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p22.4"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[445:2818](1100082.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p22.5"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p23"></span>[Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p23.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “set within his own authority.”\]

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[445:2819](1100082.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p24"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[445:2820](1100082.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p25"></span>[John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p25.1"></span>.
\[Literally rendered.\]

<span id="fn_2820"></span>[445:2821](1100082.htm#fr_2820) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p26"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIV-p26.1"></span>ανα</span>.

<span id="fn_2821"></span>[445:2822](1100082.htm#fr_2821) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p28"></span>Arians \[The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXIV-p28.1"></span>οσαν</span>, here used,
was the current term in the Arian controversy.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2822"></span>[445:2823](1100082.htm#fr_2822) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p29"></span>[Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2823"></span>[446:2824](1100082.htm#fr_2823) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p33"></span>[Matt.
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#039)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p33.1"></span>.
\[The passage is abridged.\]

<span id="fn_2824"></span>[446:2825](1100082.htm#fr_2824) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p34"></span>[1 Thess. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[446:2826](1100082.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p37"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXIV-p37.1"></span>καθολικν</span>.

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[446:2827](1100082.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p38"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
40-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p38.1"></span>. \[The citation agrees with the received
text, except in the omission of the articles in [Matt.
24.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p38.2"></span>. R.V., “is taken,” “ is left,” in [Matt.
24:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p38.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[446:2828](1100082.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p40"></span>[Exod. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p40.1"></span>.
\[LXX., both altered and abridged.\]

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[446:2829](1100082.htm#fr_2828) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p42"></span>[Luke xvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[446:2830](1100082.htm#fr_2829) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p44"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[447:2831](1100082.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p46"></span>[Matt.
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p46.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “if the master of the house had known in what watch the thief
was coming,…to be broken through.…in an hour ye think not,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[447:2832](1100082.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p53"></span>\[The future tense is peculiar to this
citation, also the addition of “their.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[447:2833](1100082.htm#fr_2832) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p54"></span>See last note.

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[447:2834](1100082.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p55"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
45-47](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p55.1"></span>. \[R.V., “that he will set him over all
that he hath.” The translator has made a similar change in [Matt.
24.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p55.2"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[447:2835](1100082.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p57"></span>[John xxi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[447:2836](1100082.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p58"></span>[John xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[447:2837](1100082.htm#fr_2836) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p60"></span>[Gen. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[447:2838](1100082.htm#fr_2837) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p61"></span>[Gen.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[447:2839](1100082.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p62"></span>[Ezek. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[447:2840](1100082.htm#fr_2839) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p63"></span>[Luke xx.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p63.1"></span>.
\[In Homily LXVIII. this form of the saying is cited as occurring in
[Matt. 21.37](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#037)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p63.2"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[448:2841](1100082.htm#fr_2840) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p68"></span>\[R.V., “when he expecteth not, and in
an hour when he knoweth not.”\]

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[448:2842](1100082.htm#fr_2841) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p69"></span>\[R.V. margin, “severely scourge him.”\]

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[448:2843](1100082.htm#fr_2842) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p70"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
48-51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p70.1"></span>. \[The textual variations are slight, and
are indicated in the emendations of the A.V. appearing in the above
rendering.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[448:2844](1100082.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p73"></span>[Phil.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[448:2845](1100082.htm#fr_2844) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p74"></span>[Heb. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[448:2846](1100082.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p77"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#050)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[450:2847](1100082.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p87"></span>[1 Cor. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[450:2848](1100082.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p87.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p88"></span>[Rom.
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[450:2849](1100082.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p90"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[450:2850](1100082.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p93"></span>[Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[450:2851](1100082.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p95"></span>[John xxi.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span
id="iii.LXXIV-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[450:2852](1100082.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p95.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p96"></span>[Luke xii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[450:2853](1100082.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p98"></span>[Acts x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[451:2854](1100082.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="iii.LXXIV-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXIV-p101"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXXIV-p101.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXV](1100083)
