[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100025)  [Next](1100027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XVIII"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p1.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span
id="iii.XVIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p3"></span>*“Ye have heard that it hath been said,
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, that ye
resist not the evil:* <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) *but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also.”*

<span id="iii.XVIII-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p5.1"></span>Seest</span> thou that it was not of an eye
that He was speaking before, when He made the law to pluck out the
offending eye, but of him who by his friendship is harming us, and
casting us into the gulf of destruction? For He who in this place uses
so great strength of expression, and who, not even when another is
plucking out your eye, permits you to strike out his; how should He have
made it a law to strike out one’s own?

<span id="iii.XVIII-p6"></span>But if any one accuses the ancient law,
because it commands such retaliation, he seems to me very unskillful in
the wisdom that becomes a legislator, and ignorant of the virtue of
opportunities, and the gain of condescension. For if he considered who
were the hearers of these sayings, and how they <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> <span id="iii.XVIII-Page_121"></span> were disposed, and when
they received this code of laws, he will thoroughly admit the wisdom of
the Lawgiver, and will see that it is one and the same, who made both
those laws and these, and who wrote each of them exceeding profitably,
and in its due season. Yes, for if at the beginning He had introduced
these high and most weighty commandments, men would not have received
either these, or the others; but now ordaining them severally in their
due time, He hath by the two corrected the whole world.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p7"></span>And besides, He commanded this, not that
we might strike out one another’s eyes, but that we might keep our hands
to ourselves. For the threat of suffering hath effectually restrained
our inclination to be doing.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p8"></span>And thus in fact He is silently dropping
seed of much self-restraint, at least in that He commands to retaliate
with just the same acts. Yet surely he that began such transgression
were worthy of a greater punishment, and this the abstract nature of
justice <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) demands. But forasmuch
as He was minded to mingle mercy also with justice, He condemns him
whose offenses were very great to a punishment less than his desert:
teaching us even while we suffer to show forth great consideration.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p10"></span>Having therefore mentioned the ancient
law, and recognized it all, He signifies again, that it is not our
brother who hath done these deeds, but the evil one. For this cause he
hath also subjoined, “But I say unto you, that ye resist not the evil
one.” He did not say, “resist not your brother,” but “the evil one,”
signifying that on his motion men dare so to act; and in this way
relaxing and secretly removing most of our anger against the aggressor,
by transferring the blame to another.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p11"></span>“What then?” it is said, “ought we not
to resist the evil one?” Indeed we ought, but not in this way, but as He
hath commanded, by giving one’s self up to suffer wrongfully; for thus
shalt thou prevail over him. For one fire is not quenched by another,
but fire by water. And to show thee that even under the old law he that
suffered rather prevails, that he it is who wins the crown; examine just
what is done, and thou wilt see that his advantage is great. For as he
that hath begun with unjust acts, will have himself destroyed the eyes
of both, his neighbor’s and his own (wherefore also he is justly hated
of all, and ten thousand accusations are aimed at him): so he that hath
been injured, even after his equal retaliation, will have done nothing
horrible. Wherefore also he hath many to sympathize with him, as being
clear from that offense even after he hath retaliated. And though the
calamity be equal to both parties, yet the sentence passed on it is not
equal, either with God, or with men. It should seem then, that neither
is the calamity equal in the end.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p12"></span>Now whereas at the beginning He said,
“he that is angry with his brother without a cause,” and “he that
calleth him fool shall be in danger of hell fire,” here He requires yet
more entire self-restraint, commanding him that suffers ill not merely
to be quiet, but even to be more exceedingly earnest in his turn, <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) by offering the other cheek.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p14"></span>And this He saith, not as legislating
about such a blow as this only, but as teaching also what forbearance we
should practise in all our other trials. For just as when He saith,
“whoso calleth his brother fool, is in danger of hell,” He speaks not of
this word only, but also of all reviling; even so here also He is making
a law, not so much for our bearing it manfully, when smitten, as that we
should be undisturbed, whatever we suffer. Because of this He both there
singled out the extremest insult, and here hath set down that which
seems to be of all blows most opprobrious, the blow on the cheek, so
full of all insolence. And He commands this as having regard both of him
that strikes and of him that is stricken. Since both he that is insulted
will not think that he suffers any harm, being thus framed to
self-restraint (nay, he will not even have any sense of the insult, as
striving rather for a prize than as receiving a blow); and he that is
offering the affront will be made ashamed, and not add a second blow,
though he be fiercer than any wild beast, yea, rather will condemn
himself heartily for the former. For nothing so restrains the wrong
doers, as when the injured bear what is done with gentleness. And it not
only restrains them from rushing onward, but works upon them also to
repent for what has gone before, and in wonder at such forbearance to
draw back. And it makes them more our own, and causes them to be slaves,
not merely friends, instead of haters and enemies; even as avenging
one’s self does just the contrary: for it both disgraces each of the
two, and makes them worse, and their anger it heightens into a greater
flame; yea, often no less than death itself is the end of it, going on
from bad to worse. Wherefore He not only forbade thee to be angry when
smitten, but even enjoined thee to satiate the <span id="page_122">p.
122</span> <span id="iii.XVIII-Page_122"></span> other’s desire, that so
neither may the former blow appear to have befallen thee against thy
will. For thus, lost as he may be to shame, thou wilt be able to smite
him with a mortal blow, rather than if thou hadst smitten him with thine
hand; or if his shamelessness be still greater, thou wilt make him
gentle in proportion.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p15"></span>2. “And if any man will sue thee at the
law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also.” <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p17"></span>For not in the matter of blows only, but
of our goods also, He would have such forbearance exhibited. Wherefore
He again employs the same strong figure. <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) That is, as in the other case He
commands to overcome in suffering, so here again, by allowing ourselves
to be deprived of more than the wrong doer expected. However, He did not
put it so merely, but with something to enhance it: not saying, “give
thy cloak to him that asketh,” but “to him that would sue thee at the
law,” that is, “if he drag thee into court, and give thee trouble.”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p19"></span>And just as, after He had bidden not to
call another fool, nor to be angry without cause, He went on and
required more, in that He commanded to offer the right cheek also; even
so here, having said, “Agree with thine adversary,” He again amplifies
the precept. For now He orders us not only to give what the other would
have, but even to show forth a greater liberality.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p20"></span>“What then!” one may say, “am I to go
about naked?” We should not be naked, if we obeyed these sayings with
exactness; rather more abundantly than any should we be clothed. For
first, no one would attack men of this disposition; and next, if there
chanced to be any one so savage and ungentle, as to proceed even so far,
yet many more would be found to clothe him, who acted with such
self-denial, not with garments only, but even with their own flesh, if
it were possible.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p21"></span>Further: even though one were of
necessity to go about naked on account of this sort of self-denial,
neither so were it any disgrace. Since Adam too was “naked” <span
id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) in paradise, “and was not ashamed;”
and Isaiah was “naked, and barefoot,” and more glorious than all the
Jews; <span id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) and Joseph <span
id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) also, when he stripped himself, did
then more than ever shine forth. For to be thus naked is no evil, but to
be so clad, as we now are, with costly garments, this is both
disgraceful and ridiculous. For this cause, you see, those had praise of
God, but these He blames, both by prophets and by apostles.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p25"></span>Let us not therefore suppose His
injunctions impossible. Nay, for besides their expediency, they are very
easy, if we are sober-minded; and the profit of them is so great as to
be an exceeding help, not to ourselves only, but to those also who are
using us despitefully. And in this chiefly stands their excellence, that
while they induce us to suffer wrong, they by the same means teach them
also that do the wrong to control themselves. For while he on his part
thinks it a great thing to take what belongs to others, but thou
signifiest to him, that to thee it is easy to give even what he doth not
ask: while thou bringest in liberality for a counterpoise to his
meanness, and a wise moderation to his covetousness: consider what a
lesson he will get, being taught not by sayings, but by actual deeds, to
scorn vice and to seek after virtue.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p26"></span>For God will have us profitable not to
ourselves alone, but to all our neighbors as well. Now if thou givest,
and abstainest from suing, thou hast sought thine own advantage only;
but if thou give him some other thing, thou hast made him too better,
and so sent him away. Of this nature is salt, which is what He would
have them to be; seeing it both recruits <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) itself, and keeps all other bodies
with which it may associate: of this nature is light; for it shows
objects both to a man’s self and to all others. Forasmuch then as He
hath set thee in the rank of these things, help thou likewise him who is
sitting in darkness, and teach him that neither before did he take any
thing by force: persuade him that he hath done no despite. Yea, for thus
thou thyself also wilt be had in more respect and reverence, if thou
signify that thou gavest freely and wert not robbed. Make therefore his
sin, through thy moderation, an instance of thine own bounty.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p28"></span>3. And if thou think this a great thing,
wait, and thou wilt see clearly, that neither yet hast thou attained to
perfection. For not even here doth He stop with thee, who is laying down
the laws of patient endurance, but He proceeds even further, thus
saying,

<span id="iii.XVIII-p29"></span>“If any one shall compel thee to go one
mile, go with him twain.” <span id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p31"></span>Seest thou the height of self-denial? in
this at least, that after giving thy coat, and thy cloak, not even if
thine enemy should wish to use thy naked body for hardships and labors,
not even so (saith He), must thou forbid him. For He would have us
possess <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="iii.XVIII-Page_123"></span> all things in common, both our bodies
and our goods, as with them that are in need, so with them that insult
us: for the latter comes of manliness, the former of mercifulness.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p32"></span>Because of this, He said, “If any one
shall compel thee to go one mile, go with him twain:” again leading thee
higher up, and commanding thee to show forth the same kind of ambition.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p33"></span>For if the things of which He spake at
the beginning, being far less than these, have so great blessings
pronounced on them; consider what sort of portion awaits them, who duly
perform these, and what they become even before their rewards, in a
human and passible <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) body winning
entire freedom from passion. Since when neither insult, nor blows, nor
the spoiling of their property, galls them; while they give way to no
such thing, but rather add in large measure to their endurance; reflect
what kind of training their soul is undergoing.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p35"></span>On this account then, as in regard of
blows, as in regard of our goods, so in this case also, He hath bidden
us act. “For why,” saith He, “do I mention insult, and property? Though
he should want to make use of thy very own limbs for toil and weary
work, and this unjustly, do thou again conquer and overpass His unjust
desire.”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p36"></span>For “to compel” <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) is this, to drag unjustly and without
any reason, and by way of despite. Nevertheless, for this also be thou
ready in thy station, so as to suffer more than the other would fain do
to thee.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p38"></span>“Give to him that asketh thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away.” <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p40"></span>These last are less than what went
before; but marvel not, for this He is ever wont to do, mingling the
small with the great. And if these be little in comparison with those,
let them hearken, who take the goods of others, who distribute their own
among harlots, and kindle to themselves a double fire, both by the
unrighteous income, and by the pernicious outlay.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p41"></span>But by “borrowing,” here, He means not
the compact with usury, but the use merely. And elsewhere He even
amplifies it, saying that we should give to them, from whom we do not
expect to receive. <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p43"></span>4. “Ye have heard that it hath been
said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto
you, love your enemies, and pray for them which despitefully use you:
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you. That ye may
become like <span id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800) your Father which is
in Heaven; for He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good,
and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.” <span
id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p46"></span>See how He hath set the highest pinnacle
on our good deeds. For this is why He teaches not only to endure a blow,
but to offer the right cheek also; not only to add the cloak to the
coat, but to travel also two miles with him who compels thee to go one;
in order that thou mightest receive with all facility that which is much
more than these. “But what,” one may say, “is more than these?” Not even
to count as an enemy him who is doing these things: or rather even
somewhat else more than this. For He said not, “do not hate,” but
“love;” He said not, “do not injure,” but “do good.”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p47"></span>And if any one should examine
accurately, he will see that even to these things somewhat is added,
much greater than they are. For neither did He simply command to love,
but to pray.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p48"></span>Seest thou how many steps He hath
ascended, and how He hath set us on the very summit of virtue? Nay, mark
it, numbering from the beginning. A first step is, not to begin with
injustice: a second, after he hath begun, to vindicate one’s self by
equal retaliation; a third, not to do unto him that is vexing us the
same that one hath suffered, but to be quiet; a fourth, even to give
one’s self up to suffer wrongfully; a fifth, to give up yet more than
the other, who did the wrong, wishes; a sixth, not to hate him who hath
done so; a seventh, even to love him; an eighth, to do him good also; a
ninth, to entreat God Himself on his behalf. Seest thou, what height of
self-command? Wherefore glorious too, as we see, is the reward which it
hath. That is, because the thing enjoined was great, and needed a
fervent <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) soul, and much
earnestness, He appoints for it also such a reward, as for none of the
former. For He makes not mention here of earth, as with respect to the
meek; nor of comfort and mercy, as with regard to the mourners and the
merciful; nor of the kingdom of Heaven; but of that which was more
thrilling than all; our becoming like God, in <span id="page_124">p.
124</span> <span id="iii.XVIII-Page_124"></span> such wise as men might
become so. For He saith, “That ye may become like unto your Father which
is in Heaven.”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p50"></span>And observe, I pray thee, how neither in
this place, nor in the preceding parts, doth He call Him His own Father,
but in that instance, “God,” and “a great King,” when He was discoursing
about oaths, and here, “their Father.” And this He doth, as reserving
for the proper season what He had to say touching these points.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p51"></span>5. Then, bringing the likeness yet
closer, He saith,

<span id="iii.XVIII-p52"></span>“Because He maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain upon just and unjust.” <span
id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p54"></span>“For He too, so far from hating,” so He
speaks, “even pours benefits on those that insult Him.” Yet surely in no
respect is the case parallel, not only because of the surpassing nature
of His benefits, but also by reason of the excellence of His dignity.
For thou indeed art despised by thy fellow-slave, but He by His slave,
who hath also received ten thousand benefits from Him: and thou indeed
givest words, in praying for him, but He, deeds, very great and
marvellous, kindling the sun, and giving the annual showers.
“Nevertheless, even so I grant thee to be mine equal, in such wise as it
is possible for a man so to be.”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p55"></span>Hate not then the man that doeth thee
wrong, who is procuring thee such good things, and bringing thee to so
great honor. Curse not him that uses thee despitefully; for so hast thou
undergone the labor, but art deprived of the fruit; thou wilt bear the
loss, but lose the reward; which is of the utmost folly, having borne
the more grievous, not to bear what is less than it. “But how,” saith
one, “is it possible for this to take place?” Having seen God become
man, and descend so far, and suffer so much for thy sake, dost thou
still inquire and doubt, how it is possible to forgive thy
fellow-servants their injuriousness? Hearest thou not Him on the cross,
saying, “Forgive them, for they know not what they do?” <span
id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) Hearest thou not Paul, when he saith,
“He who is gone up on high, and is sitting on the right hand intercedeth
for us?” <span id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) Seest thou not that
even after the cross, and after He had been received up, He sent the
apostles unto the Jews that had slain Him, to bring them His ten
thousand blessings, and this, though they were to suffer ten thousand
terrors at their hands?

<span id="iii.XVIII-p58"></span>6. But hast thou been greatly wronged?
Nay, what hast thou endured like thy Lord, bound, beaten with whips,
with rods, spit upon by servants, enduring death, and that death, which
is of all deaths the most shameful, after ten thousand favors shown? And
even if thou hast been greatly wronged, for this very cause most of all
do thou do him good, that thou mayest both make thine own crown more
glorious, and set thy brother free from the worst infirmity. For so too
the physicians, when they are kicked, and shamefully handled by the
insane, then most of all pity them, and take measures for their perfect
cure, knowing that the insult comes of the extremity of their disease.
Now I bid thee too have the same mind touching them that are plotting
against thee, and do thou so treat them that are injuring thee. For it
is they above all that are diseased, it is they who are undergoing all
the violence. Deliver him then from this grievous contumely, and grant
him to let go his anger, and set him free from that grievous demon,
wrath. Yea, for if we see persons possessed by devils, we weep for them;
we do not seek to be ourselves also possessed.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p59"></span>Now let us do this too likewise with
respect to them that are angry; for in truth the enraged are like the
possessed; yea rather, are more wretched than they, being mad with
consciousness of it. Wherefore also their frenzy is without excuse.
Trample not then on the fallen, but rather pity him. For so, should we
see any one troubled with bile, blinded and giddy, and straining to cast
up this evil humor, we stretch forth a hand, and continue to support him
through his struggles, and though we stain our garments, we regard it
not, but seek one thing only, how we may set him free from this grievous
distress. This then let us do with respect to the angry also, and
continue to bear them up when vomiting and struggling; nor let him go,
until he put from him all the bitterness. And then shall he feel toward
thee the greatest thankfulness; when he is at rest, then he will know
clearly from how great trouble thou hast released him.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p60"></span>But why do I speak of the thanks from
him? for God will straightway crown thee, and will requite thee with ten
thousand honors, because thou hast freed thy brother from a grievous
disease; and that brother too will honor thee as a master, ever
reverencing thy forbearance.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p61"></span>Seest thou not the women that are in
travail, how they bite those that stand by, and they are not pained? or
rather they are pained, but bear it bravely, and sympathize with them
who are in sorrow and are torn by <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>
<span id="iii.XVIII-Page_125"></span> those pangs. These do thou too
emulate, and prove not softer than women. For after these women have
brought forth (for these men are more feeble minded than women), then
they will know thee to be a man in comparison. <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) of Heaven?

<span id="iii.XVIII-p63"></span>9. What then can we deserve, who are
commanded to emulate God, and are perhaps in a way not so much as to
equal the publicans? For if “to love them that love us” be the part of
publicans, sinners, and heathens: when we do not even this (and we do it
not, so long as we envy our brethren who are in honor), what penalty
shall we not incur, commanded as we are to surpass the scribes, and
taking our place below the heathens? How then shall we behold the
kingdom, I pray thee? how shall we set foot on that holy <span
id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="iii.XVIII-Page_126"></span>
threshold, who are not surpassing even the publicans? For this He
covertly signified, when He said, “Do not even the publicans the same?”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p64"></span>And this thing most especially we may
admire in His teaching, that while in each instance He sets down with
very great fullness the prizes of the conflicts; such as “to see God,”
and “to inherit the kingdom of Heaven,” and “to become sons of God,” and
“like God,” and “to obtain mercy,” and “to be comforted,” and “the great
reward:” if anywhere He must needs mention things grievous, He doth this
in a subdued tone. Thus in the first place, the name of hell He hath set
down once only in so many sentences; and in some other instances too, it
is with reserve that He corrects the hearer, and as though he were
managing His discourse rather in the way of shaming than threatening
him; where He saith, “do not even the publicans the same?” and, “if the
salt have lost its savor;” and, “he shall be called least in the kingdom
of Heaven.”

<span id="iii.XVIII-p65"></span>And there are places where He puts down
the sin itself by way of punishment, leaving to the hearer to infer the
grievousness of the punishment: as when He saith, “he hath committed
adultery with her in his heart;” and, “he that putteth away causeth her
to commit adultery;” and, “That which is more than these is of the evil
one.” For to them that have understanding, instead of the mention of the
punishment, the very greatness of the sin is sufficient for correction.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p66"></span>Wherefore also He here brings forward
the heathens and the publicans, by the quality of the person putting the
disciple to shame. Which Paul too did, saying, “Sorrow not, even as the
rest which have no hope;” <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) and,
“Even as the Gentiles which know not God.” <span
id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p69"></span>And to signify that He requires nothing
very overpowering, but a little more than was accustomed, He saith,

<span id="iii.XVIII-p70"></span>“Do not even the Gentiles <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) the same?” <span
id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) Yet nevertheless He stops not the
discourse at this, but makes it end with His rewards, and those good
hopes, saying,

<span id="iii.XVIII-p73"></span>“Be ye therefore perfect, as your
Heavenly Father.” <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811)

<span id="iii.XVIII-p75"></span>And He intersperses everywhere
abundantly the name of the heavens, by the very place thoroughly
elevating their minds. For as yet, I know not how, they were somewhat
weak and dull.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p76"></span>10. Let us then, bearing in mind all the
things which have been said, show forth great love even towards our
enemies; and let us cast away that ridiculous custom, to which many of
the more thoughtless give way, waiting for those that meet them to
address them first. Towards that which hath a great blessing, they have
no zeal; but what is ridiculous, that they follow after.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p77"></span>Wherefore now dost thou not address him
first? “Because he is waiting for this,” is the reply. Nay, for this
very reason most of all thou shouldest have sprung forward to him, that
thou mightest win the crown. “No,” saith he, “since this was his
object.” And what can be worse than this folly? That is, “Because this,”
saith he, “was his object;—to become procurer of a reward for me;—I will
not put my hand to what he has thus suggested.” Now if he first address
thee, thou gainest nothing, even though thou accost him. But if thou be
first to spring forward and speak to him, thou hast made thyself profit
of his pride, and hast gathered in a manner abundant fruit from his
obstinacy. <span id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) What is it then but
the utmost folly, when we are to reap so large fruit from bare words, to
give up the gain; and condemning him, to stumble at the very same thing?
For if thou blamest him for this, that he first waits to be addressed by
another, wherefore dost thou emulate that same thing which thou
accusest? That which thou saidst was evil, why art thou to imitate the
same as good? Seest thou how that nothing is more senseless than a man
who associates with wickedness? Wherefore, I entreat, let us flee this
evil and ridiculous practice. Yea, for ten thousand friendships hath
this pestilence overthrown, many enmities hath it wrought.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p79"></span>For this cause then let us anticipate
them. Since we who are commanded to take blows, and be compelled to
journey, <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) and to be stripped by
enemies, and to bear it; what kind of indulgence should we deserve,
exhibiting so great contentiousness in a mere formal address?

<span id="iii.XVIII-p81"></span>11. “Why,” saith one, “we are despised
and spit upon, the moment we have given him up this.” And in order that
man may not despise thee, dost thou offend God? And in order that thy
frenzied fellow servant may not despise thee, dost thou despise the
Lord, who hath bestowed on thee benefits so great? Nay, if it be amiss
that thine equal <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="iii.XVIII-Page_127"></span> should despise thee, how much more that
thou shouldest despise the God that made thee?

<span id="iii.XVIII-p82"></span>And together with this, consider that
other point also; that when he despises thee, he is at that very moment
employed in procuring to thee a greater reward. Since for God’s sake
thou submittest to it, because thou hast hearkened to His laws. And
this, to what kind of honor is it not equal? to how many diadems? Be it
my portion both to be insulted and despised for God’s sake, rather than
to be honored by all kings; for nothing, nothing is equal to this glory.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p83"></span>This then let us pursue, in such wise as
Himself commanded, and making no account of the things of men, but
showing forth perfect self restraint in all things, let us so direct our
own lives. For so even now, from this very time, we shall enjoy the good
things of the heavens, and of the crowns that are there, walking as
angels among men, going about in the earth like the angelic powers, and
abiding apart from all lust, from all turmoil.

<span id="iii.XVIII-p84"></span>And together with all these things we
shall receive also the unutterable blessings: unto which may we all
attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory, and power, and worship, with the unoriginate Father, and
the Holy and Good Spirit, now and always, even forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_786"></span>[120:787](1100026.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p4"></span>\[R.V. text, “him that is evil.”
Chrysostom interprets <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p4.1"></span>τ πονηρ</span>, “the evil one.” In verse 40
the R.V. renders “would go to law with thee.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_787"></span>[121:788](1100026.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p9.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p9.2"></span>το δικαου λγο</span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[121:789](1100026.htm#fr_788) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p13.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p13.2"></span>ντιφιλοτιμεσθαι</span> .

<span id="fn_789"></span>[122:790](1100026.htm#fr_789) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p16"></span>[Matt. v.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span id="iii.XVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[122:791](1100026.htm#fr_790) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p18"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p18.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p18.2"></span>περβολν</span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[122:792](1100026.htm#fr_791) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p22"></span>[Gen. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#025)<span id="iii.XVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[122:793](1100026.htm#fr_792) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p23"></span>[Isa.
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003)<span id="iii.XVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[122:794](1100026.htm#fr_793) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p24"></span>[Gen. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#012)<span id="iii.XVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[122:795](1100026.htm#fr_794) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p27"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p27.1"></span>συγκροτε</span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[122:796](1100026.htm#fr_795) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p30"></span>[Matt. v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#041)<span id="iii.XVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[123:797](1100026.htm#fr_796) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p34"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p34.1"></span>παθητ</span>. There is a paranomasia in the
original, indicated here by the word “passible.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_797"></span>[123:798](1100026.htm#fr_797) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p37"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p37.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p37.2"></span>γγαρεσαι</span>. \[R.V. marg., “impress,” a
legal act of oppression. The Greek work is of Persian origin, and was
transferred into Latin also; see Vulgate, [Matt. v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#041)<span
id="iii.XVIII-p37.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_798"></span>[123:799](1100026.htm#fr_798) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p39"></span>[Matt. v.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042)<span id="iii.XVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[123:800](1100026.htm#fr_799) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p42"></span>[Luke vi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035)<span id="iii.XVIII-p42.1"></span>.
“Do good and lend, hoping for nothing again.” \[But the R.V. renders
“never despairing,” with the margin, “Some ancient authorities read
*despairing of no man*.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_800"></span>[123:801](1100026.htm#fr_800) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p44"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p44.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p44.2"></span>μοιοι</span>, Chrys. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XVIII-p44.3"></span>υο</span>, rec. text.
\[For the former reading in the New Testament there is no <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XVIII-p44.4"></span>ms</span>. authority.—R.\]

<span id="fn_801"></span>[123:802](1100026.htm#fr_801) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p44.5"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p45"></span>[Matt. v.
43-45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)<span
id="iii.XVIII-p45.1"></span>. \[The briefer form of [Matt.
5.44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="iii.XVIII-p45.2"></span>
is now accepted by critical editors (so Vulgate). The longer reading is
from [Luke 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#028)<span id="iii.XVIII-p45.3"></span>.
Comp. R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_802"></span>[123:803](1100026.htm#fr_802) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p49"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p49.1"></span>νεανικ</span>.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[124:804](1100026.htm#fr_803) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p53"></span>[Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iii.XVIII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[124:805](1100026.htm#fr_804) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p56"></span>[Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="iii.XVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[124:806](1100026.htm#fr_805) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p57"></span>[Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="iii.XVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[125:807](1100026.htm#fr_806) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p62"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p62.1"></span>σε τν νδρα εσονται</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XVIII-p62.2"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XVIII-p62.3"></span>ψδα</span>.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[126:808](1100026.htm#fr_807) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p67"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="iii.XVIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[126:809](1100026.htm#fr_808) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p68"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#005)<span id="iii.XVIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[126:810](1100026.htm#fr_809) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p71"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p71.1"></span>τελωνα</span>, rec. text. \[But <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XVIII-p71.2"></span>ο θνικο</span>, the
reading accepted by Chrysostom, is supported by the best authorities of
every class. Comp. R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_810"></span>[126:811](1100026.htm#fr_810) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p71.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p72"></span>[Matt. v.
47](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#047)<span id="iii.XVIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[126:812](1100026.htm#fr_811) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p74"></span>[Matt. v.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)<span id="iii.XVIII-p74.1"></span>.
\[The text of the Homily has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p74.2"></span>γνεσθε</span>, which is probably imperative,
but in [Matt. v. 48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)<span
id="iii.XVIII-p74.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p74.4"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p74.5"></span>σεσθε</span> is the undisputed reading:
comp. R.V., “Ye therefore shall be perfect,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_812"></span>[126:813](1100026.htm#fr_812) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p78"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p78.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p78.2"></span>πονοα</span>.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[126:814](1100026.htm#fr_813) <span
id="iii.XVIII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XVIII-p80"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p80.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XVIII-p80.2"></span>γγαρευσθαι</span>. \[See note on sec.
3.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIX](1100027)
