[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100050)  [Next](1100052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLIII"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIII.</span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)<span
id="iii.XLIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p3"></span>*“Then certain of the Scribes and
Pharisees answered Him, saying, Master, we would see a sign from Thee.
But He answered and said,* <span id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739)
*An evil and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign, and there shall
no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas.”*

<span id="iii.XLIII-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p5.1"></span>Could</span> then anything be more foolish
than these men (not more impious only), who after so many miracles, as
though none had been wrought, say, “We would see a sign from Thee?” With
what intent then did they so speak? That they might lay hold of Him
again. For since by His words He had stopped their mouths, once and
twice <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="iii.XLIII-Page_267"></span> and often, and had checked their
shameless tongue, they come to His works again. At which also the
evangelist marvelling again, said,

<span id="iii.XLIII-p6"></span>“Then certain of the scribes answered
Him, asking a sign.”

<span id="iii.XLIII-p7"></span>“Then,” when? When they ought to be
stooping before Him, to admire, to be amazed and give way, “then” they
desist not from their wickedness.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p8"></span>And see their words too, teeming with
flattery and dissimulation. For they thought to draw Him towards them in
that way. And now they insult, now they flatter Him; now calling Him a
demoniac, now again “Master,” both out of an evil mind, how contrary
soever the words they speak.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p9"></span>Wherefore also He rebukes them severely.
And when they were questioning Him roughly and insulting Him, He
reasoned with them gently; when they were flattering; reproachfully, and
with great severity; implying that He is superior to either passion, and
is neither at the one time moved to anger, nor at the other softened by
flattery. And see His reproach, that it is not merely hard words, but
contains a demonstration of their wickedness. For what saith He?

<span id="iii.XLIII-p10"></span>“An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign.” Now what He saith is to this effect: What marvel
if ye behave so to me who have been hitherto unknown to you when even to
the Father, of whom ye have had so much experience, ye have done the
very same? forsaking Him, ye have run unto the devils, drawing to
yourselves wicked lovers. With this Ezekiel too was continually
upbraiding them. <span id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740)

<span id="iii.XLIII-p12"></span>Now by these sayings He signified
Himself to be of one accord with His Father, and them to be doing
nothing new; He was also unfolding their secrets, how with hypocrisy and
as enemies they were making their demand. Therefore He called them “an
evil generation,” because they have been always ungrateful towards their
benefactors; because upon favors they become worse, which belongs to
extreme wickedness.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p13"></span>And He called it “adulterous,” declaring
both their former and their present unbelief; whereby He implies Himself
again to be equal to the Father, if at least the not believing Him makes
it “adulterous.”

<span id="iii.XLIII-p14"></span>2. Then, after His reproach, what saith
He? “There shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of Jonas the
prophet.” Now is He striking the first note of the doctrine of His
resurrection, and confirming it by the type.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p15"></span>What then? one may say; was no sign
given it? None was given to it on asking. For not to bring in them did
He work His signs (for He knew them to be hardened), but in order to
amend others. Either then this may be said, or that they were not to
receive such a sign as that was. For a sign did befall them, when by
their own punishment they learnt His power. Here then He speaks as
threatening, and with this very meaning obscurely conveyed: as if He
said, innumerable benefits have I showed forth, none of these hath drawn
you to me, neither were ye willing to adore my power. Ye shall know
therefore my might by the contrary tokens, when ye shall see your city
cast down to the ground, the walls also dismantled, the temple become a
ruin; when ye shall be cast out both from your former citizenship and
freedom, and shall again go about everywhere, houseless and in exile.
(For all these things came to pass after the cross.) These things
therefore shall be to you for great signs. And indeed it is an exceeding
great sign, that their ills remain unchanged; that although ten thousand
have attempted it, no one hath been able to reverse <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741) the judgment once gone forth
against them.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p17"></span>All this however He saith not, but
leaves it to after time to make it clear to them, but for the present He
is making trial of <span id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742) the
doctrine of His resurrection, which they were to come to know by the
things which they should afterwards suffer.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p19"></span>“For as Jonas,” saith He, “was three
days and three nights in the whale’s belly, so shall the Son of Man be
three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.” <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) Thus, He said not indeed openly
that He should rise again, since they would have even laughed Him to
scorn, but He intimated it in such manner, that they might believe Him
to have foreknown it. For as to their being aware of it, they say to
Pilate, “That deceiver said,” these are their words, “while He was yet
alive, After three days I will rise again;” <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) and yet we know His disciples were
ignorant of this; even as they had been beforehand more void of
understanding than these: wherefore also these became self-condemned.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p22"></span>But see how exactly He expresses it,
even though in a dark saying. For He said not, “In the earth,” but, “In
the heart of the earth;” that He might designate His very sepulchre, and
that no one might suspect a mere semblance. <span
id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) And for this intent too <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="iii.XLIII-Page_268"></span> did He
allow three days, that the fact of His death might be believed. For not
by the cross only doth He make it certain, and by the sight of all men,
but also by the time of those days. For to the resurrection indeed all
succeeding time was to bear witness; but the cross, unless it had at the
time many signs bearing witness to it, would have been disbelieved; and
with this disbelief would have gone utter disbelief of the resurrection
also. Therefore He calls it also a sign. But had He not been crucified,
the sign would not have been given. For this cause too He brings forward
the type, that the truth may be believed. For tell me, was Jonah in the
whale’s belly a mere appearance? Nay, thou canst not say so. Therefore
neither was Christ in the heart of the earth such. For surely the type
is not in truth, and the truth in mere appearance. For this cause we
every where show forth His death, both in the mysteries, and in baptism,
and in all the rest. Therefore Paul also cries with a clear voice, “God
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746)

<span id="iii.XLIII-p25"></span>Whence it is clear, that they who are
diseased in Marcion’s way are children of the devil, blotting out these
truths, to avoid the annulling whereof Christ did so many things, while
to have them annulled the devil took such manifold pains: I mean, His
cross and His passion.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p26"></span>3. Therefore He said elsewhere also,
“Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up:” <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747) and, “The days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away from them: <span
id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748) and here, “There shall no sign be
given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet:” declaring both that He
should die <span id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749) and “the ox that
knoweth his owner, and the ass that remembereth his crib.” <span
id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) Even so here too, when He had by a
comparison set forth their perverseness, He speaks afterwards of their
punishment also.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p31"></span>What then can the saying mean? As the
possessed, saith He, when delivered from that infirmity, should they be
at all remiss, draw upon themselves their delusion more grievous than
ever: even so is it with you. For before also ye were possessed by a
devil, when ye were worshipping idols, and were slaying your sons to the
devils, exhibiting great madness; nevertheless I forsook you not, but
cast out that devil by the prophets; and again in my own person I am
come, willing to cleanse you more entirely. Since then you will not
attend, but have wrecked yourselves in greater wickedness (for to kill
prophets was a crime not nearly so great and grievous as to slay Him);
therefore your sufferings will be more grievous than the former, those
at Babylon, I mean, and in Egypt, and under the first Antiochus. Because
what things befell them in the time of Vespasian and Titus, were very
far more grievous than those. Wherefore also He said, “There shall be
great tribulation, such as never was, neither shall be.” <span
id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751) But not this only doth the
illustration declare, but that they should be also utterly destitute of
all virtue, and more assailable by the power of the devils, than at that
time. For then even although they sinned, yet were there also among them
such as acted uprightly, and God’s providence was present with them, and
the grace of the Spirit, tending, correcting, fulfilling all its part;
but now of this guardianship too they shall be utterly deprived; so He
tells them; so that there is now both a greater scarcity <span
id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span id="iii.XLIII-Page_269"></span> of
virtue, and a more intense affliction, and a more tyrannical operation
of the devils.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p33"></span>Ye know accordingly even in our
generation, when he who surpassed all in impiety, I mean Julian, was
transported with his fury, how they ranged themselves with the heathens,
how they courted their party. So that, even if they seem to be in some
small degree chastened now, the fear of the emperors makes them quiet;
since, if it were not for that, far worse than the former had been their
daring. For in all their other evil works they surpass their
predecessors; sorceries, magic arts, impurities, they exhibit in great
excess. And amongst the rest, moreover, strong as is the curb which
holds them down, they have often made seditions, and risen up against
kings, which has resulted in their being pierced through with the worst
of evils.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p34"></span>Where now are they that seek after
signs? Let them hear that a considerate mind is needed, and if this be
wanting, signs are of no profit. See, for instance, how the Ninevites
without signs believed, while these, after so many miracles, grew worse,
and made themselves an habitation of innumerable devils, and brought on
themselves ten thousand calamities; and very naturally. For when a man,
being once delivered from his ills, fails to be corrected, he will
suffer far worse than before. Yea, therefore He said, “he finds no
rest,” to indicate, that positively and of necessity such an one will be
overtaken by the ambush of the devils. Since surely by these two things
he ought to have been sobered, by his former sufferings, and by his
deliverance; or rather a third thing also is added, the threat of having
still worse to endure. But yet by none of these were they made better.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p35"></span>5. All this might be seasonably said,
not of them only, but of us also, when after having been
enlightened, <span id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752) and delivered
from our former ills, we again cleave unto the same wickedness, for more
grievous also thenceforth will be the punishment of our subsequent sins.
Therefore to the sick of the palsy also Christ said, “Behold, thou art
made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee;” <span
id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753) and this to a man who was
thirty-eight years in his infirmity. And what, one might ask, was he to
suffer worse than this? Something far worse, and more intolerable. For
far be it from us, that we should endure as much as we are capable of
enduring. For God is at no loss for inflictions. For according to the
greatness of His mercy, so also is His wrath.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p38"></span>With this He charges Jerusalem also by
Ezekiel. “I saw thee,” saith He, “polluted in blood; and I washed thee,
and anointed thee; and thou hadst renown for thy beauty; and thou
pouredst out thy fornications,” saith He, “on those who dwell near
thee,” <span id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754) wherefore also the
more grievous are His threatenings to thee when thou sinnest.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p40"></span>But from hence infer not thy punishment
only, but also the boundless longsuffering of God. How often at least
have we put our hands to the same evil deeds, and yet He suffers long!
But let us not be sanguine, but fear; since Pharaoh too, had he been
taught by the first plague, would not have experienced the later ones;
he would not afterwards have been drowned, his host and all together.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p41"></span>And this I say, because I know many, who
like Pharaoh are even now saying, “I know not God,” <span
id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755) and making those that are in their
power cleave to the clay and to the bricks. How many, though God bids
them assauge their “threatening,” <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) cannot bear so much as to relax the
toil!

<span id="iii.XLIII-p44"></span>“But we have no Red Sea now, to pass
through afterwards.” But we have a sea of fire, a sea not like that,
either in kind or in size, but far greater and fiercer, having its waves
of fire, of some strange and horrible fire. A great abyss is there, of
most intolerable flame. Since everywhere fire may be seen roving quickly
round, like some savage wild beast. And if here this sensible and
material fire leaped like a wild beast out of the furnace, and sprang
upon those who were sitting without, <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) what will not that other fire do to
such as have fallen into it?

<span id="iii.XLIII-p46"></span>Concerning that day, hear the prophets,
saying, “The day of the Lord is incurable, full of anger and
wrath.” <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) For there will be
none to stand by, none to rescue, nowhere the face of Christ, so mild
and calm. But as those who work in the mines are delivered over to
certain cruel men, and see none of their friends, but those only that
are set over them; so will it be then also: or rather not so, but even
far more grievous. For here it is possible to go unto the king, and
entreat, and free the condemned person: but there, no longer; for He
permits it not, but they continue in the scorching torment, <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) and in so great anguish, as it is
not possible for words to tell. For if, when any are in flames here, no
speech can describe their sharp pangs, much less theirs, who suffer it
in that place: since here indeed all is over in a brief point <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="iii.XLIII-Page_270"></span> of
time, but in that place there is burning indeed, but what is burnt is
not consumed.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p49"></span>What then shall we do there? For to my
self also do I say these things.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p50"></span>6. “But if thou,” saith one, “who art
our teacher, speakest so of thyself, I care no more; for what wonder,
should I be punished?” Nay, I entreat, let no man seek this consolation;
for this is no refreshment at all. For tell me; was not the devil an
incorporeal power? Was he not superior to men? Yet he fell away. Is
there any one who will derive consolation from being punished along with
him? By no means. What of all who were in Egypt? did they not see those
also punished who were in high places, and every house in mourning? Were
they then hereby refreshed, and comforted? No surely; and it is manifest
by what they did afterwards, as men tortured by some kind of fire,
rising up together against the king, and compelling him to cast out the
people of the Hebrews.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p51"></span>Yea, and very unmeaning is this saying,
to suppose that it gives comfort to be punished with all men, to say,
“As all, so I too.” For why should I speak of hell? Think, I pray you,
of those that are seized with gout, how, when they are racked by sharp
pain, though you show them ten thousand suffering worse, they do not so
much as take it into their mind. For the intensity of their anguish
allows not their reason any leisure for thinking of others, and so
finding consolation. Let us not then feed ourselves with these cold
hopes. For to receive consolation from the ills of our neighbors, takes
place in ordinary sufferings; but when the torment is excessive, and all
our inward parts full of tempest, and the soul is now come to be unable
so much as to know itself, whence shall it derive consolation? So that
all these sayings are an absurdity, and fables of foolish children. For
this, of which thou speakest, takes place in dejection, and in moderate
dejection, when we are told, “the same thing hath befallen such an one;”
but sometimes not even in dejection: now if in that case it hath no
strength, much less in the anguish and burden unspeakable, which “the
gnashing of teeth” indicates.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p52"></span>And I know that I am galling you, and
giving you pain by these words; but what can I do? For I would fain not
speak thus, but be conscious of virtue both in myself, and in all of
you; but since we are in sins, the more part of us, who will grant me
ability to pain you indeed, and to penetrate the understanding of them
that hear me? Then might I so be at rest. But now I fear lest any
despise my sayings, and their punishments become the greater for their
indifferent way of hearing. Since, when a master utters a threat, should
one of the fellow-servants hear and make light of his menace, not
without punishment would he hasten by him, provoked as he is, but rather
it would be a ground for increasing his chastisement. Wherefore I
entreat you, let us pierce our own hearts, when we hear His sayings
regarding hell. For nothing is more delightful than this discourse, by
how much nothing is more bitter than the reality. But how delightful to
be told of hell? one may ask. Because it were so far from delight to
fall into hell, which result, our words that appear so galling, keep
off. And before this they furnish another pleasure: in that they brace
up our souls, and make us more reverent, and elevate the mind, and give
wings to the thoughts, and cast out the desires that so mischievously
beset us; and the thing becomes a cure.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p53"></span>7. Wherefore, to proceed, together with
the punishment let me speak also of the shame. For as the Jews shall
then be condemned by the Ninevites, so we too by many that seem beneath
us now.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p54"></span>Let us imagine then how great the
mockery, how great the condemnation; let us imagine, and cast some
foundation at length, some door of repentance.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p55"></span>To myself I say these things, to myself
first I give this advice, and let no one be angry, as though he were
condemned. Let us enter upon the narrow way. How long shall it be
luxury? how long sloth? Have we not had enough of indolence, mirth,
procrastination? Will it not be the same over again, feasting, and
surfeiting, and expense, and wealth, and acquisitions, and buildings?
And what is the end? Death. What is the end? Ashes, and dust, and
coffins, and worms.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p56"></span>Let us show forth then a new kind of
life. Let us make earth, heaven; let us hereby show the Greeks, of how
great blessings they are deprived. For when they behold in us good
conversation, they will look upon the very face of the kingdom of
Heaven. Yea, when they see us gentle, pure from wrath, from evil desire,
from envy, from covetousness, rightly fulfilling all our other duties,
they will say, “If the Christians are become angels here, what will they
be after their departure hence? if where they are strangers they shine
so bright, how great will they become when they shall have won their
native land!” Thus they too will be reformed, and the word of godliness
“will have free course,” <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) not
less than in the apostles’ times. <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>
<span id="iii.XLIII-Page_271"></span> For if they, being twelve,
converted entire cities and countries; were we all to become teachers by
our careful conduct, imagine how high our cause will be exalted. For not
even a dead man raised so powerfully attracts the Greek, as a person
practising self-denial. At that indeed he will be amazed, but by this he
will be profited. That is done, and is past away; but this abides, and
is constant culture to his soul.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p58"></span>Let us take heed therefore to ourselves,
that we may gain them also. I say nothing burdensome. I say not, do not
marry. I say not, forsake cities, and withdraw thyself from public
affairs; but being engaged in them, show virtue. Yea, and such as are
busy in the midst of cities, I would fain have more approved than such
as have occupied the mountains. Wherefore? Because great is the profit
thence arising. “For no man lighteth a candle, and setteth it under the
bushel.” <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) Therefore I would
that all the candles were set upon the candlestick, that the light might
wax great.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p60"></span>Let us kindle then His fire; let us
cause them that are sitting in darkness to be delivered from their
error. And tell me not, “I have a wife, and children belonging to me,
and am master of a household, and cannot duly practise all this.” For
though thou hadst none of these, yet if thou be careless, all is lost;
though thou art encompassed with all these, yet if thou be earnest, thou
shalt attain unto virtue. For there is but one thing that is wanted, the
preparation of a generous mind; and neither age, nor poverty, nor
wealth, nor reverse of fortune, nor anything else, will be able to
impede thee. Since in fact both old and young, and men having wives, and
bringing up children, and working at crafts, and serving as soldiers,
have duly performed all that is enjoined. For so Daniel was young, and
Joseph a slave, and Aquila wrought at a craft, and the woman who sold
purple was over a workshop, and another was the keeper of a prison, and
another a centurion, as Cornelius; and another in ill health, as
Timothy; and another a runaway, as Onesimus; but nothing proved an
hindrance to any of these, but all were approved, both men and women,
both young and old, both slaves and free, both soldiers and people.

<span id="iii.XLIII-p61"></span>Let us not then make vain pretexts, but
let us provide a thoroughly good mind, and whatsoever we may be, we
shall surely attain to virtue, and arrive at the good things to come; by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be
unto the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory, might, honor, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[266:1740](1100051.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p4"></span>\[“Unto them” is omitted in the Greek
text here, against all our New Testament codices.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[267:1741](1100051.htm#fr_1740) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p11"></span>See [Ezek. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#023)<span id="iii.XLIII-p11.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[267:1742](1100051.htm#fr_1741) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p16"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p16.1"></span>διορθσαι</span>.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[267:1743](1100051.htm#fr_1742) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p18"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p18.1"></span>γυμνζει</span>.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[267:1744](1100051.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p20"></span>[Matt. xxii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040)<span id="iii.XLIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[267:1745](1100051.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p21"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)<span id="iii.XLIII-p21.1"></span>.
\[The citation is not exact: at the close a different verb, in a
different tense, is given.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[267:1746](1100051.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p23"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p23.1"></span>δκησιν</span>: so <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p23.2"></span>Δοκητα</span> was the name of those heretics
who denied the reality of our Lord’s incarnation and death.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[268:1747](1100051.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p24"></span>[Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="iii.XLIII-p24.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Far be it from me to glory,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[268:1748](1100051.htm#fr_1747) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p27"></span>[John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iii.XLIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[268:1749](1100051.htm#fr_1748) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p28"></span>[Matt. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)<span id="iii.XLIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[268:1750](1100051.htm#fr_1749) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p29"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p29.1"></span>πεσεται</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p29.2"></span>στηθοδεσμδο</span>.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[268:1751](1100051.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p30"></span>[Is. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)<span id="iii.XLIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[268:1752](1100051.htm#fr_1751) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p32"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)<span id="iii.XLIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[269:1753](1100051.htm#fr_1752) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p36"></span>[Heb. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)<span id="iii.XLIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[269:1754](1100051.htm#fr_1753) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p37"></span>[John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span id="iii.XLIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[269:1755](1100051.htm#fr_1754) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p39"></span>[Ezek.
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#009),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026)<span id="iii.XLIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[269:1756](1100051.htm#fr_1755) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p42"></span>[Exod. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002)<span id="iii.XLIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[269:1757](1100051.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p43"></span>[Ephes. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[269:1758](1100051.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p45"></span>[Dan. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#022)<span id="iii.XLIII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[269:1759](1100051.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p47"></span>[Is. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[269:1760](1100051.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p48"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p48.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIII-p48.2"></span>ποτηγανιζμενοι</span>.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[270:1761](1100051.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p57"></span>[2 Thess. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001)<span id="iii.XLIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[271:1762](1100051.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="iii.XLIII-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIII-p59"></span>[Matt.
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015), [Luke
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#033)<span
id="iii.XLIII-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLIV](1100052)
