[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100089)  [Next](1100091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXXII"></span> <span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXII-Page_492"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#012)<span
id="iii.LXXXII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p3"></span>*“And Jesus stood before the governor;
and the governor asked Him, saying, Art thou the king of the Jews? And
Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest. And when He was accused of the chief
priests and elders, He answered nothing.”* <span
id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059)

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p5.1"></span>Seest</span> thou what He is first asked?
which thing most of all they were continually bringing forward in every
way? For since they saw Pilate making no account of the matters of the
law, they direct their accusation to the state charges. So likewise did
they in the case of the apostles, ever bringing forward these things,
and saying that they were going about proclaiming king one Jesus, <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060) speaking as of a mere man, and
investing them with a suspicion of usurpation.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p7"></span>Whence it is manifest, that both the
rending the garment and the amazement were a pretense. But all things
they got up, and plied, in order to bring Him to death.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p8"></span>This at any rate Pilate then asked. What
then said Christ? “Thou sayest.” He confessed that He was a king, but a
heavenly king, which elsewhere also He spake more clearly, replying to
Pilate, “My kingdom is not of this world;” <span
id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061) that neither they nor this man
should have an excuse for accusing Him of such things. And He gives a
reason that cannot be gainsaid, saying, “If I were of this world, my
servants would fight, that I should not be delivered.” For this purpose
I say, in order to refute this suspicion, He both paid tribute, <span
id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) and commanded others to pay it, and
when they would make Him a king, He fled. <span
id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063)

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p12"></span>Wherefore then did he not bring forward
these things, it may be said, at that time, when accused of usurpation?
Because having the proofs from His acts, of His power, His meekness, His
gentleness, beyond number, they were willfully blind, and dealt
unfairly, and the tribunal was corrupt. For these reasons then He
replies to nothing, but holds His peace, yet answering briefly (so as
not to get the reputation of arrogance from continual silence) when the
high priest adjured Him, when the governor asked, but in reply to their
accusations He no longer saith anything; for He was not now likely to
persuade them. Even as the prophet declaring this self-same thing from
of old, said, “In His humiliation His judgment was taken away.” <span
id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064)

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p14"></span>At these things the governor marvelled,
and indeed it was worthy of admiration to see Him showing such great
forbearance, and holding His peace, Him that had countless things to
say. For neither did they accuse Him from knowing of any evil thing in
Him, but from jealousy and envy only. At least when they had set false
witness, wherefore, having nothing to say, did they still urge their
point? and when they saw Judas was dead, and that Pilate had washed his
hands of it, why were they not pricked with remorse. For indeed He did
many things even at the very time, that they might recover themselves,
but by none were they amended.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p15"></span>What then saith Pilate? “Hearest thou
not how many things these witness against thee?” <span
id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065) He wished that He should defend
Himself and be acquitted, wherefore also he said these things; but since
He answered nothing, he devises another thing again.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p17"></span>Of what nature was this? It was a
custom for them to release one of the condemned, and by this means he
attempted to deliver Him. For if you are not willing to release Him as
innocent, yet as guilty pardon Him for the feast’s sake.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p18"></span>Seest thou order reversed? For the
petition in behalf of the condemned it was customary to be with the
people, and the granting it with the rulers; but now the contrary hath
come to pass, and the ruler petitions the people; and not even so do
they become gentle, but grow more savage and bloodthirsty, driven to
frenzy by the passion of envy. For neither had they whereof they should
accuse Him, and this though He was silent, but they were refuted even
then by reason of the abundance of His righteous deeds, and being silent
He overcame them that say ten thousand things, and are maddened.

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span id="iii.LXXXII-Page_493"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p19"></span>“And when he was set down on the
judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, have thou nothing to do
with this just man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of Him.” <span id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066) See what a
thing takes place again, sufficient to recall them all. For together
with the proof from the things done, the dream too was no small thing.
And wherefore doth he not see it himself? Either because she was more
worthy, or because he, if he had seen it, would not have been equally
believed; or would not so much as have told it. Therefore it was ordered
that the wife should see it, so that it might be manifest to all. And
she doth not merely see it, but also suffers many things, that from his
feeling towards his wife, the man may be made more reluctant to the
murder. And the time too contributed not a little, for on the very night
she saw it.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p21"></span>But it was not safe, it may be said,
for him to let Him go, because they said He made Himself a king. He
ought then to have sought for proofs, and a conviction, and for all the
things that are infallible signs of an usurpation, as, for instance,
whether He levied forces, whether He collected money, whether He forged
arms, whether He attempted any other such thing. But he is led away at
random, therefore neither doth Christ acquit him of the blame, in
saying, “He that betrayeth me unto thee hath greater sin.” <span
id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067) So that it was from weakness that
he yielded and scourged Him, and delivered Him up.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p23"></span>He then was unmanly and weak; but the
chief priests wicked and criminal. For since he had found out a device,
namely, the law of the feast requiring him to release a condemned
person, what do they contrive in opposition to that? “They persuaded the
multitude,” it is said, “that they should ask Barabbas.” <span
id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068)

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p25"></span>2. See how much care he taketh for them
to relieve them from blame, and how much diligence they employed, so as
not to leave to themselves so much as a shadow of an excuse. For which
was right? to let go the acknowledged criminal, or Him about whose guilt
there was a question? For, if in the case of acknowledged offenders it
was fit there should be a liberation, much more in those of whom there
was a doubt. For surely this man did not seem to them worse than
acknowledged murderers. For on this account, it is not merely said they
had a robber; but one noted, that is, who was infamous in wickedness,
who had perpetrated countless murders. But nevertheless even him did
they prefer to the Saviour of the world, and neither did they reverence
the season because it was holy, nor the laws of humanity, nor any other
thing of the kind, but envy had once for all blinded them. And besides
their own wickedness, they corrupt the people also, that for deceiving
them too they might suffer the most extreme punishment.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p26"></span>Since therefore they ask for the other,
he saith, “What shall I do then with the Christ,” <span
id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069) in this way desiring to put them to
the blush, by giving them the power to choose, that at least out of
shame they might ask for Him, and the whole should be of their
bountifulness. For though to say, He had not done wrong, made them more
contentious, yet to require that He should be saved out of humanity,
carries with it persuasion and entreaty that cannot be gainsaid.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p28"></span>But even then they said, “Crucify Him.
But he said, why, what evil hath He done? but they cried out
exceedingly, <span id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070) let Him be
crucified. But he, when he saw that he profited nothing, washed his
hands, saying, I am innocent.” Why then didst thou deliver Him up? Why
didst thou not rescue Him, as the centurion did Paul. <span
id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071) For that man too was aware that he
would please the Jews; and a sedition had taken place on his account,
and a tumult, nevertheless he stood firm against all. But not so this
man, but he was extremely unmanly and weak, and all were corrupt
together. For neither did this man stand firm against the multitude, nor
the multitude against the Jews, <span
id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072) and in every way their excuse was
taken away. For they “cried out exceedingly,” that is, cried out the
more, “Let Him be crucified.” For they desired not only to put Him to
death, but also that it should be on a charge of wickedness, and though
the judge was contradicting them, they continued to cry out the same
thing.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p32"></span>Seest thou how many things Christ did
in order to recover them? For like as He often times checked Judas, so
likewise did He restrain these men too, both throughout all His Gospel,
and at the very time of His condemnation. For surely when they saw the
ruler and the judge washing his hands of it, <span id="page_494">p.
494</span> <span id="iii.LXXXII-Page_494"></span> and saying, “I am
innocent of this blood,” they should have been moved to compunction both
by what was said, and by what was done, as well when they saw Judas had
hanged himself, as when they saw Pilate himself entreating them to take
another in the place of Him. For when the accuser and traitor condemns
himself, and he who gives sentence puts off from himself the guilt, and
such a vision appears the very night, and even as condemned he begs Him
off, what kind of plea will they have? For if they were not willing that
He should be innocent, yet they should not have preferred to him even a
robber, one that was acknowledged to be such, and very notorious.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p33"></span>What then did they? When they saw the
judge washing his hands, and saying, “I am innocent,” they cried out
“His blood be on us, and on our children.” <span
id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073) Then at length when they had given
sentence against themselves, he yielded that all should be done.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p35"></span>See here too their great madness. For
passion and wicked desire are like this. They suffer not men to see
anything of what is right. For be it that ye curse yourselves; why do
you draw down the curse upon your children also?

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p36"></span>Nevertheless, the lover of man, though
they acted with so much madness, both against themselves, and against
their children, so far from confirming their sentence upon their
children, confirmed it not even on them, but from the one and from the
other received those that repented, and counts them worthy of good
things beyond number. For indeed even Paul was of them, and the
thousands that believed in Jerusalem; for, “thou seest it is said,
brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe.” <span
id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074) And if some continued *in their
sin*, to themselves let them impute their punishment.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p38"></span>“Then released he Barabbas unto them,
but Jesus, when he had scourged Him, he delivered to be
crucified.” <span id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075)

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p40"></span>And wherefore did he scourge Him.
Either as one condemned, or willing to invest the judgment with due
form, or to please them. And yet he ought to have resisted them. For
indeed even before this he had said, “Take ye Him, and judge Him
according to your law.” <span id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076) And
there were many things that might have held back him and those men, the
signs and the miracles, and the great patience of Him, who was suffering
these things, and above all His untold silence. For since both by His
defense of Himself, and by His prayers, He had shown His humanity, again
He showeth His exaltedness and the greatness of His nature, both by His
silence, and by His contemning what is said; by all leading them on to
marvel at Himself. <span id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077) But to
none of these things did they give way.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p43"></span>3. For when once the reasoning powers
are overwhelmed as it were by intoxication or some wild insanity, it
would be hard for the sinking soul to rise again, if it be not very
noble.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p44"></span>For it is fearful, it is fearful to
give place to these wicked passions, wherefore it were fit in every way
to ward off and repel their entering in. For when they have laid hold of
the soul, and got the dominion over it, like as fire lighting upon a
wood, so do they kindle the flame to a blaze.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p45"></span>Wherefore I entreat you to do all
things so as to fence off their entrance; and not by comforting
yourselves with this heartless reasoning to bring in upon yourselves all
wickedness, saying, what of this? What of that? For countless ills have
their birth from hence. For the devil, being depraved, makes use of much
craft, and exertion, and self-abasement for the ruin of men, and begins
his attack on them with things of a more trifling nature.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p46"></span>And mark it, he desired to bring Saul
into superstition of witchcraft. But if he had counselled this at the
beginning, the other would not have given heed; for how should he, who
was even driving them out? Therefore gently and by little and little he
leads him on to it. For when he had disobeyed Samuel, and had caused the
burnt-offering to be offered, when he was not present, being blamed for
it, he says, “The compulsion from the enemy was too great,” <span
id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078) and when he ought to have bewailed,
he felt as though he had done nothing.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p48"></span>Again God gave him the commands about
the Amalekites, but he transgressed these too. Thence he proceeded to
his crimes about David, and thus slipping easily and by little and
little he stayed not, until he came unto the very pit of destruction,
and cast himself in. So likewise in the case of Cain, he did not at once
urge him to slay his brother, since he would not have persuaded him, but
first wrought upon him to offer things more or less vile, saying, “This
is no sin:” in the second place he kindled envy and jealousy, saying,
neither is there anything in this; <span id="page_495">p. 495</span>
<span id="iii.LXXXII-Page_495"></span> thirdly, he persuaded him to slay
and to deny his murder; and did not leave him before he had put on him
the crowning act of evil.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p49"></span>Wherefore it is necessary for us to
resist the beginning. For at any rate, even if the first sins stopped at
themselves, not even so were it right to despise the first sins; but now
they go on also to what is greater, when the mind is careless. Wherefore
we ought to do all things to remove the beginnings of them.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p50"></span>For look not now at the nature of the
sin, that it is little, but that it becomes a root of great sin when
neglected. For if one may say something marvellous, great sins need not
so much earnestness, as such as are little, and of small account. For
the former the very nature of the sin causes us to abhor, but the little
sins by this very thing cast us into remissness; and allow us not to
rouse ourselves heartily for their removal. Wherefore also they quickly
become great, while we sleep. This one may see happening in bodies also.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p51"></span>So likewise in the instance of Judas,
that great wickedness had its birth. For if it had not seemed to him a
little thing to steal the money of the poor, he would not have been led
on to this treachery. Unless it had seemed to the Jews a little thing to
be taken captive by vainglory, they would not have run on the rock of
becoming Christ’s murderers. And indeed all evils we may see arise from
this.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p52"></span>For no one quickly and at once rusheth
out into vices. For the soul hath, yea it hath a shame implanted in us,
and a reverence for right things; and it would not at once become so
shameless as in one act to cast away everything, but slowly, and by
little and little doth it perish, when it is careless. Thus also did
idolatry enter in, men being honored beyond measure, both the living and
the departed; thus also were idols worshipped; thus too did whoredom
prevail, and the other evils.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p53"></span>And see. One man laughed unseasonably;
another blamed him; a third took away the fear, by saying, nothing comes
of this. “For what is laughing? What can come of it?” Of this is bred
foolish jesting; from that filthy talking; then filthy doings.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p54"></span>Again, another being blamed for
slandering his neighbors, and reviling, and calumniating, despised it,
saying, evil-speaking is nothing. By this he begets hatred unspeakable,
revilings without end; by the revilings blows, and by the blows
oftentimes murder.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p55"></span>4. From these little things then that
wicked spirit thus brings in the great sins; and from the great despair;
having invented this other while not less mischievous than the former.
For to sin destroys not so much as to despair. For he that hath
offended, if he be vigilant, speedily by repentance amends what hath
been done; but he that hath learnt to despond, and doth not repent, by
reason thereof fails of this amendment by not applying the remedies from
repentance.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p56"></span>And he hath a third grievous snare; as
when he invests the sin with a show of devotion. And where hath the
devil so far prevailed as to deceive to this degree? Hear, and beware of
his devices. Christ by Paul commanded “that a woman depart not from her
husband, <span id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079) and not to defraud
one another, except by consent;” <span
id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080) but some from a love of continence
forsooth, having withdrawn from their own husbands, as though they were
doing something devout, have driven them to adultery. Consider now what
an evil it is that they, undergoing so much toil, should be blamed as
having committed the greatest injustice, and should suffer extreme
punishment, and drive their husbands into the pit of destruction.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p59"></span>Others again, abstaining from meats by
a rule of fasting, have by degrees gone so far as to abhor them; which
even of itself brings a very great punishment.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p60"></span>But this comes to pass, when any hold
fast their own prejudices contrary to what is approved by the
Scriptures. Those also among the Corinthians thought it was a part of
perfection to eat of all things without distinction, even of things
forbidden, but nevertheless this was not of perfection, but of the
utmost lawlessness. Wherefore also Paul earnestly reproves them, and
pronounces them to be worthy of extreme punishment. Others again think
it a sign of piety to wear long hair. And yet this is amongst the things
forbidden, and carries with it much disgrace.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p61"></span>Again, others follow after excessive
sorrow for their sins as a profitable thing; yet it also comes of the
devil’s wiles, and Judas showed it; at least in consequence thereof he
even hanged himself. Therefore Paul again was in fear about him that had
committed fornication, lest any such thing should befall him, and
persuaded the Corinthians speedily to deliver him, “lest perhaps such a
one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.” <span
id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081) Then, indicating that such a result
cometh of the snares of that wicked one, he saith, “Lest Satan should
get an advantage over us, for we are not ignorant of his devices,” <span
id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082) meaning that he assails us with
much craft. Since if he fought against us plainly and openly, the
victory would be ready and easy; or rather even now, if we be vigilant,
victory <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXII-Page_496"></span> will be ready. For indeed against each
one of those ways God hath armed us.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p64"></span>For to persuade us not to despise even
these little things, hear what warning He gives us, saying, “He that
saith to his brother, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell;” <span
id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083) and he that hath looked with
unchaste eyes is a complete adulterer. <span
id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084) And on them that laugh he
pronounces a woe, and everywhere He removes the beginning and the seeds
of evil, and saith we have to give an account of an idle word. <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) Therefore also Job applied a remedy
even for the thoughts of his children. <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086)

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p69"></span>But about not despairing, it is said,
“Doth he fall, and not arise? Doth he turn away, and not return?” <span
id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) and, “I do not will the death of
the sinner, so much as that he should turn and live:” <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) and, “To-day if ye will hear His
voice:” <span id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) and many other such
things, both sayings and examples are set in the Scripture. And in order
not to be ruined under the guise of godly fear, hear Paul saying, “Lest
perhaps such a one be swallowed up by overmuch sorrow.”

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p73"></span>Knowing therefore these things, let us
set for a barrier in all the ways that pervert the unwary the wisdom
which is drawn from the Scriptures. Neither say, why, what is it, if I
gaze curiously at a beautiful woman? For if thou shouldest commit the
adultery in the heart, soon thou wilt venture on that in flesh. Say not,
why, what is it if I should pass by this poor man? For if thou pass this
man by, thou wilt also the next; if him, then the third.

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p74"></span>Neither again say, why, what is it, if
I should desire my neighbor’s goods. For this, this caused Ahab’s ruin;
although he would have paid a price, yet he took it from one unwilling.
For a man ought not to buy by force, but on persuasion. But if he, who
would have paid the fair price, was so punished, because he took from
one unwilling, he who doeth not so much as this, and taketh by violence
from the unwilling, and that when living under grace, of what punishment
will he not be worthy?

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p75"></span>In order therefore that we be not
punished, keeping ourselves quite pure from all violence and rapine, and
guarding against the sources of sins together with the sins themselves,
let us with much diligence give heed to virtue; for thus shall we also
enjoy the good things eternal by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[492:3060](1100090.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p4"></span>\[The article is omitted before
“elders,” as in the best New Testament <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p4.1"></span>mss</span>. In all other details the
agreement with the received text is exact.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[492:3061](1100090.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p6"></span>[Acts xvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[492:3062](1100090.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p9"></span>[John xviii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[492:3063](1100090.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p10"></span>[Matt. xxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[492:3064](1100090.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p11"></span>[John vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[492:3065](1100090.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p13"></span>[Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p13.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXXII-p13.2"></span>LXX</span>., see
margin of our version.

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[492:3066](1100090.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p16"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p16.1"></span>.
\[The word “these” is peculiar to this citation.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[493:3067](1100090.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p20"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p20.1"></span>.
\[The readings <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p20.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p20.3"></span>πεμψε</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p20.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p20.5"></span>πστειλεν</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXII-p20.6"></span>τοτ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXII-p20.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXII-p20.8"></span>κεινω</span>, are
peculiar. R.V., “And while he was sitting on the,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[493:3068](1100090.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p22"></span>[John xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p22.1"></span>.
\[“delivereth” is preferable, since the reference is not necessarily to
Judas. Similarly in R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[493:3069](1100090.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p24"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p24.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “ask for;” but the form of the verb in the Homily is
peculiar.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[493:3070](1100090.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p27"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p27.1"></span>.
\[Abridged, but given in full in some editions of the Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[493:3071](1100090.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p29"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022)<span
id="iii.LXXXII-p29.1"></span>. \[Abridged. R.V., “prevailed
nothing.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[493:3072](1100090.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p30"></span>[Acts
xxi](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#000)<span
id="iii.LXXXII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[493:3073](1100090.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p31"></span>*i.e*., the Jewish rulers; Mr. Field
has observed in his note on this passage, that <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p31.1"></span>ο Ιουδαοι</span> is thus used, especially
in St. John’s Gospel.

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[494:3074](1100090.htm#fr_3073) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p34"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[494:3075](1100090.htm#fr_3074) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p37"></span>[Acts xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p37.1"></span>.
\[The R.V. accepts a different reading; but “which have believed” is the
more accurate rendering of the received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[494:3076](1100090.htm#fr_3075) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p39"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p39.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “he scourged and delivered to be crucified.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[494:3077](1100090.htm#fr_3076) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p41"></span>[John xviii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#031)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[494:3078](1100090.htm#fr_3077) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXII-p42.1"></span>πρ τ οκεον θαμα</span>.

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[494:3079](1100090.htm#fr_3078) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p47"></span>Cf. [1 Sam.
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#012), [1 Sam.
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015)<span
id="iii.LXXXII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[495:3080](1100090.htm#fr_3079) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p57"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[495:3081](1100090.htm#fr_3080) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p58"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[495:3082](1100090.htm#fr_3081) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p62"></span>[2 Cor. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[495:3083](1100090.htm#fr_3082) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p63"></span>[2 Cor.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.LXXXII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[496:3084](1100090.htm#fr_3083) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p65"></span>[Matt. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[496:3085](1100090.htm#fr_3084) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p66"></span>[Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[496:3086](1100090.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p67"></span>[Matt. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[496:3087](1100090.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p68"></span>[Job i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[496:3088](1100090.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p70"></span>[Jer. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[496:3089](1100090.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p71"></span>[Ezek. xviii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p71.1"></span>.
\[Abridged from the LXX.\]

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[496:3090](1100090.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="iii.LXXXII-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXII-p72"></span>[Ps. xcv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXXII-p72.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXXIII](1100091)
