[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100051)  [Next](1100053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLIV"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIV.</span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XII.
46-49](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046)<span
id="iii.XLIV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p3"></span>*“While He yet talked to the people,
behold, His mother and His brethren stood without, desiring to speak
with Him. Then one said unto Him, Behold, Thy mother and Thy brethren
stand without, desiring to speak with Thee. But He answered and said
unto him that told Him, Who is my mother, and* <span
id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) *my brethren? And He stretched
forth His hand towards His disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my
brethren.”*

<span id="iii.XLIV-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p5.1"></span>That</span> which I was lately saying, that
when virtue is wanting all things are vain, this is now also pointed out
very abundantly. For I indeed was saying, that age and nature, and to
dwell in the wilderness, and all such things, are alike unprofitable,
where there is not a good mind; but to-day we learn in addition another
thing, that even to have borne Christ in the womb, and to have brought
forth that marvellous birth, hath no profit, if there be not virtue.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p6"></span>And this is hence especially manifest.
“For while He yet talked to the people,” it is said, “one told Him, Thy
mother and Thy brethren seek Thee. But He saith, who is my mother, and
who are my brethren?”

<span id="iii.XLIV-p7"></span>And this He said, not as being ashamed of
<span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span id="iii.XLIV-Page_272"></span>
His mother, nor denying her that bare Him; for if He had been ashamed of
her, He would not have passed through that womb; but as declaring that
she hath no advantage from this, unless she do all that is required to
be done. For in fact that which she had essayed to do, was of
superfluous vanity; in that she wanted to show the people that she hath
power and authority over her Son, imagining not as yet anything great
concerning Him; whence also her unseasonable approach. See at all events
both her self-confidence <span id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) and
theirs. <span id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) Since when they ought
to have gone in, and listened with the multitude; or if they were not so
minded, to have waited for His bringing His discourse to an end, and
then to have come near; they call Him out, and do this before all,
evincing a superfluous vanity, and wishing to make it appear, that with
much authority they enjoin Him. And this too the evangelist shows that
he is blaming, for with this very allusion did he thus express himself,
“While He yet talked to the people;” as if he should say, What? was
there no other opportunity? Why, was it not possible to speak with Him
in private?

<span id="iii.XLIV-p10"></span>And what was it they wished to say? For
if it were touching the doctrines of the truth, they ought to have
propounded these things publicly, and stated them before all, that the
rest also might have the benefit: but if about other matters that
concerned themselves, they ought not to have been so urgent. For if He
suffered not the burial of a father, lest the attendance on Him should
be interrupted, much less ought they to have stopped His discourse to
the people, for things that were of no importance. Whence it is clear,
that nothing but vainglory led them to do this; which John too declares,
by saying, “Neither did His brethren believe on Him;” <span
id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765) and some sayings too of theirs he
reports, full of great folly; telling us that they were for dragging Him
to Jerusalem, for no other purpose, but that they themselves might reap
glory from His miracles. “For if thou do these things,” it is said,
“show Thyself to the world. For there is no man that doeth anything in
secret, and seeketh himself to be manifest;” <span
id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766) when also He Himself rebuked them,
attributing it to their carnal mind. That is, because the Jews were
reproaching Him, and saying, “Is not this the carpenter’s son, whose
father and mother we know? and His brethren, are not they with
us?” <span id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767) they, willing to throw
off the disparagement caused by His birth, were calling Him to the
display of His miracles.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p14"></span>For this cause He quite repels them,
being minded to heal their infirmity; since surely, had it been His will
to deny His mother, He would have denied her then, when the Jews were
reproaching Him. But as it is, we see that He takes so great care of
her, as even at the very cross to commit her to the disciple whom He
loved most of all, and to give him a great charge concerning her.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p15"></span>But now He doth not so, out of care for
her, and for His brethren. I mean, because their regard for Him was as
towards a mere man, and they were vainglorious, He casts out the
disease, not insulting, but correcting them.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p16"></span>But do thou, I pray, examine not the
words only, which contain a moderate reproof, but also the unbecoming
conduct of His brethren, and the boldness wherewith they had been bold
and who was the person reproving it, no mere man, but the only-begotten
Son of God; and with what purpose He reproved; that it was not with
intent to drive them to perplexity, but to deliver them from the most
tyrannical passion and to lead them on by little and little to the right
idea concerning Himself, and to convince her that He was not her Son
only, but also her Lord: so wilt thou perceive that the reproof is in
the highest degree both becoming Him and profitable to her, and withal
having in it much gentleness. For He said not, “Go thy way, tell my
mother, thou art not my mother,” but He addresses Himself to the person
that told Him; saying, “Who is my mother?” together with the things that
have been mentioned providing for another object also. What then is
that? That neither they nor others confiding in their kindred, should
neglect virtue. For if she is nothing profited <span id="page_273">p.
273</span> <span id="iii.XLIV-Page_273"></span> by being His mother,
were it not for that quality in her, hardly will any one else be saved
by his kindred. For there is one only nobleness, to do the will of God.
This kind of noble birth is better than the other, and more real.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p17"></span>2. Knowing therefore these things, let us
neither pride ourselves on children that are of good report, unless we
have their virtue; nor upon noble fathers, unless we be like them in
disposition. For it is possible, both that he who begat a man should not
be his father, and that he who did not beget him should be. Therefore in
another place also, when some woman had said, “Blessed is the womb that
bare Thee, and the paps which Thou hast sucked;” He said not, “The womb
bare me not, neither did I suck the paps,” but this, “Yea rather,
blessed are they that do the will of my Father.” <span
id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768) Seest thou how on every occasion He
denies not the affinity by nature, but adds that by virtue? And His
forerunner too, in saying, “O generation of vipers, think not to say, We
have Abraham to our father,” <span id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769)
means not this, that they were not naturally of Abraham, but that it
profits them nothing to be of Abraham, unless they had the affinity by
character; which Christ also declared, when He said, “If ye were
Abraham’s children, ye would do the works of Abraham;” <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770) not depriving them of their kindred
according to the flesh, but teaching them to seek after that affinity
which is greater than it, and more real.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p21"></span>This then He establishes here also, but
in a manner less invidious, and more measured, as became Him speaking to
His mother. For He said not at all, “She is not my mother, nor are those
my brethren, because they do not my will;” neither did He declare and
pronounce judgment against them; but He yet left in it their own power
to choose, speaking with the gentleness that becomes Him.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p22"></span>“For he that doeth,” saith He, “the will
of my Father, this is my brother, and sister, and mother.” <span
id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p24"></span>Wherefore if they desire to be such, let
them come this way. And when the woman again cried out, saying, “Blessed
is the womb that bare Thee,” He said not, “She is not my mother,” but,
“If she wishes to be blessed, let her do the will of my Father. For such
a one is both brother, and sister, and mother.”

<span id="iii.XLIV-p25"></span>Oh honor! oh virtue! Unto what a height
doth she lead up him that follows after her! How many women have blessed
that holy Virgin, and her womb, and prayed that they might become such
mothers, and give up all! What then is there to hinder? For behold, He
hath marked out a spacious road for us; and it is granted not to women
only, but to men also, to be of this rank, or rather of one yet far
higher. For this makes one His mother much more, than those pangs did.
So that if that were a subject for blessing, much more this, inasmuch as
it is also more real. Do not therefore merely desire, but also in the
way that leads thee to thy desire walk thou with much diligence.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p26"></span>3. Having then said these words, “He came
out of the house.” Seest thou, how He both rebuked them, and did what
they desired? Which He did also at the marriage. <span
id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772) For there too He at once reproved
her asking unseasonably, and nevertheless did not gainsay her; by the
former correcting her weakness, by the latter showing His kindly feeling
toward His mother. So likewise on this occasion too, He both healed the
disease of vainglory, and rendered the due honor to His mother, even
though her request was unseasonable. For, “in the same day,” it is said,
“went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side.” <span
id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p29"></span>Why, if ye desire, saith He, to see and
hear, behold I come forth and discourse. Thus having wrought many
miracles, He affords again the benefit of His doctrine. And He “sits by
the sea,” fishing and getting into His net them that are on the land.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p30"></span>But He “sat by the sea,” not without a
purpose; and this very thing the evangelist has darkly expressed. For to
indicate that the cause of His doing this was a desire to order His
auditory with exactness, and to leave no one behind His back, but to
have all face to face,

<span id="iii.XLIV-p31"></span>“And great multitudes,” saith He, “were
gathered together unto Him, so that He went into a ship and sat, and the
whole multitude stood on the shore.” <span
id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p33"></span>And having sat down there, He speaks by
parables.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p34"></span>“And He spake,” it says, “many things
unto them in parables.” <span id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p36"></span>And yet on the mount, we know, He did no
such thing, neither did He weave His discourse with so many parables,
for then there were multitudes only, and a simple people; but here are
also Scribes and Pharisees.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="iii.XLIV-Page_274"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p37"></span>But do thou mark, I pray thee, what kind
of parable He speaks first, and how Matthew puts them in their order.
Which then doth He speak first? That which it was most necessary to
speak first, that which makes the hearer more attentive. For because He
was to discourse unto them in dark sayings, He thoroughly rouses His
hearers’ mind first by His parable. Therefore also another evangelist
saith that He reproved them, because they do not understand; saying,
“How knew ye not the parable?” <span
id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) But not for this cause only doth He
speak in parables, but that He may also make His discourse more vivid,
and fix the memory of it in them more perfectly, and bring the things
before their sight. In like manner do the prophets also.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p39"></span>4. What then is the parable? “Behold,”
saith He, “a sower <span id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) went forth
to sow.” Whence went He forth, who is present everywhere, who fills all
things? or how went He forth? Not in place, but in condition and
dispensation to usward, coming nearer to us by His clothing Himself with
flesh. For because we could not enter, our sins fencing us out from the
entrance, He comes forth unto us. And wherefore came He forth? to
destroy the ground teeming with thorns? to take vengeance upon the
husbandmen? By no means; but to till and tend it, and to sow the word of
godliness. For by seed here He means His doctrine, and by land, the
souls of men, and by the sower, Himself.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p41"></span>What then comes of this seed? Three parts
perish, and one is saved.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p42"></span>“And when He sowed, some seeds fell,” He
saith, “by the way side; and the fowls came and devoured them up.” <span
id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p44"></span>He said not, that He cast them, but that
“they fell.”

<span id="iii.XLIV-p45"></span>“And some upon the rock, where they had
not much earth; and forthwith they sprang up, because they had no
deepness of earth; and when the sun was up, they were scorched; and
because they had no root, they withered away. And some fell among the
thorns, and the thorns sprang up, and choked them. But others fell on
the good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some
sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. Who hath ears to hear let him hear.” <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p47"></span>A fourth part is saved; and not this all
alike, but even here great is the difference.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p48"></span>Now these things He said, manifesting
that He discoursed to all without grudging. For as the sower makes no
distinction in the land submitted to him, but simply and indifferently
casts his seed; so He Himself too makes no distinction of rich and poor,
of wise and unwise, of slothful or diligent, of brave or cowardly; but
He discourses unto all, fulfilling His part, although foreknowing the
results; that it may be in His power to say, “What ought I to have done,
that I have not done?” <span id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) And
the prophets speak of the people as of a vine; “For my beloved,” it is
said, “had a vineyard;” <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781) and,
“He brought a vine out of Egypt;” <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) but He, as of seed. What could this
be to show? That obedience now will be quick and easier, and will
presently yield its fruit.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p52"></span>But when thou hearest, “The sower went
forth to sow,” think it not a needless repetition. For the sower
frequently goes forth for some other act also, either to plough, or to
cut out the evil herbs, or to pluck up thorns, or to attend to some such
matter; but He went forth to sow.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p53"></span>Whence then, tell me, was the greater
part of the seed lost? Not through the sower, but through the ground
that received it; that is, the soul that did not hearken.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p54"></span>And wherefore doth He not say, Some the
careless received, and lost it; some the rich, and choked it, and some
the superficial, and betrayed it? It is not His will to rebuke them
severely, lest He should cast them into despair, but He leaves the
reproof to the conscience of His hearers.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p55"></span>And this was not the case with the seed
only, but also with the net; for that too produced many that were
unprofitable.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p56"></span>5. But this parable He speaks, as
anointing His disciples, and to teach them, that even though the lost be
more than such as receive the word yet they are not to despond. For this
was the ease even with their Lord, and He who fully foreknew that these
things should be, did not desist from sowing.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p57"></span>And how can it be reasonable, saith one,
to sow among the thorns, on the rock, on the wayside? With regard to the
seeds and the earth it cannot be reasonable; but in the case of men’s
souls and their instructions, it hath its praise, and that abundantly.
For the husbandman indeed would reasonably be blamed for doing this; it
being impossible for the rock to become earth, or the wayside not to be
a wayside, or the thorns, thorns; but in the things that have reason it
is not so. There is such a thing as the rock changing, and becoming rich
land; and the wayside being no longer trampled on, nor lying <span
id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span id="iii.XLIV-Page_275"></span> open to
all that pass by, but that it may be a fertile field; and the thorns may
be destroyed, and the seed enjoy full security. For had it been
impossible, this Sower would not have sown. And if the change did not
take place in all, this is no fault of the Sower, but of them who are
unwilling to be changed: He having done His part: and if they betrayed
what they received of Him, He is blameless, the exhibitor of such love
to man.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p58"></span>But do thou mark this, I pray thee; that
the way of destruction is not one only, but there are differing ones,
and wide apart from one another. For they that are like the wayside are
the coarse-minded, <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783) and
indifferent, and careless; but those on the rock such as fail from
weakness only.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p60"></span>For “that which is sown upon the stony
places,” saith He, “the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with
joy receiveth it. Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth for a
while; but when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word,
by and by he is offended! When any one,” so He saith, “heareth the word
of truth and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and
catcheth that which was sown out of his heart. This is he that is sown
by the wayside.” <span id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784)

<span id="iii.XLIV-p62"></span>Now it is not the same thing for the
doctrine to wither away, when no man is evil entreating, or disturbing
its foundations, as when temptations press upon one. But they that are
likened to the thorns, are much more inexcusable than these.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p63"></span>6. In order then that none of these
things may befall us, let us by zeal and continual remembrance cover up
the things that are told us. For though the devil do catch them away,
yet it rests with us, whether they be caught away; though the plants
wither, yet it is not from the heat this takes place (for He did not
say, because of the heat it withered, but, “because it had no root”);
although His sayings are choked, it is not because of the thorns, but of
them who suffer them to spring up. For there is a way, if thou wilt, to
check this evil growth, and to make the right use of our wealth.
Therefore He said not, “the world,” but “the care of the world;” nor
“riches,” but “the deceitfulness of riches.”

<span id="iii.XLIV-p64"></span>Let us not then blame the things, but the
corrupt mind. For it is possible to be rich and not to be deceived; and
to be in this world, and not to be choked with its cares. For indeed
riches have two contrary disadvantages; one, care, wearing us out, and
bringing a darkness over us; the other, luxury, making us effeminate.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p65"></span>And well hath He said, “The deceitfulness
of riches.” For all that pertains to riches is deceit; they are names
only, not attached to things. For so pleasure and glory, and splendid
array, and all these things, are a sort of vain show, not a reality.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p66"></span>Having therefore spoken of the ways of
destruction, afterwards He mentions the good ground, not suffering them
to despair, but giving a hope of repentance, and indicating that it is
possible to change from the things before mentioned into this.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p67"></span>And yet if both the land be good, and the
Sower one, and the seed the same, wherefore did one bear a hundred, one
sixty, one thirty? Here again the difference is from the nature of the
ground, for even where the ground is good, great even therein is the
difference. Seest thou, that not the husbandman is to be blamed, nor the
seed, but the land that receives it? not for its nature, but for its
disposition. And herein too, great is His mercy to man, that He doth not
require one measure of virtue, but while He receives the first, and
casts not out the second, He gives also a place to the third.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p68"></span>And these things He saith, least they
that followed Him should suppose that hearing is sufficient for
salvation. And wherefore, one may say, did He not put the other vices
also, such as lust, vainglory? In speaking of “the care of this world,
and the deceitfulness of riches,” He set down all. Yea, both vainglory
and all the rest belong to this world, and to the deceitfulness of
riches; such as pleasure, and gluttony, and envy, and vainglory, and all
the like.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p69"></span>But He added also the “way” and the
“rock,” signifying that it is not enough to be freed from riches only,
but we must cultivate also the other parts of virtue. For what if thou
art free indeed from riches, yet are soft and unmanly? and what if thou
art not indeed unmanly, but art remiss and careless about the hearing of
the word? Nay, no one part is sufficient for our salvation, but there is
required first a careful hearing, and a continual recollection; then
fortitude, then contempt of riches, and deliverance from all worldly
things.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p70"></span>In fact, His reason for putting this
before the other, is because the one is first required (for “How shall
they believe except they hear?” <span
id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785) just as we too, except we mind what
is said, shall not be able so much as to <span id="page_276">p.
276</span> <span id="iii.XLIV-Page_276"></span> learn what we ought to
do): after that, fortitude, and the contempt of things present.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p72"></span>7. Hearing therefore these things, let us
fortify ourselves on all sides, regarding His instructions, and striking
our roots deep, and cleansing ourselves from all worldly things. But if
we do the one, neglecting the other, we shall be nothing bettered; for
though we perish not in one way, yet shall we in some other. For what
signifies our not being ruined by riches, if we are by indolence: or not
by indolence, if we are by softness. For so the husbandman, whether this
way or that way he lose his crop, equally bewails himself. Let us not
then soothe ourselves upon our not perishing in all these ways, but let
it be our grief, in whichever way we are perishing.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p73"></span>And let us burn up the thorns, for they
choke the word. And this is known to those rich men, who not for these
matters alone, but for others also prove unprofitable. For having become
slaves and captives of their pleasures, they are useless even for civil
affairs, and if for them, much more for those of Heaven. Yea, and in two
ways hereby our thoughts are corrupted; both by the luxury, and by the
anxiety too. For either of these by itself were enough to overwhelm the
bark; but when even both concur, imagine how high the billow swells.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p74"></span>And marvel not at His calling our luxury,
“thorns.” For thou indeed art not aware of it, being intoxicated with
thy passion, but they that are in sound health know that it pricks
sharper than any thorn, and that luxury wastes the soul worse than care,
and causes more grievous pains both to body and soul. For one is not so
sorely smitten by anxiety, as by surfeiting. Since when watchings, and
throbbings of the temples, and heaviness in the head, and pangs of the
bowels, lay hold of such a man, you may imagine how many thorns these
surpass in grievousness. And as the thorns, on whichever side they are
laid hold of, draw blood from the hands that seize them, just so doth
luxury plague both feet, and hands, and head, and eyes, and in general
all our members; and it is withered also, and unfruitful, like the
thorn, and hurts much more than it, and in our vital parts. Yea, it
brings on premature old age, and dulls the senses, and darkens our
reasoning, and blinds the keen-sighted mind, and makes the body
tumid, <span id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786) rendering excessive
the deposition of that which is cast away, and gathering together a
great accumulation of evils; and it makes the burden too great, and the
load overwhelming; whence our falls are many and continual, and our
shipwrecks frequent.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p76"></span>For tell me, why pamper thy body? What?
are we to slay thee in sacrifice, to set thee on the table? The birds it
is well for thee to pamper: or rather, not so well even for them; for
when they are fattened, they are unprofitable for wholesome food. So
great an evil is luxury, that its mischief is shown even in irrational
beings. For even them by luxury we make unprofitable, both to themselves
and to us. For their superfluous flesh is indigestible, and the moister
kind of corruption is engendered by that kind of fatness. Whereas the
creatures that are not so fed, but live, as one may say, in abstinence,
and moderate diet, and in labor and hardship, these are most serviceable
both to themselves and to others, as well for food, as for everything
else. Those, at any rate, who live on them, are in better health; but
such as are fed on the others are like them, growing dull and sickly,
and rendering their chain more grievous. For nothing is so hostile and
hurtful to the body, as luxury; nothing so tears it in pieces, and
overloads and corrupts it, as intemperance.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p77"></span>Wherefore above all may this circumstance
make one amazed at them for their folly, that not even so much care as
others show towards their wine skins, are these willing to evince
towards themselves. For those the wine merchants do not allow to receive
more than is fit, lest they should burst; but to their own wretched
belly these men do not vouchsafe even so much forethought, but when they
have stuffed it and distended it, they fill all, up to the ears, up to
the nostrils, to the very throat itself, thereby pressing into half its
room the spirit, and the power that directs the living being. What? was
thy throat given thee for this end, that thou shouldest fill it up to
the very mouth, with wine turned sour, and all other corruption? Not for
this, O man, but that thou shouldest above all things sing to God, and
offer up the holy prayers, and read out the divine laws, and give to thy
neighbors profitable counsel. But thou, as if thou hadst received it for
this end, dost not suffer it to have leisure for that ministry, so much
as for a short season, but for all thy life subjectest it to this evil
slavery. And as if any man having had a lyre given him with golden
strings, and beautifully constructed, instead of awakening with it the
most harmonious music, were to cover it over with much dung and clay;
even so do these men. Now the word, dung, I use not of living, but of
luxurious living, and of that great wantonness. Because what is more
than necessary is not <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="iii.XLIV-Page_277"></span> nourishment, but merely injurious. For in
truth the belly alone was made merely for the reception of food; but the
month, and the throat, and tongue, for other things also, far more
necessary than these: or rather, not even the belly for the reception of
food simply, but for the reception of moderate food. And this it makes
manifest by crying out loudly against us, when we tease it by this
greediness; nor doth it clamor against us only, but also avenging that
wrong exacts of us the severest penalty. And first it punishes the feet,
that bear and conduct us to those wicked revels, then the hands that
minister to it, binding them together for having brought unto it such
quantities and kinds of provisions; and many have distorted even their
very mouth, and eyes, and head. And as a servant receiving an order
beyond his power, not seldom out of desperation becomes insolent to the
giver of the order: so the belly too, together with these members, often
ruins and destroys, from being over-strained, the very brain itself. And
this God hath well ordered, that from excess so much mischief should
arise; that when of thine own will thou dost not practise
self-restraint, at least against thy will, for fear of so great ruin,
thou mayest learn to be moderate.

<span id="iii.XLIV-p78"></span>Knowing then these things, let us flee
luxury, let us study moderation, that we may both enjoy health of body,
and having delivered our soul from all infirmity, may attain unto the
good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[271:1763](1100052.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p4"></span>\[In the text here <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIV-p4.1"></span>τνε εσν</span> is omitted,
but is inserted in the comment. There is no <span class="c41"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p4.2"></span>mss</span>. authority for the omission in
Matthew. The other variations are slight.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[272:1764](1100052.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p8"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p8.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p8.2"></span>πνοιαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[272:1765](1100052.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p9"></span>“It seems to me that the person bringing
the message was not simply doing so on occasion given, but was laying a
snare for our Saviour, to see whether he would prefer flesh and blood to
His spiritual task. Our Lord therefore did not think scorn to come out,
as disavowing mother and brethren, but He speaks as answering one who
was laying a snare for Him.…Not, as Marcion and Manichæus say, did He
deny His mother, that we should esteem Him born of a phantom, but He
preferred the apostles to His kindred.” St. Jer. *in loc*. “Some
pestilent heretics would maintain from this passage, that our Lord had
no mother, and do not perceive that it follows, on comparison of an
other text” (St. [Matt. xxiii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span
id="iii.XLIV-p9.1"></span>), “that neither have His disciples fathers.
Because, as He said Himself, “Who is my mother?” so He taught them,
saying, “Call no man your father on earth.” St. Aug. in [Ps.
ix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#000)<span id="iii.XLIV-p9.2"></span>
sec. 31. \[He speaks\] “not as defrauding His mother of her due honor,
but indicates for what kind of maternity the Virgin is pronounced to be
blessed. For if he who hears the Word of God and keeps it is His
brother, and sister, and mother, and Christ’s mother had both these,
evidently this was the maternity in respect of which His mother was to
be blessed. For to hear the Word of God and keep it belongs to a pure
soul, looking altogether towards God. And since it was no ordinary woman
whom God selected to become the mother of Christ, but her who in virtues
held a place higher than all women, therefore Christ also willed His
mother to be called blessed from this virtue, whereby she was deemed
worthy to become a virgin mother.” Quæst. et Resp. ad Orthod. ap. St.
Just. Mart. p. 485. Ed. Morell. 1736.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[272:1766](1100052.htm#fr_1765) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p11"></span>[John vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#005)<span id="iii.XLIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[272:1767](1100052.htm#fr_1766) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p12"></span>[John vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#004)<span id="iii.XLIV-p12.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIV-p12.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIV-p12.3"></span>φανερ
εναι</span></span><span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIV-p12.4"></span>,
rec. text,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p12.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p12.6"></span>ν παησ εναι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p12.7"></span>. \[The latter reading is that of all our
authorities.—R\]</span>

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[272:1768](1100052.htm#fr_1767) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p12.8"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p13"></span>[Matt.
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055),
[56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056), [Mark
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003)<span id="iii.XLIV-p13.1"></span>.
But the citation is freely made.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[273:1769](1100052.htm#fr_1768) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p18"></span>[Luke
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028)<span id="iii.XLIV-p18.1"></span>.
\[According to many Harmonists this occurred about the same time,
probably as His mother was seen approaching.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[273:1770](1100052.htm#fr_1769) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p19"></span>[Matt.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLIV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[273:1771](1100052.htm#fr_1770) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p20"></span>[John viii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039)<span id="iii.XLIV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[273:1772](1100052.htm#fr_1771) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p23"></span>[Matt. xiii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#050)<span id="iii.XLIV-p23.1"></span>.
\[Slightly altered.\]

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[273:1773](1100052.htm#fr_1772) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p27"></span>[John ii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)<span id="iii.XLIV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[273:1774](1100052.htm#fr_1773) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p28"></span>[Matt.
13.1](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)<span id="iii.XLIV-p28.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “On that day,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[273:1775](1100052.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p32"></span>[Matt. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#002)<span id="iii.XLIV-p32.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “all the multitude stood on the beach.”\]

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[273:1776](1100052.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p35"></span>[Matt. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003)<span id="iii.XLIV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[274:1777](1100052.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p38"></span>[Mark iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#013)<span id="iii.XLIV-p38.1"></span>.
\[Freely cited.\]

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[274:1778](1100052.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p40"></span>\[R.V., “the sower.”\]

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[274:1779](1100052.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p43"></span>[Matt. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#004)<span id="iii.XLIV-p43.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “And as he sowed,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[274:1780](1100052.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p46"></span>[Matt. xiii.
5-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005)<span id="iii.XLIV-p46.1"></span>.
\[The Greek text here differs slightly from that of the New Testament
passage, as well as from the accounts of Mark and Luke.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[274:1781](1100052.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p49"></span>[Is. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="iii.XLIV-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[274:1782](1100052.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p50"></span>[Is. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span id="iii.XLIV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[274:1783](1100052.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p51"></span>[Ps. lxxx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008)<span id="iii.XLIV-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[275:1784](1100052.htm#fr_1783) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p59"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p59.1"></span>βναυσοι</span>.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[275:1785](1100052.htm#fr_1784) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p61"></span>[Matt.
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#021),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#019)<span id="iii.XLIV-p61.1"></span>.
\[There are some variations in the Greek text, not found in any New
Testament <span class="c20"><span id="iii.XLIV-p61.2"></span>mss</span>.
In verse 19 <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p61.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p61.4"></span>ληθεα</span> is substituted for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIV-p61.5"></span>βασιλεα</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[275:1786](1100052.htm#fr_1785) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p71"></span>[Rom. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="iii.XLIV-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[276:1787](1100052.htm#fr_1786) <span
id="iii.XLIV-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIV-p75"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIV-p75.1"></span>πλαδαρν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLV](1100053)
