[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100062)  [Next](1100064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LV"></span> <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="iii.LV-Page_337"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LV-p1.1"></span>Homily LVII.</span>

<span id="iii.LV-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LV-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XVII.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010)<span
id="iii.LV-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LV-p3"></span>“And His disciples asked Him, saying, Why
then say the Scribes that Elias must first come?”

<span id="iii.LV-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LV-p4.1"></span>Not</span> then from the Scriptures did they
know this, but the Scribes used to explain themselves, and this saying
was reported abroad amongst the ignorant people; as about Christ also.

<span id="iii.LV-p5"></span>Wherefore the Samaritan woman also said,
“Messiah cometh; when He is come, He will tell us all things:” <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) and they themselves asked John,
“Art thou Elias, or the Prophet?” <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) For the saying, as I said,
prevailed, both that concerning the Christ and that concerning Elias,
not however rightly interpreted by them.

<span id="iii.LV-p8"></span>For the Scriptures speak of two advents of
Christ, both this that is past, and that which is to come; and declaring
these Paul said, “The grace of God, that bringeth salvation, hath
appeared, teaching us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, and righteously, and godly.” <span
id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) Behold the one, hear how he
declares the other also; for having said these things, he added,
“Looking for the blessed hope and appearing of our great God and Saviour
Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217) And the
prophets too mention both; of the one, however, that is, of the second,
they say Elias will be the forerunner. For of the first, John was
forerunner; whom Christ called also Elias, not because he was Elias, but
because he was fulfilling the ministry of that prophet. For as the one
shall be forerunner of the second advent, so was the other too of the
first. But the Scribes, confusing these things and perverting the
people, made mention of that other only to the people, the second
advent, and said, “If this man is the Christ, Elias ought to have come
beforehand.” Therefore the disciples too speak as follows, “How then say
the Scribes, Elias must first come?”

<span id="iii.LV-p11"></span>Therefore also the Pharisees sent unto
John, and asked him, “Art thou Elias?” <span
id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218) making no mention anywhere of the
former advent.

<span id="iii.LV-p13"></span>What then is the solution, which Christ
alleged? “Elias indeed cometh then, before my second advent; and now too
is Elias come;” so calling John.

<span id="iii.LV-p14"></span>In this sense Elias is come: but if thou
wouldest seek the Tishbite, he is coming. Wherefore also He said, “Elias
truly cometh, and shall restore all things.” <span
id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) All what things? Such as the
Prophet Malachi spake of; for “I will send you,” saith He, “Elias the
Tishbite, who shall restore the heart of father to son, lest I come and
utterly smite the earth.” <span id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220)

<span id="iii.LV-p17"></span>Seest thou the accuracy of prophetical
language? how, because Christ called John, Elias, by reasoning of their
community of office, lest thou shouldest suppose this to be the meaning
of the prophet too in this place, He added His country also, saying,
“the Tishbite;” <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) whereas John
was not a Tishbite. And herewith He sets down another sign also, saying,
“Lest I come and utterly smite the earth,” signifying His second and
dreadful advent. For in the first He came not to smite the earth. For,
“I came not,” saith He, “to judge the world, but to save the
world.” <span id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222)

<span id="iii.LV-p20"></span>To show therefore that the Tishbite comes
before that other advent, which hath the judgment, He said this. And the
reason too of his coming He teaches withal. And what is this reason?
That when He is come, he may persuade the Jews to believe in Christ, and
that they may not all utterly perish at His coming. Wherefore He too,
guiding them on to that remembrance, saith, “And he shall restore all
things;” that is, shall correct the unbelief of the Jews that are then
in being.

<span id="iii.LV-p21"></span>Hence the extreme accuracy of his
expression; in that he said not, “He will restore the heart of the son
to the father,” but “of the father to the son.” <span
id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223) For the Jews being fathers of the
apostles, his meaning is, that he will restore to the doctrines of their
sons, that is, of the apostles, the hearts of the fathers, that is, the
Jewish people’s mind. <span id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224)

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span id="iii.LV-Page_338"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p24"></span>“But I say unto you, that Elias is come
already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they
listed. Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of them. Then they
understood that He spake to them of John.” <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225)

<span id="iii.LV-p26"></span>And yet neither the Scribes said this, nor
the Scriptures; but because now they were sharper and more attentive to
His sayings, they quickly caught His meaning.

<span id="iii.LV-p27"></span>And whence did the disciples know this? He
had already told them, “He is Elias, which was for to come;” <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) but here, that he hath come; and
again, that “Elias cometh and will restore all things.” But be not thou
troubled, nor imagine that His statement wavers, though at one time He
said, “he will come,” at another, “he hath come.” For all these things
are true. Since when He saith, “Elias indeed cometh, and will restore
all things,” He means Elias himself, and the conversion of the Jews
which is then to take place; but when He saith, “Which was for to come,”
He calls John, Elias, with regard to the manner of his administration.
Yea, and so the prophets used to call every one of their approved kings,
David; <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227) and the Jews, “rulers
of Sodom,” <span id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228) and “sons of
Ethiopians;” <span id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) because of their
ways. For as the other shall be forerunner of the second advent, so was
this of the first.

<span id="iii.LV-p32"></span>2. And not for this only doth He call him
Elias everywhere, but to signify His perfect agreement with the Old
Testament, and that this advent too is according to prophecy.

<span id="iii.LV-p33"></span>Wherefore also He adds again, “He came, and
they knew him not, but have done unto him all things whatsoever they
listed.” <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230) What means, “call
things whatsoever they listed?” They cast him into prison, they used him
despitefully, they slew him, they brought his head in a charger.

<span id="iii.LV-p35"></span>“Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer
of them.” Seest thou how again He in due season reminds them of His
passion, laying up for them great store of comfort from the passion of
John. And not in this way only, but also by presently working great
miracles. Yea, and whensoever He speaks of His passion, presently He
works miracles, both after those sayings and before them; and in many
places one may find Him to have kept this rule.

<span id="iii.LV-p36"></span>“Then,” for instance, it saith, “He began
to signify how that He must go unto Jerusalem, and be killed, and suffer
many things.” <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231) “Then:” when?
when He was confessed to be Christ, and the Son of God.

<span id="iii.LV-p38"></span>Again on the mountain, when He had shown
them the marvellous vision, and the prophets had been discoursing of His
glory, He reminded them of His passion. For having spoken of the history
concerning John, He added, “Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of
them.”

<span id="iii.LV-p39"></span>And after a little while again, when He had
cast out the devil, which His disciples were not able to cast out; for
then too, “As they abode in Galilee,” so it saith, “Jesus said unto
them, The Son of Man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinful <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) men, and they shall kill Him, and
the third day He shall rise again.” <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233)

<span id="iii.LV-p42"></span>Now in doing this, He by the greatness of
the miracles was abating the excess of their sorrow, and in every way
consoling them; even as here also, by the mention of John’s death, He
afforded them much consolation.

<span id="iii.LV-p43"></span>But should any one say, “Wherefore did He
not even now raise up Elias and send him, witnessing as He doth so great
good of his coming?” we should reply, that even as it was, while
thinking Christ to be Elias, they did not believe Him. For “some say,”
such are the words, “that Thou art Elias, and others, Jeremias.” <span
id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) And indeed between John and Elias,
there was no difference but the time only. “Then how will they believe
at that time?” it may be said. Why, “he will restore all things,” not
simply by being recognized, but also because the glory of Christ will
have been growing more intense up to that day, and will be among all
clearer than the sun. When therefore, preceded by such an opinion and
expectation, he comes making the same proclamation as John, and himself
also announcing Jesus, they will more easily receive his sayings. But in
saying, “They knew him not,” He is excusing also what was done in His
own case. <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235)

<span id="iii.LV-p46"></span>And not in this way only doth He console
them, but also by pointing out that John’s sufferings at their hands,
whatever they are, are undeserved; and by His throwing into the shade
what would annoy them, by means of two signs, the one on the mountain,
the other just about to take place.

<span id="iii.LV-p47"></span>But when they heard these things, they do
not ask Him when Elias cometh; being <span id="page_339">p. 339</span>
<span id="iii.LV-Page_339"></span> straitened either by grief at His
passion, or by fear. For on many occasions, upon seeing Him unwilling to
speak a thing clearly, they are silent, and so an end. For instance,
when during their abode in Galilee He said, “The Son of Man shall be
betrayed, and they shall kill Him;” <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) it is added by Mark, “That they
understood not the saying, and were afraid to ask Him;” <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) by Luke, “That it was hid from
them, that they might not perceive it, and they feared to ask Him of
that saying.” <span id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238)

<span id="iii.LV-p51"></span>3. “And when they were come to the
multitude, there came to Him a man, kneeling down to Him, and saying,
Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and sore vexed; <span
id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239) for ofttimes he falleth into the
fire, and oft into the water. And I brought him unto Thy disciples, and
they could not cure him.” <span id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240)

<span id="iii.LV-p54"></span>This man the Scripture signifies to be
exceedingly weak in faith; and this is many ways evident; from Christ’s
saying, “All things are possible to him that believeth;” <span
id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241) from the saying of the man himself
that approached, “Help Thou mine unbelief:” <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) from Christ’s commanding the devil
to “enter no more into him;” <span id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243)
and from the man’s saying again to Christ, “If Thou canst.” <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) “Yet if his unbelief was the
cause,” it may be said, “that the devil went not out, why doth He blame
the disciples?” Signifying, that even without persons to bring the sick
in faith, they might in many instances work a cure. For as the faith of
the person presenting oftentimes availed for receiving the cure, even
from inferior ministers; so the power of the doers oftentimes sufficed,
even without belief in those who came to work the miracle.

<span id="iii.LV-p59"></span>And both these things are signified in the
Scripture. For both they of the company of Cornelius by their faith drew
unto themselves the grace of the Spirit; and in the case of
Eliseus <span id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) again, when none had
believed, a dead man rose again. For as to those that cast him down, not
for faith but for cowardice did they cast him, unintentionally and by
chance, for fear of the band of robbers, and so they fled: while the
person himself that was cast in was dead, yet by the mere virtue of the
holy body the dead man arose.

<span id="iii.LV-p61"></span>Whence it is clear in this case, that even
the disciples were weak; but not all; for the pillars <span
id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) were not present there. And see
this man’s want of consideration, from another circumstance again, how
before the multitude he pleads to Jesus against His disciples, saying,
“I brought him to Thy disciples, and they could not cure him.”

<span id="iii.LV-p63"></span>But He, acquitting them of the charges
before the people, imputes the greater part to him. For, “O faithless
and perverse generation,” these are His words, “how long shall I be with
you?” <span id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247) not aiming at his
person only, lest He should confound the man, but also at all the Jews.
For indeed many of those present might probably be offended, and have
undue thoughts of them.

<span id="iii.LV-p65"></span>But when He said, “How long shall I be with
you,” He indicates again death to be welcome to Him, and the thing an
object of desire, and His departure longed for, and that not
crucifixion, but being with them, is grievous.

<span id="iii.LV-p66"></span>He stopped not however at the accusations;
but what saith He? “Bring him hither to me.” <span
id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) And Himself moreover asks him, “how
long time he is thus;” both making a plea for His disciples, and leading
the other to a good hope, and that he might believe in his attaining
deliverance from the evil.

<span id="iii.LV-p68"></span>And He suffers him to be torn, not for
display (accordingly, when a crowd began to gather, He proceeded to
rebuke him), but for the father’s own sake, that when he should see the
evil spirit disturbed at Christ’s mere call, so at least, if in no other
way, he might be led to believe the coming miracle.

<span id="iii.LV-p69"></span>And because he had said, “Of a child,” and,
“If thou canst help me,” Christ saith, “To him that believeth, all
things are possible,” <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) again
giving the complaint a turn against him. And whereas when the leper
said, “If Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean,” <span
id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250) bearing witness to His authority
Christ commending him, and confirming His words, said, “I will, be thou
clean;” in this man’s case, upon his uttering a speech in no way worthy
of His power,—“If Thou canst, help me,”—see how He corrects it, as not
rightly spoken. For what saith He? “If thou canst believe, all things
are possible to him that believeth.” <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) What He saith is like this: “Such
abundance of power is with me, that I can even make others work these
miracles. So that if thou believe as one ought, even thou thyself art
able,” saith He, “to heal both this one, and many others.” And having
thus said, He set free the possessed of the devil.

<span id="iii.LV-p73"></span>But do thou not only from this observe His
providence and His beneficence, but also from that other time, during
which He allowed the <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="iii.LV-Page_340"></span> devil to be in him. Since surely, unless
the man had been favored with much providential care even then, he would
have perished long ago; for “it cast him both into the fire,” so it is
said, “and into the water.” And he that dared this would assuredly have
destroyed the man too, unless even in so great madness God had put on
him His strong curb: as indeed was the case with those naked men that
were running in the deserts and cutting themselves with stones.

<span id="iii.LV-p74"></span>And if he call him “a lunatic,” trouble not
thyself at all, for it is the father of the possessed who speaks the
word. How then saith the evangelist also, “He healed many that were
lunatic?” <span id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) Denominating them
according to the impression of the multitude. For the evil spirit, to
bring a reproach upon nature, <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253)
by wine? For the weaker the vessel, the more entire the shipwreck,
whether she be free or a slave. For the free woman behaves herself
unseemly in the midst of her slaves as spectators, and the slave again
in like manner in the midst of the slaves, and they cause the gifts of
God to be blasphemously spoken of by foolish men.

<span id="iii.LV-p77"></span>For instance, I hear many say, when these
excesses happen, “Would there were no wine.” O folly! O madness! When
other men sin, dost thou find fault with God’s gifts? And what great
madness is this? What? did the wine, O man, produce this evil? Not the
wine, but the intemperance of such as take an evil delight in it. Say
then, “Would there were no drunkenness, no luxury;” but if thou say,
“Would there were no wine,” thou wilt say, going on by degrees, “Would
there were no steel, because of the murderers; no night, because of the
thieves; no light, because of the informers; no women, because of
adulteries;” and, in a word, thou wilt destroy all.

<span id="iii.LV-p78"></span>But do not so; for this is of a satanical
mind; do not find fault with the wine, but with the drunkenness; and
when thou hast found this self-same man sober, sketch out all his
unseemliness, and say unto him, Wine was given, that we might be
cheerful, not that we might behave ourselves unseemly; that we might
laugh, not that we might be a laughingstock; that we might be healthful,
not that we might be diseased; that we might correct the weakness of our
body, not cast down the might of our soul.

<span id="iii.LV-p79"></span>God honored thee with the gift, why
disgrace thyself with the excess thereof? Hear what Paul saith, “Use a
little wine for thy stomach’s sake, and thine often infirmities.” <span
id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) But if that saint, even when
oppressed with disease, and enduring successive sicknesses, partook not
of wine, until his Teacher suffered <span id="page_341">p. 341</span>
<span id="iii.LV-Page_341"></span> him; what excuse shall we have, who
are drunken in health? To him indeed He said, “Use a little wine for thy
stomach’s sake;” but to each of you who are drunken, He will say, “Use
little wine, for thy fornications, thy frequent filthy talking, for the
other wicked desires to which drunkenness is wont to give birth.” But if
ye are not willing, for these reasons, to abstain; at least on account
of the despondencies which come of it, and the vexations, do ye abstain.
For wine was given for gladness, “Yea, wine,” so it is said, “maketh
glad the heart of man:” <span id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255) but
ye mar even this excellence in it. For what kind of gladness is it to be
beside one’s self, and to have innumerable vexations, and to see all
things whirling round, and to be oppressed with giddiness, and like
those that have a fever, to require some who may drench their heads with
oil? <span id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256)

<span id="iii.LV-p83"></span>6. These things are not said by me to all:
or rather they are said to all, not because all are drunken, God forbid;
but because they who do not drink take no thought of the drunken.
Therefore even against you do I rather inveigh, that are in health;
since the physician too leaves the sick, and addresses his discourse to
them that are sitting by them. To you therefore do I direct my speech,
entreating you neither to be at any time over-taken by this passion, and
to draw up <span id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) as by cords those
who have been so overtaken, that they be not found worse than the
brutes. For they indeed seek nothing more than what is needful, but
these have become even more brutish than they, overpassing the
boundaries of moderation. For how much better is the ass than these men?
how much better the dog! For indeed each of these animals, and of all
others, whether it need to eat, or to drink, acknowledges sufficiency
for a limit, and goes not on beyond what it needs; and though there are
innumerable persons to constrain, it will not endure to go on to excess.

<span id="iii.LV-p85"></span>In this respect then we are worse even than
the brutes, by the judgment not of them that are in health only, but
even by our own. For that ye have judged yourselves to be baser than
both dogs and asses, <span id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258) revealed
to Peter, He doth hereby again confirm. And neither at this did He stop,
but by His very condescension declares this self-same truth; an instance
of exceeding wisdom.

<span id="iii.LV-p87"></span>For after thus speaking, He saith, “But
lest we should offend them, go thou and cast an hook into the sea, and
take up the fish that first cometh up, and thou shalt find therein a
piece of money; <span id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) that take,
and give unto them for me and thee.” <span
id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260)

<span id="iii.LV-p90"></span>See how He neither declines the tribute,
nor simply commands to pay it, but having first proved Himself not
liable to it, then He gives it: the one to save the people, the other,
those around Him, from offense. For He gives it not at all as a debt,
but as doing the best <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) for
their weakness. Elsewhere, however, He despises the offense, when He was
discoursing of meats, <span id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262)
teaching us to know at what seasons we ought to consider them that are
offended, and at what to disregard them.

<span id="iii.LV-p93"></span>And indeed by the very mode of giving He
discloses Himself again. For wherefore doth He not command him to give
of what they have laid up? That, as I have said, herein also He might
signify Himself to be God of all, and the sea also to be under His rule.
For He had indeed signified this even already, by His rebuke, and by His
commanding this same Peter to walk on the waves; but He now again
signifies the self-same thing, though in another way, yet so as to cause
herein great amazement. For neither was it a small thing, to foretell
that the first, who out of those depths should come in his way, would be
the fish that would pay the tribute; and having cast forth His
commandment like a net into that abyss, to bring up the one that bore
the piece of money; but it was of a divine and unutterable power, thus
to make even the sea bear gifts, and that its subjection to Him should
be shown on all hands, as well when in its madness it was silent, <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) and when, though fierce, it
received its fellow servant; <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264)
as now again, when it makes payment in His behalf to them that are
demanding it.

<span id="iii.LV-p96"></span>“And give unto them,” He saith, “for me and
thee.” Seest thou the exceeding greatness of the honor? See also the
self-command of Peter’s mind. For this point Mark, the follower of this
apostle, doth not appear to have set down, because it indicated the
great honor paid to him; but while of the denial he wrote as well as the
rest, the things that make him illustrious he hath passed over in
silence, his master perhaps entreating him not to mention the great
things about himself. And He used the phrase, “for me and thee,” because
Peter too was a firstborn child.

<span id="iii.LV-p97"></span>Now as thou art amazed at Christ’s power,
so I bid thee admire also the disciple’s faith, that to a thing beyond
possibility he so gave ear. For indeed it was very far beyond
possibility by nature. Wherefore also in requital for his faith, He
joined him to Himself in the payment of the tribute.

<span id="iii.LV-p98"></span>3. “In that hour came the disciples unto
Jesus, saying, Who then is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” <span
id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265)

<span id="iii.LV-p100"></span>The disciples experienced some feeling of
human weakness; wherefore the evangelist also adds this note, saying,
“In that hour;” when He had preferred him to all. For of James too, and
John, one was a firstborn son, but no such thing as this had He done for
them.

<span id="iii.LV-p101"></span>Then, being ashamed to avow their feeling,
they say not indeed openly, “Wherefore hast thou preferred Peter to us?”
or, “Is he greater than we are?” for they were ashamed; but indefinitely
they ask, “Who then is greater?” For when they saw the three preferred,
they felt nothing of the kind; but now that the honor had come round to
one, they were vexed. And not for this only, but there were many other
things which they put together to kindle that feeling. For to him He had
said, “I will give thee the keys;” <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) to him, “Blessed art thou, Simon
Barjona;” to him here, “Give unto them for me and thee;” and seeing too
in general how freely he was allowed to speak, it somewhat fretted them.

<span id="iii.LV-p103"></span>And if Mark saith, <span
id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) that they did not ask, <span
id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span id="iii.LV-Page_342"></span> but
reasoned in themselves, that is nothing contrary to this. For it is
likely that they did both the one and the other, and whereas before, on
another occasion, they had had this feeling, both once and twice, that
now they did both declare it, and reason among themselves.

<span id="iii.LV-p105"></span>But to thee I say, “Look not to the charge
against them only, but consider this too; first, that they seek none of
the things of this world; next, that even this passion they afterwards
laid aside, and give up the first place one to another.” But we are not
able to attain so much as unto their faults, neither do we seek, “who is
greatest <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) in the kingdom of
heaven;” but, who is greatest <span id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269)
in the earthly kingdom, who is wealthiest, who most powerful.

<span id="iii.LV-p108"></span>What then saith Christ? He unveils their
conscience, and replies to their feeling, not merely to their words.
“For He called a little child unto Him,” saith the Scripture, “and said,
Except ye be converted, and become as this little child, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) “Why, you,” He saith, “inquire who
is greatest, and are contentious for first honors; but I pronounce him,
that is not become lowest of all, unworthy so much as to enter in
thither.”

<span id="iii.LV-p110"></span>And full well doth He both allege that
pattern, and not allege it only, but also set the child in the midst, by
the very sight abashing them, and persuading them to be in like manner
lowly and artless. Since both from envy the little child is pure, and
from vainglory, and from longing for the first place; and he is
possessed of the greatest of virtues, simplicity, and whatever is
artless and lowly.

<span id="iii.LV-p111"></span>Not courage then only is wanted, nor
wisdom, but this virtue also, humility I mean, and simplicity. Yea, and
the things that belong to our salvation halt even in the chiefest point,
if these be not with us.

<span id="iii.LV-p112"></span>The little child, whether it be insulted
and beaten, or honored and glorified, neither by the one is it moved to
impatience or envy, nor by the other lifted up.

<span id="iii.LV-p113"></span>Seest thou how again He calls us on to all
natural excellencies, indicating that of free choice it is possible to
attain them, and so silences the wicked frenzy of the Manichæans? For if
nature be an evil thing, wherefore doth He draw from hence His patterns
of severe goodness?

<span id="iii.LV-p114"></span>And the child which He set in the midst I
suppose to have been a very young child indeed, free from all these
passions. For such a little child is free from pride and the mad desire
of glory, and envy, and contentiousness, and all such passions, and
having many virtues, simplicity, humility, unworldliness, <span
id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271) prides itself upon none of them;
which is a twofold severity of goodness; to have these things, and not
to be puffed up about them.

<span id="iii.LV-p116"></span>Wherefore He brought it in, and set it in
the midst; and not at this merely did He conclude His discourse, but
carries further this admonition, saying, “And whoso shall receive such a
little child in my name, receiveth me.” <span
id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272)

<span id="iii.LV-p118"></span>“For know,” saith He, “that not only, if
ye yourselves become like this, shall ye receive a great reward; but
also if for my sake ye honor others who are such, even for your honor to
them do I appoint unto you a kingdom as your recompence.” Or rather, He
sets down what is far greater, saying, “he receiveth me. So exceedingly
dear to me is all that is lowly and artless.” For by “a little child,”
here, He means the men that are thus simple and lowly, and abject and
contemptible in the judgment of the common sort.

<span id="iii.LV-p119"></span>4. After this, to obtain yet more
acceptance for His saying, He establishes it not by the honor only, but
also by the punishment, going on to say, “And whoso shall offend one of
these little ones, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.” <span
id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273)

<span id="iii.LV-p121"></span>“For as they,” saith He, “who honor these
for my sake, have heaven, or rather an honor greater than the very
kingdom; even so they likewise who dishonor them (for this is to offend
them), shall suffer the extremity of punishment. And marvel thou not at
His calling the affront “an offense;” <span
id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274) for many feeble-minded persons have
suffered no ordinary offense from being treated with slight and insult.
To heighten therefore and aggravate the blame, He states the mischief
arising therefrom.

<span id="iii.LV-p123"></span>And He doth not go on to express the
punishment in the same way, but from the things familiar to us, He
indicates how intolerable it is. For when He would touch the grosser
sort most sharply, He brings sensible images. Wherefore here also,
meaning to <span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="iii.LV-Page_343"></span> indicate the greatness of the punishment
they shall undergo, and to strike into the arrogance of those that
despise them, He brought forward a kind of sensible punishment, that of
the millstone, and of the drowning. Yet surely it were suitable to what
had gone before to have said, “He that receiveth not one of these little
ones, receiveth not me;” a thing bitterer than any punishment; but since
the very unfeeling, and exceeding gross, were not so much penetrated by
this, terrible as it is, He puts “a millstone,” and “a drowning.” And He
said not, “A millstone shall be hanged about his neck,” but, “It were
better for him” <span id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) to undergo
this; implying that another evil, more grievous than this, awaits him;
and if this be unbearable, much more that.

<span id="iii.LV-p125"></span>Seest thou how in both respects He made
His threat terrible, first by the comparison with the known image
rendering it more distinct, then by the excess on its side presenting it
to the fancy as far greater than that visible one. Seest thou how He
plucks up by the root the spirit of arrogance; how He heals the ulcer of
vainglory; how He instructs us in nothing to set our heart on the first
honors; how He persuades such as covet them in everything to follow
after the lowest place?

<span id="iii.LV-p126"></span>5. For nothing is worse than
arrogance. <span id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) This even takes
men out of their natural senses, and brings upon them the character of
fools; or rather, it really makes them to be utterly like idiots.

<span id="iii.LV-p128"></span>For like as, if any one, being three
cubits in stature, were to strive to be higher than the mountains, or
actually to think it, and draw himself up, as overpassing their summits,
we should seek no other proof of his being out of his senses; so also
when thou seest a man arrogant, and thinking himself superior to all,
and accounting it a degradation to live with other people, seek not thou
after that to see any other proof of that man’s madness. Why, he is much
more ridiculous than any natural fool, inasmuch as he absolutely creates
this his disease on purpose. And not in this only is he wretched, but
because he doth without feeling it fall into the very gulf of
wickedness.

<span id="iii.LV-p129"></span>For when will such an one come to due
knowledge of any sin? when will he perceive that he is offending? Nay,
rather he is as a vile and captive slave, whom the devil having caught
goes off with, and makes him altogether a prey, buffetting him on every
side, and encompassing him with ten thousand insults.

<span id="iii.LV-p130"></span>For unto such great folly doth he lead
them in the end, as to get them to be haughty towards their children,
and wives, and towards their own forefathers. And others, on the
contrary, He causes to be puffed up by the distinction of their
ancestors. Now, what can be more foolish than this? when from opposite
causes people are alike puffed up, the one sort because they had mean
persons for fathers, grandfathers, and ancestors; and the other because
theirs were glorious and distinguished? How then may one abate in each
case the swelling sore? By saying to these last, “Go farther back than
your grandfather, and immediate ancestors, and you will find perchance
many cooks, and drivers of asses, and shopkeepers:” but to the former,
that are puffed up by the meanness of their forefathers, the contrary
again; “And thou again, if thou proceed farther up among thy
forefathers, wilt find many far more illustrious than thou art.”

<span id="iii.LV-p131"></span>For that nature hath this course, come let
me prove it to thee even from the Scriptures. Solomon was son of a king,
and of an illustrious king, but that king’s father was one of the vile
and ignoble. And his grandfather on his mother’s side in like manner;
for else he would not have given his daughter to a mere soldier. And if
thou wert to go up again higher from these mean persons, thou wilt see
the race more illustrious and royal. So in Saul’s case too, so in many
others also, one shall come to this result. Let us not then pride
ourselves herein. For what is birth? tell me. Nothing, but a name only
without a substance; and this ye will know in that day. But because that
day is not yet come, let us now even from the things present persuade
you, that hence arises no superiority. For should war overtake us,
should famine, should anything else, all these inflated conceits of
noble birth are put to the proof: should disease, should pestilence come
upon us, it knows not how to distinguish between the rich and the poor,
the glorious and inglorious, the high born and him that is not such;
neither doth death, nor the other reverses of fortune, but they all rise
up alike against all; and if I may say something that is even
marvellous, against the rich more of the two. For by how much they are
less exercised in these things, so much the more do they perish, when
overtaken by them. And the fear too is greater with the rich. For none
so tremble at princes as they; and at multitudes, not less than at
princes, yea rather much more; many such houses in fact have been
subverted alike by the wrath of multitudes and the threatening of
princes. But <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> <span
id="iii.LV-Page_344"></span> the poor man is exempt from both these
kinds of troubled waters.

<span id="iii.LV-p132"></span>6. Wherefore let alone this nobility, and
if thou wouldest show me that thou art noble, show the freedom of thy
soul, such as that blessed man had (and he a poor man), who said to
Herod, “It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother Philip’s
wife;” <span id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) such as he was
possessed of, who before him was like him, and after him shall be so
again; who said to Ahab, “I do not trouble Israel, but thou, and thy
father’s house;” <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278) such as the
prophets had, such as all the apostles.

<span id="iii.LV-p135"></span>But not like this are the souls of them
that are slaves to wealth, but as they that are under ten thousand
tutors, and taskmasters, so these dare not so much as lift up their eye,
and speak boldly in behalf of virtue. For the love of riches, and that
of glory, and that of other things, looking terribly on them, make them
slavish flatterers; there being nothing which so takes away liberty, as
entanglement in worldly affairs, and the wearing what are accounted
marks of distinction. For such an one hath not one master, nor two, nor
three, but ten thousand.

<span id="iii.LV-p136"></span>And if ye would fain even number them, let
us bring in some one of those that are in honor in kings’ courts, and
let him have both very much wealth, and great power, and a birthplace
excelling others, and distinction of ancestry, and let him be looked up
to by all men. Now then let us see, if this be not the very person to be
more in slavery than all; and let us set in comparison with him, not a
slave merely, but a slave’s slave, for many though servants have slaves.
This slave’s slave then for his part hath but one master. And what
though that one be not a freeman? yet he is but one, and the other looks
only to his pleasure. For albeit his master’s master seem to have power
over him, yet for the present he obeys one only; and if matters between
them two are well, he will abide in security all his life. But our man
hath not one or two only, but many, and more grievous masters. And first
he is in care about the sovereign himself. And it is not the same to
have a mean person for a master, as to have a king, whose ears are
buzzed into by many, and who becomes a property now to this set and now
to that.

<span id="iii.LV-p137"></span>Our man, though conscious of nothing,
suspects all; both his comrades and his subordinates; both his friends
and his enemies.

<span id="iii.LV-p138"></span>But the other man too, you may say, fears
his master. But how is it the same thing, to have one or many, to make
one timorous? Or rather, if a man inquire carefully, he will not find so
much as one. How, and in what sense? Whereas that slave hath no one that
desires to put him out of that service of his, and to introduce himself
(whence neither hath he any one to plot against him therein); these have
not even any other pursuit, but to unsettle him that is more approved
and more beloved by their ruler. Wherefore also he must needs flatter
all, his superiors, his equals, his friends. For where envy is, and love
of glory, there even sincere friendship has no strength. For as those of
the same craft cannot love one another with a perfect and genuine love,
so is it with rivals in honor also, and with them that long for the same
among worldly objects. Whence also great is the war within.

<span id="iii.LV-p139"></span>Seest thou what a swarm of masters, and of
hard masters? Wilt thou that I show thee yet another, more grievous than
this? They that are behind him, all of them strive to get before him:
all that are before him, to hinder him from coming nearer them, and
passing them by.

<span id="iii.LV-p140"></span>7. But O marvel! I undertook indeed to
show you masters, but our discourse, we find, coming on and waxing
eager, hath performed more than my undertaking, pointing out foes
instead of masters; or rather the same persons both as foes and as
masters. For while they are courted like masters, they are terrible as
foes, and they plot against us as enemies. When then any one hath the
same persons both as masters, and as enemies, what can be worse than
this calamity? The slave indeed, though he be subject to command, yet
nevertheless hath the advantage of care and good-will on the part of
them who give him orders; but these, while they receive commands, are
made enemies, and are set one against another; and that so much more
grievously than those in battles, in that they both wound secretly, and
in the mask of friends they treat men as their enemies would do, and
oftentimes make themselves credit of the calamity of others.

<span id="iii.LV-p141"></span>But not such are our circumstances; rather
should another fare ill, there are many to grieve with him: should he
obtain distinction, many to find pleasure with him. Not so again the
apostle: “For whether,” saith he, “one member suffer, all the members
suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with
it.” <span id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279) And the words of him who
gives these admonitions, are at one time, “What is my hope or joy? are
not even ye?” <span id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280) at another,
“Now we live, if ye <span id="page_345">p. 345</span> <span
id="iii.LV-Page_345"></span> stand fast in the Lord;” <span
id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281) at another, “Out of much affliction
and anguish of heart I wrote unto you;” <span
id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282) and, “Who is weak, and I am not
weak? Who is offended, and I burn not?” <span
id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283)

<span id="iii.LV-p147"></span>Wherefore then do we still endure the
tempest and the billows of the world without, and not run to this calm
haven, and leaving the names of good things, go on to the very things
themselves? For glory, and dignity, and wealth, and credit, and all such
things, are names with them, but with us realities; just as the grievous
things, death and dishonor and poverty, and whatever else is like them,
are names indeed with us, but realities with them.

<span id="iii.LV-p148"></span>And, if thou wilt, let us first bring
forward glory, so lovely and desirable with all of them. And I speak not
of its being short-lived, and soon put out, but when it is in its bloom,
then show it me. Take not away the daubings and colored lines of the
harlot, but bring her forward decked out, and exhibit her to us, for me
thereupon to expose her deformity. Well then, of course thou wilt tell
of her array, and her many lictors, and the heralds’ voice, and the
listening of all classes, and the silence kept by the populace, and the
blows given to all that come in one’s way, and the universal gazing. Are
not these her splendors? Come then, let us examine whether these things
be not vain, and a mere unprofitable imagination. For wherein is the
person we speak of the better for these things, either in body, or in
soul? for this constitutes the man. Will he then be taller hereby, or
stronger, or healthier, or swifter, or will he have his senses keener,
and more piercing? Nay, no one could say this. Let us go then to the
soul, if haply we may find there any advantage occurring herefrom. What
then? Will such a one be more temperate, more gentle, more prudent,
through that kind of attendance? By no means, but rather quite the
contrary. For not as in the body, so also is the result here. For there
the body indeed gains nothing in respect of its proper excellence; but
here the mischief is not only the soul’s reaping no good fruit, but also
its actually receiving much evil therefrom: hurried as it is by such
means into haughtiness, and vainglory, and folly, and wrath, and ten
thousand faults like them.

<span id="iii.LV-p149"></span>“But he rejoices,” thou wilt say, “and
exults in these things, and they brighten him up.” The crowning
point <span id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) of his evils lies in
that word of thine, and the incurable part of the disease. For he that
rejoices in these things, would be unwilling however easily to be
released from that which is the ground of his evils; yea, he hath
blocked up against himself the way of healing by this delight. So that
here most of all is the mischief, that he is not even pained, but rather
rejoices, when the diseases are growing upon him.

<span id="iii.LV-p151"></span>For neither is rejoicing always a good
thing; since even thieves rejoice in stealing, and an adulterer in
defiling his neighbor’s marriage bed, and the covetous in spoiling by
violence, and the manslayer in murdering. Let us not then look whether
he rejoice, but whether it be for something profitable, lest <span
id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285) perchance we find his joy to be
such as that of the adulterer and the thief.

<span id="iii.LV-p153"></span>For wherefore, tell me, doth he rejoice?
For his credit with the multitude, because he can puff himself up, and
be gazed upon? Nay, what can be worse than this desire, and this
ill-placed fondness? or if it be no bad thing, ye must leave off
deriding the vainglorious and aspersing them with continual mockeries:
ye must leave off uttering imprecations on the haughty and contemptuous.
But ye would not endure it. Well then, they too deserve plenty of
censure, though they have plenty of lictors. And all this I have said of
the more tolerable sort of rulers; since the greater part of them we
shall find transgressing more grievously than either robbers, or
murderers, or adulterers, or spoilers of tombs, from not making a good
use of their power. For indeed both their thefts are more shameless, and
their butcheries more hardened, and their impurities far more enormous
than the others; and they dig through, not one wall, but estates and
houses without end, their prerogative making it very easy to them.

<span id="iii.LV-p154"></span>And they serve a most grievous servitude,
both stooping basely under their passions, <span
id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286) and trembling at all their
accomplices. For he only is free, and he only a ruler, and more kingly
than all kings, who is delivered from his passions.

<span id="iii.LV-p156"></span>Knowing then these things, let us follow
after the true freedom, and deliver ourselves from the evil slavery, and
let us account neither pomp of power nor dominion of wealth, nor any
other such thing, to be blessed; but virtue only. For thus shall we both
enjoy security here, and attain unto the good things to come, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[337:2215](1100063.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="iii.LV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p6"></span>[John iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)<span id="iii.LV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[337:2216](1100063.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="iii.LV-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p7"></span>[John i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021)<span id="iii.LV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[337:2217](1100063.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="iii.LV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p9"></span>[Titus
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012)<span id="iii.LV-p9.1"></span>.
\[The Homily omits “to all men.”\]

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[337:2218](1100063.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="iii.LV-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p10"></span>[Tit. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span id="iii.LV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[337:2219](1100063.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="iii.LV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p12"></span>[John i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021)<span id="iii.LV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[337:2220](1100063.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="iii.LV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p15"></span>[Matt. xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)<span id="iii.LV-p15.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Elijah indeed cometh,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[337:2221](1100063.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="iii.LV-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p16"></span>[Mal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span id="iii.LV-p16.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LV-p16.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[337:2222](1100063.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="iii.LV-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p18"></span>\[The Hebrew does not have this; the
argument rests on the inaccurate rendering of the <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.LV-p18.1"></span>LXX</span>.\]

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[337:2223](1100063.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="iii.LV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p19"></span>[John xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)<span id="iii.LV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[337:2224](1100063.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="iii.LV-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p22"></span>See <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LV-p22.1"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[337:2225](1100063.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="iii.LV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p23"></span>As to Elijah’s future coming, see St. Just.
Mart. *Dial. adv*. *Tryph*. p. 268, ed. Paris, 1636: Tert. *de Anim*.
35; *de Resur. Carnis*, 22; Origen (more doubtfully) *in St. Matt.* tom.
13, iii. 572; *in St. Joan.* tom. 3, iv. 92. St. Jer. *in St. Matt*. xi,
15, (t. 7, 70. Vallars. 1771), but doubtingly; *in loco,* p. 132, more
positively; St. Aug. *in St. Joan*. Tr. iv. 5, 6. *de Civ. Dei*, 20, 29:
who speaks positively of his coming to convert the Jews, as being “a
most common topic in the mouths and hearts of the faithful.”

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[338:2226](1100063.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="iii.LV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p25"></span>[Matt.
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#013)<span id="iii.LV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[338:2227](1100063.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="iii.LV-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p28"></span>[Matt. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014)<span id="iii.LV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[338:2228](1100063.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="iii.LV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p29"></span>This refers apparently to such texts as
[Jer. 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009), [Ezek.
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024), [Ezek.
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024), [Hos.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)<span id="iii.LV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[338:2229](1100063.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="iii.LV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p30"></span>[Isa. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span id="iii.LV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[338:2230](1100063.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="iii.LV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p31"></span>[Amos ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)<span id="iii.LV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[338:2231](1100063.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="iii.LV-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p34"></span>[Matt. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012)<span id="iii.LV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[338:2232](1100063.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="iii.LV-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p37"></span>[Matt. xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)<span id="iii.LV-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[338:2233](1100063.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="iii.LV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p40"></span>\[“Sinful” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p40.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p40.2"></span>μαρτωλν</span>) is omitted in some <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.LV-p40.3"></span>mss</span>. of the Homily. It
does not occur in [Matt. xvii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)<span
id="iii.LV-p40.4"></span>, but is taken from [Luke xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#007)<span id="iii.LV-p40.5"></span>.
Comp. Homily LVIII. at the beginning.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[338:2234](1100063.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="iii.LV-p40.6"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p41"></span>[Matt. xvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023)<span id="iii.LV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[338:2235](1100063.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="iii.LV-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p44"></span>[Matt. xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014)<span id="iii.LV-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[338:2236](1100063.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="iii.LV-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p45"></span>Comp. [Luke xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#024)<span id="iii.LV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[339:2237](1100063.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="iii.LV-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p48"></span>[Matt.
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023)<span id="iii.LV-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[339:2238](1100063.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="iii.LV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p49"></span>[Mark ix.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#032)<span id="iii.LV-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[339:2239](1100063.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="iii.LV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p50"></span>[Luke ix.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#045)<span id="iii.LV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[339:2240](1100063.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="iii.LV-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p52"></span>\[R.V., “for he is epileptic, and suffereth
grievously.”\]

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[339:2241](1100063.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="iii.LV-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p53"></span>[Matt. xvii.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014)<span id="iii.LV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[339:2242](1100063.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="iii.LV-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p55"></span>[Mark ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023)<span id="iii.LV-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[339:2243](1100063.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="iii.LV-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p56"></span>[Mark ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#024)<span id="iii.LV-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[339:2244](1100063.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="iii.LV-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p57"></span>[Mark ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025)<span id="iii.LV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[339:2245](1100063.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="iii.LV-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p58"></span>[Mark ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#022)<span id="iii.LV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[339:2246](1100063.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="iii.LV-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p60"></span>[2 Kings xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021)<span id="iii.LV-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[339:2247](1100063.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="iii.LV-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p62"></span>[Gal. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)<span id="iii.LV-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[339:2248](1100063.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="iii.LV-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p64"></span>[Matt. xvii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#017)<span id="iii.LV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[339:2249](1100063.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="iii.LV-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p67"></span>[Mark ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#021)<span id="iii.LV-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[339:2250](1100063.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="iii.LV-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p70"></span>[Mark ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023)<span id="iii.LV-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[339:2251](1100063.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="iii.LV-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p71"></span>[Matt. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002)<span id="iii.LV-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[339:2252](1100063.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="iii.LV-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p72"></span>[Mark ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#023)<span id="iii.LV-p72.1"></span>.
\[The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p72.2"></span>πιστεσαι</span> is read here; The R.V. has a
briefer reading. The entire passage in Mark shows many variations of
text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[340:2253](1100063.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="iii.LV-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p75"></span>[Matt. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024)<span id="iii.LV-p75.1"></span>.
\[<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p75.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p75.3"></span>σεληνιαζομνου</span></span>; the same term
occurs here, and is the basis of the comment.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[340:2254](1100063.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="iii.LV-p75.4"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p76"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p76.1"></span>το στοιχεου</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p76.2"></span>παραφερομνη</span>.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[340:2255](1100063.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="iii.LV-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p80"></span>[1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span id="iii.LV-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[341:2256](1100063.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="iii.LV-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p81"></span>[Ps. civ.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#015)<span id="iii.LV-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[341:2257](1100063.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="iii.LV-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p82"></span>Lightfoot, *Harmony*, A.D., 43. t. i. p.
333, seems to show from Talmudic writers, that anointing was regularly
used among the Jews, either as a remedy or as a charm, in complaints of
the head especially; and he uses the fact to explain St. [James v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015)<span id="iii.LV-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[341:2258](1100063.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="iii.LV-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p84"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p84.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p84.2"></span>νιμθαι</span>.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[341:2259](1100063.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="iii.LV-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p86"></span>\[The Oxford edition reads “apes,”
obviously a typographical error. The Greek word is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p86.1"></span>ὄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p86.2"></span>νων</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p86.3"></span>τν γνσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[341:2260](1100063.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="iii.LV-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p88"></span>Literally, a stater, = 4 drachmas. \[R.V.,
“shekel, Greek, stater.”\]

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[341:2261](1100063.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="iii.LV-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p89"></span>[Matt. xvii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)<span id="iii.LV-p89.1"></span>.
\[Slightly abridged.\]

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[341:2262](1100063.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="iii.LV-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p91"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p91.1"></span>διορθνμενο</span> .

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[341:2263](1100063.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="iii.LV-p91.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p92"></span>[Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span id="iii.LV-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[341:2264](1100063.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="iii.LV-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p94"></span>[Matt. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)<span id="iii.LV-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[341:2265](1100063.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="iii.LV-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p95"></span>[Matt. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)<span id="iii.LV-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[341:2266](1100063.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="iii.LV-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p99"></span>[Matt. xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001)<span id="iii.LV-p99.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Who then is greatest (Greek, greater).” Compare the
comment.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[341:2267](1100063.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="iii.LV-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p102"></span>[Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="iii.LV-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[341:2268](1100063.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="iii.LV-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p104"></span>[Mark ix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#034)<span id="iii.LV-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[342:2269](1100063.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="iii.LV-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p106"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p106.1"></span>μεζων</span> “greater.”\]

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[342:2270](1100063.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="iii.LV-p106.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p107"></span>\[R.V., “Except ye turn, and become as
little children,” but Chrysostom substitutes “this little child.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[342:2271](1100063.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="iii.LV-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p109"></span>[Matt.
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="iii.LV-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[342:2272](1100063.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="iii.LV-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p115"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p115.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p115.2"></span>πραγμοσνην</span> .

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[342:2273](1100063.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="iii.LV-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p117"></span>[Matt. xviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#005)<span id="iii.LV-p117.1"></span>.
\[“one such little child,” rec. text; so R.V.\]

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[342:2274](1100063.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="iii.LV-p119.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p120"></span>[Matt. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006)<span id="iii.LV-p120.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “but whoso shall cause one of these little ones which believe in
me to stumble, it is profitable for him that a great millstone (Greek, a
millstone turned by an ass) should be hanged about his neck, and that he
should be sunk in the depth of the sea.” The Greek text of Chrysostom
agrees very closely with the received, but omits “which believe in
me.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[342:2275](1100063.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="iii.LV-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p122"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p122.1"></span>σκνδαλον</span>, “stumbling block.”\]

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[343:2276](1100063.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="iii.LV-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p124"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p124.1"></span>συμφερε ατ</span>, “it is profitable for
him.”\]

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[343:2277](1100063.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="iii.LV-p126.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p127"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p127.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p127.2"></span>πονοα</span>.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[344:2278](1100063.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="iii.LV-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p133"></span>[Mark vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#018)<span id="iii.LV-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[344:2279](1100063.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="iii.LV-p133.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p134"></span>[1 Kings xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018)<span id="iii.LV-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[344:2280](1100063.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="iii.LV-p141.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p142"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span id="iii.LV-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[344:2281](1100063.htm#fr_2280) <span
id="iii.LV-p142.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p143"></span>[1 Thes. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span id="iii.LV-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[345:2282](1100063.htm#fr_2281) <span
id="iii.LV-p143.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p144"></span>[1 Thes. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008)<span id="iii.LV-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[345:2283](1100063.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="iii.LV-p144.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p145"></span>[2 Cor. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#004)<span id="iii.LV-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[345:2284](1100063.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="iii.LV-p145.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p146"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="iii.LV-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[345:2285](1100063.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="iii.LV-p149.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p150"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LV-p150.1"></span>κολοφνα</span>.

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[345:2286](1100063.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="iii.LV-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p152"></span>\[The Greek text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p152.1"></span>διασκεψμεθα</span>, which
the translator has ignored: “Let us consider well, lest,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[345:2287](1100063.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="iii.LV-p154.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LV-p155"></span>\[Some <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LV-p155.1"></span>mss</span>. insert here: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p155.2"></span>κα το συνδολου τπτοντε
φειδ</span><span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LV-p155.3"></span>,</span>
“and beating the fellow servants unsparingly.” But it is put in brackets
by Field.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LVI](1100064)
