[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100014)  [Next](1100016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.VII"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.VII-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="iii.VII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.VII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005)<span
id="iii.VII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.VII-p3"></span>“And when he had gathered all the chief
priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where
Christ should be born. And they said unto him, in Bethlehem of Judæa.”

<span id="iii.VII-p4"></span>Seest thou how all things are done to
convict the Jews? how, as long as He was out of their sight, the envy
had not yet laid hold of them, and they rehearsed the testimonies *of
Him* with truth; but when they saw the glory that arose from the
miracles, a grudging spirit possessed them, and thenceforth they
betrayed the truth.

<span id="iii.VII-p5"></span>However, the truth was exalted by all
things, and strength was the more gathered for it even by its enemies.
See for example in this very case, how wonderful and beyond <span
id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_42"></span> expectation
are the results secretly provided for. <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) For both the barbarians and the Jews
do the same time alike learn something more of one another, and teach
one another. Thus the Jews, for their part, heard from the wise men,
that a star also had proclaimed Him in the land of the Persians; the
wise men, in their turn, were informed by the Jews that this Man, whom
the star proclaimed, prophets also had made known from a long time of
old. And the ground <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) of their
inquiry was made to both an occasion of setting forth clearer and more
perfect instruction; and the enemies of the truth are compelled even
against their will to read the writings in favor of the truth, and to
interpret the prophecy; although not all of it. For having spoken of
Bethlehem, and how that out of it He shall come that should rule Israel,
they proceed not afterwards to add what follows, out of flattery to the
king. And what was this? That “His goings forth are from of old, from
everlasting.”

<span id="iii.VII-p8"></span>2. “But why,” one may say, “if He was to
come from thence, did He live in Nazareth after the birth, and obscure
the prophecy?” Nay, He did not obscure it, but unfolded it the more. For
the fact, that while His mother had her constant residence in the one
place, He was born in the other, shows the thing to have been done by a
Divine dispensation. <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301)

<span id="iii.VII-p10"></span>And for this cause, let me add, neither
did He remove from thence straightway after His birth, but abode forty
days, giving opportunity to them that were disposed to be inquisitive to
examine all things accurately. Because there were in truth many things
to move them to such an inquiry, at least if they had been disposed to
give heed to them. Thus at the coming of the wise men the whole city was
in a flutter, <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) and together with
the city the king, and the prophet was brought forward, and a court of
high authority was summoned; and many other things too were done there,
all which Luke relates minutely. Such were what concerns Anna, and
Simeon, and Zacharias, and the angels, and the shepherds; all which
things were to the attentive sufficient to give hints for ascertaining
what had taken place. For if the wise men, who came from Persia, were
not ignorant of the place, much more might they, whose abode it was,
acquaint themselves with these things.

<span id="iii.VII-p12"></span>He manifested Himself then from the
beginning by many miracles, but when they would not see, He hid Himself
for a while, to be again revealed from another more glorious beginning.
For it was no longer the wise men, nor the star, but the Father from
above that proclaimed Him at the streams of Jordan; and the Spirit
likewise came upon Him, guiding that voice to the head of Him just
baptized; and John, with all plainness of speech, cried out everywhere
in Judæa, till inhabited and waste country alike were filled with that
kind of doctrine; and the witness too of the miracles, and earth, and
sea, and the whole creation, uttered in His behalf a distinct voice. But
at the time of the birth, just so many things happened as were fitted
quietly to mark out Him that was come. Thus, in order that the Jews
might not say, “We know not when He was born, nor whereabouts,” both all
these events in which the wise men were concerned were brought about by
God’s providence, and the rest of the things which we have mentioned; so
that they would have no excuse to plead, for not having inquired into
that which had come to pass.

<span id="iii.VII-p13"></span>But mark also the exactness of the
prophecy. For it does not say, “He will *abide*” in Bethlehem, but “He
will *come out*” thence. So that this too was a subject of prophecy, His
being simply born there.

<span id="iii.VII-p14"></span>Some of them, however, being past shame,
say that these things were spoken of Zerubbabel. But how can they be
right? For surely “his goings forth” were not “from of old, from
everlasting.” <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) And how can that
suit him which is said at the beginning, “Out of thee shall He come
forth:” Zorobabel not having been born in Judæa, but in Babylon, whence
also he was called Zorobabel, <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)
because he had his origin there? And as many as know the Syrians’
language know what I say.

<span id="iii.VII-p17"></span>And together with what hath been said, all
the time also since these things is sufficient to establish the
testimony. For what saith he? “Thou art not the <span id="page_43">p.
43</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_43"></span> least among the princes of
Judah,” and he adds the cause of the pre-eminence, saying, “out of thee
shall He come.” But no one else hath made that place illustrious or
eminent, excepting Him alone. For example: since that birth, men come
from the ends of the earth to see the manger, and the site of the shed.
And this the prophet foretold aloud from the first, saying, “Thou art
not the least among the princes of Judah;” that is, among the heads of
tribes. By which expression he comprehended even Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) But not even so have they given heed,
although the advantage passes on to themselves. Yea, and because of this
the prophets at the beginning discourse nowhere so much of His dignity,
as touching the benefit which accrued to them by Him. For so, when the
Virgin was bearing the child, he saith, “Thou shalt call His name
Jesus;” <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) and he gives the reason
saying, “for He shall save His people from their sins.” And the wise men
too said not, “Where is the Son of God?” but “He that is born King of
the Jews.” And here again it is not affirmed, “Out of thee shall come
forth” the Son of God, but “a Governor, that shall feed my people
Israel.” <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) For it was needful to
converse with them at first, setting out in a tone of very exceeding
condescension, lest they should be offended; and to preach what related
to their salvation in particular, that hereby they might be the rather
won over. At any rate, all the testimonies that are first cited, and for
which it was the season immediately at the time of the birth, say
nothing great, nor lofty concerning Him, nor such as those subsequent to
the manifestation of the miracles; for these discourse more distinctly
concerning His dignity. For instance, when after many miracles children
were singing hymns unto Him, hear what saith the prophet, “Out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise.” <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) And again, “I will consider the
Heavens, the works of Thy fingers;” which signifies Him to be Maker of
the universe. And the testimony too, which was produced after the
ascension, manifests His equality with the Father; thus saying, “The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand.” <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) And Isaiah too saith, “He that riseth
up to rule over the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust.” <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)

<span id="iii.VII-p24"></span>But how saith he that Bethlehem is “not
the least among the princes of Judah?” for not in Palestine alone, but
in the whole world, the village hath become conspicuous. Why, so far he
was speaking to Jews; wherefore also he added, “He shall feed my people
Israel.” And yet He fed the whole world; but as I have said, He is fain
not to offend as yet, by revealing what He hath to say touching the
Gentiles.

<span id="iii.VII-p25"></span>But how was it, one may say, that He did
not feed the Jewish people? I answer, first, this too is accomplished:
for by the term Israel in this place, he figuratively meant such as
believed on Him from among the Jews. And Paul interpreting this, saith,
“For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel,” <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) but as many as have been born by faith
and promise. And if He did not feed them all, this is their own fault
and blame. For when they ought to have worshipped with the wise men, and
have glorified God that such a time was come, doing away all their sins
(for not a word was spoken to them of judgments set, or of accounts to
be given, but of a mild and meek Shepherd); they for their part do just
the contrary, and are troubled, and make disturbance, and go on
continually framing plots without end.

<span id="iii.VII-p27"></span>3. “Then Herod, when he had privily called
the wise men, inquired of them diligently <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) what time the star appeared:” <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)

<span id="iii.VII-p30"></span>Attempting to slay that which was born,—an
act of extreme idiotcy <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) not of
madness only; since what had been said and done was enough to have
withholden him from any such attempt. For those occurrences were not
after the manner of man. A star, I mean, calling the wise men from on
high; and barbarians making so long a pilgrimage, to worship Him that
lay in swaddling clothes and a manger; and prophets too from of old,
proclaiming beforehand all this;—these and all the rest were more than
human events: but nevertheless, none of these things restrained him. For
such a thing is wickedness. It falls foul of itself, and is ever
attempting impossibilities. And mark his utter folly. If on the one hand
he believed the prophecy, and accounted it to be unchangeable, it was
quite clear that he was attempting impossibilities; if again he
disbelieved, and did not expect that those sayings would come to pass,
he need not have been in fear and alarm, nor have formed any plot on
that behalf. So that in either way his craft was superfluous.

<span id="iii.VII-p32"></span>And this too came of the utmost folly, to
think that the wise men would make more account of him than of the Child
that was born, for the sake of which they had come so long a journey.
For if, before they saw, they were so inflamed with longing for Him;
<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_44"></span> after
they had seen with their eyes, and been confirmed by the prophecy, how
hoped he to persuade them to betray the young Child to him?

<span id="iii.VII-p33"></span>Nevertheless, many as were the reasons to
withhold him, he made the attempt; and having “privily called the wise
men, he inquired of them.” <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315)
Because he thought that Jews would be concerned in favor of the Child,
and he never could expect that they would fall away unto such madness as
to be willing to give up to His enemies their Protector and Saviour, and
Him who was come for the deliverance of their nation. On account of this
he both calls them privily, and seeks the time not of the Child, but of
the star: thereby marking out the object of his chase so as to include
far more than it. <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) For the star,
I think, must have appeared a long time before. It was a long time which
the wise men had to spend on their journey. In order, therefore, that
they might present themselves just after His birth (it being meet for
Him to be worshipped in His very swaddling clothes, that the marvellous
and strange nature of the thing might appear), the star, a long time
before, makes itself visible. Whereas if at the moment of His birth in
Palestine, and not before, it had been seen by them in the East, they,
consuming a long time in their journey, would not have seen Him in
swaddling clothes on their arrival. As to his slaying the children “from
two years old and under,” let us not marvel; for his wrath and dread,
for the sake of a fuller security, added very much to the time, so that
not one might escape.

<span id="iii.VII-p36"></span>Having therefore called them, he saith,
“Go and search diligently <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) for
the young Child; and when ye have found Him, bring me word again, that I
may come and worship Him also.” <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)

<span id="iii.VII-p39"></span>Seest thou his extreme folly? Why, if thou
sayest these things in sincerity, wherefore dost thou inquire privily?
But if intending to plot against Him, how is it thou dost not perceive,
that from the fact of their being asked secretly the wise men will be
able to perceive thy craft? But as I have already said, a soul taken
captive by any wickedness becomes more utterly senseless than any thing.

<span id="iii.VII-p40"></span>And he said not, “go and learn concerning
the King,” but “concerning the young Child;” for he could not even
endure to call Him by the name of His dominion.

<span id="iii.VII-p41"></span>4. But the wise men perceive nothing of
this, by reason of their exceeding reverence (for they never could have
expected that he could have gone on to so great wickedness, and would
have attempted to form plots against a dispensation so marvellous): and
they depart suspecting none of these things, but from what was in
themselves auguring all that would be in the rest of mankind.

<span id="iii.VII-p42"></span>“And, lo! the star, which they saw in the
east, went before them.” <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)

<span id="iii.VII-p44"></span>For therefore only was it hidden, that
having lost their guide, they might come to be obliged to make inquiry
of the Jews, and so the matter might be made evident to all. Since after
they have made inquiries, and have had His enemies <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) for informants, it appears to them
again. And mark how excellent was the order; how in the first place
after the star the people <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) of the
Jews receives them, and the king, and these bring in the prophecy to
explain what had appeared: how next, after the prophet, an angel again
took them up and taught them all things; but for a time they journey
from Jerusalem to Bethlehem by the guidance of the star, the star again
journeying with them from that place also; that hence too thou mightest
learn, that this was not one of the ordinary stars, for there is not so
much as one star that hath this nature. And it not merely moved, but
“went before them,” drawing and guiding them on in mid-day.

<span id="iii.VII-p47"></span>“But what need of this star any more,” one
may ask, “when the place was ascertained?” In order that the Child also
might be seen. For there was not anything to make Him manifest, since
the house was not conspicuous, neither was His mother glorious, or
distinguished. There was need then of the star, to set them by the
place. Wherefore it re-appears on their coming out of Jerusalem, and
stays not, before it hath reached the manger.

<span id="iii.VII-p48"></span>And marvel was linked on to marvel; for
both were strange things, as well the magi worshipping, as the star
going before them; and enough to attract even such as were made all of
stone. For if the wise men had said, they had heard prophets say these
things, or that angels had discoursed with them in private, they might
have been disbelieved; but now, when the vision of the star appeared on
<span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_45"></span> high,
even they that were exceeding shameless had their mouths stopped.

<span id="iii.VII-p49"></span>Moreover, the star, when it stood over the
young Child, stayed its course again: which thing itself also was of a
greater power than belongs to a star, now to hide itself, now to appear,
and having appeared to stand still. Hence they too received an increase
of faith. For this cause they rejoiced also, that they had found what
they were seeking, that they had proved messengers of truth, that not
without fruit had they come so great a journey; so great a longing (so
to speak) had they for Christ. For first it came and stood over His very
head, showing that what is born is Divine; next standing there, it leads
them to worship Him; being not simply barbarians, but the wiser sort
amongst them.

<span id="iii.VII-p50"></span>Seest thou, with how great fitness the
star appeared? Why; because even after the prophecy, and after the
interpretation of the chief priests and scribes, they still had their
minds turned towards it.

<span id="iii.VII-p51"></span>5. Shame upon Marcion, shame upon Paul of
Samosata, <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) for refusing to see
what those wise men saw,—the forefathers of the Church; for I am not
ashamed so to call them. Let Marcion be ashamed, beholding God
worshipped in the flesh. Let Paul be ashamed, beholding Him worshipped
as not being merely a man. As to His being in the flesh, that first is
signified by the swaddling clothes and the manger; as to their not
worshipping Him as a mere man, they declare it, by offering Him, at that
unripe age, such gifts as were meet to be offered to God. And together
with them let the Jews also be ashamed, seeing themselves anticipated by
barbarians and magi, whilst they submit not so much as to come after
them. For indeed what happened then was a type of the things to come,
and from the very beginning it was shown that the Gentiles would
anticipate their nation.

<span id="iii.VII-p53"></span>“But how was it,” one may ask, “that not
at the beginning, but afterwards, He said, ‘Go ye, and make disciples of
all nations’”? Because the occurrence was a type, as I said, of the
future, and a sort of declaration of it beforehand. For the natural
order was that Jews should come unto Him first; but forasmuch as they of
their own choice gave up their proper benefit, the order of things was
inverted. Since not even in this instance should the wise men have come
before the Jews, nor should persons from so great a distance have
anticipated those who were settled about the very city, nor should those
who had heard nothing have prevented <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) them that were nurtured in so many
prophecies. But because they were exceedingly ignorant of their own
blessings, those from Persia anticipate those at Jerusalem. And this
indeed is what Paul also saith: “It was necessary that the word of the
Lord should first have been spoken to you, but seeing ye have judged
yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) For even though before they did not
obey, at any rate when they heard it from the wise men, they ought to
have made all haste; but they would not. Therefore, while those are
slumbering, these run before.

<span id="iii.VII-p56"></span>6. Let us then also follow the magi, let
us separate ourselves from our barbarian customs, and make our distance
therefrom great, that we may see Christ, since they too, had they not
been far from their own country, would have missed seeing Him. Let us
depart from the things of earth. For so the wise men, while they were in
Persia, saw but the star, but after they had departed from Persia, they
beheld the Sun of Righteousness. Or rather, they would not have seen so
much as the star, unless they had readily risen up from thence. Let us
then also rise up; though all men be troubled, let us run to the house
of the young Child; though kings, though nations, though tyrants
interrupt this our path, let not our desire pass away. For so shall we
thoroughly repel all the dangers that beset us. Since these too, except
they had seen the young Child, would not have escaped their danger from
the king. Before seeing the young Child, fears and dangers and troubles
pressed upon them from every side; but after the adoration, it is calm
and security; and no longer a star but an angel receives them, having
become priests from the act of adoration; for we see that they offered
gifts also.

<span id="iii.VII-p57"></span>Do thou therefore likewise leave the
Jewish people, the troubled city, the blood-thirsty tyrant, the pomp of
the world, and hasten to Bethlehem, where is the <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) house of the spiritual Bread. <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) For though thou be a shepherd, and
come hither, thou wilt behold the young Child in an inn: though thou be
a king, and approach not here, thy purple robe will profit thee nothing;
though thou be one of the wise men, this will be no hindrance to thee;
only let thy coming be to honor and adore, not to spurn the Son of God;
only do this with trembling and joy: for it is possible for both of
these to concur in one.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_46"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p60"></span>But take heed that thou be not like Herod,
and say, “that I may come and worship Him,” and when thou art come, be
minded to slay Him. For him do they resemble, who partake of the
mysteries unworthily: it being said, that such a one “shall be guilty of
the Body and Blood of the Lord.” <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327)
Yes; for they have in themselves the tyrant who is grieved at Christ’s
kingdom, him that is more wicked than Herod of old, even Mammon. For he
would fain have the dominion, and sends them that are his own to worship
in appearance, but slaying while they worship. Let us fear then, lest at
any time, while we have the appearance of suppliants and worshippers, we
should in deed show forth the contrary.

<span id="iii.VII-p62"></span>And let us cast everything out of our
hands when we are to worship; though it be gold that we have, let us
offer it unto him and not bury it. For if those barbarians then offered
it for honor, what will become of thee, not giving even to Him that hath
need? If those men journeyed so far to see Him newly born, what sort of
excuse wilt thou have, not going out of thy way one alley’s length, that
thou mayest visit Him sick or in bonds? And yet when they are sick or in
bonds, even our enemies have our pity; thine is denied even to thy
Benefactor and Lord. And they offered gold, thou hardly givest bread.
They saw the star and were glad, thou, seeing Christ Himself a stranger
and naked, art not moved.

<span id="iii.VII-p63"></span>For which of you, for Christ’s sake, hath
made so long a pilgrimage, you that have received countless benefits, as
these barbarians, or rather, these wiser than the wisest philosophers?
And why say I, so long a journey? Nay, many of our women are so
delicate, that they go not over so much as one crossing of the streets
to behold Him on the spiritual manger, <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) unless they can have mules to draw
them. And others being able to walk, yet prefer to their attendance
here, some a crowd of worldly business, some the theatres. Whereas the
barbarians accomplished so great a journey for His sake, before seeing
Him; thou not even after thou hast seen Him dost emulate them, but
forsakest Him after seeing Him, and runnest to see the stage player.
(For I touch again on the same subjects, as I did also of late. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) ) And seeing Christ lying in the
manger, thou leavest Him, that thou mayest see women on the stage.

<span id="iii.VII-p66"></span>7. What thunderbolts do not these things
deserve? For tell me, if any one were to lead <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) thee into a palace, and show thee the
king on his throne, wouldest thou indeed choose to see the theatre
instead of those things? And yet even in the palace there is nothing to
gain; but here a spiritual well of fire gushes up out of this table. And
thou leavest this, and runnest down to the theatre, to see women
swimming, and nature put to open dishonor, leaving Christ sitting by the
well? Yes: for now, as of old, He sits down by the well, not discoursing
to a Samaritan woman, but to a whole city. Or perchance now too with a
Samaritan woman only. For neither now is any one with Him; but some with
their bodies only, and some not even with these. But nevertheless, He
retires not, but remains, and asks of us to drink, not water, but
holiness, for “His holy things He gives unto the holy.” <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) For it is not water that He gives us
from this fountain, but living blood; and it is indeed a symbol of
death, but it is become the cause of life.

<span id="iii.VII-p69"></span>But thou, leaving the fountain of blood,
the awful cup, goest thy way unto the fountain of the devil, to see a
harlot swim, and to suffer shipwreck of the soul. For that water is a
sea of lasciviousness, not drowning bodies, but working shipwreck of
souls. And whereas she swims with naked body, thou beholding, art sunk
into the deep of lasciviousness. For such is the devil’s net; it sinks,
not them that go down into the water itself, but them that sit above
more than such as wallow therein; and it chokes them more grievously
than Pharaoh, who was of old sunk in the sea with his horses and his
chariots. And if souls could but be seen, I could show you many floating
on these waters, like the bodies of the Egyptians at that time. But what
is still more grievous is this, that they even call such utter
destruction a delight, and they term the sea of perdition a channel for
a pleasure voyage. <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) Yet surely
one might easier pass over in safety the Ægean or the Tuscan sea, than
this spectacle. For in the first place, through a whole night the devil
preoccupies their souls with the expectation of it; then having shown
them the expected object, he binds them at once, and makes them
captives. For think not, because thou hast not been joined unto the
harlot, thou art clean from the sin; for in the purpose of thine heart
thou hast done it all. Since if thou be taken by lust, thou hast kindled
the flame up higher; if thou feel nothing at what <span id="page_47">p.
47</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_47"></span> thou seest, thou deservest
a heavier charge, for being a scandal to others, by encouraging them in
these spectacles, and for polluting thine own eye-sight, and together
with thine eye-sight, thy soul.

<span id="iii.VII-p71"></span>However, not merely to find fault, come
let us devise a mode of correction too. What then will the mode be? I
would commit you to your own wives, that they may instruct you. It is
true, according to Paul’s law, <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333)
you ought to be the teachers. But since that order is reversed by sin,
and the body has come to be above, and the head beneath, let us even
take this way.

<span id="iii.VII-p73"></span>But if thou art ashamed to have a woman
for thy teacher, fly from sin, and thou wilt quickly be able to mount up
on the throne which God hath given thee. Since so long as thou sinnest
the Scripture sends thee not to a woman only, but even to things
irrational, and those of the viler sort; yea, it is not ashamed to send
thee who art honored with reason, as a disciple to the ant. <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) Plainly this is no charge against the
Scripture, but against them that so betray their own nobility of race.
This then we will do likewise; and for the present we will commit thee
to thy wife; but if thou despise her, we will send thee away to the
school of the very brutes, and will point out to thee how many birds,
fishes, four-footed beasts, and creeping things are found more
honorable, and chaster than thou.

<span id="iii.VII-p75"></span>If now thou art ashamed, and dost blush at
the comparison, mount up to thine own nobility, and fly the sea of hell,
and the flood of fire, I mean the pool in the theatre. For this pool
introduces to that sea, and kindles that abyss of flame. Since if “he
that looketh on a woman to lust after her hath already committed
adultery,” <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) he who is forced even
to see her naked, how doth he not become ten thousandfold a captive? The
flood in the days of Noah did not so utterly destroy the race of men as
these swimming women drown all that are there with great disgrace. For
as to that rain, though it wrought indeed a death of the body, yet did
it repress the wickedness of the soul; but this hath the contrary
effect; while the bodies remain, it destroys the soul. And ye, when
there is a question of precedence, claim to take place of the whole
word, forasmuch as our city first crowned itself with the name of
Christian; <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) but in the
competition of chastity, ye are not ashamed to be behind the rudest
cities.

<span id="iii.VII-p78"></span>8. “Well,” saith one, “and what dost thou
require us to do? to occupy the mountains, and become monks?” Why it is
this which makes me sigh, that ye think them alone to be properly
concerned with decency and chastity; and yet assuredly Christ made His
laws common to all. Thus, when He saith, “if any one look on a woman to
lust after her,” He speaks not to the solitary, but to him also that
hath a wife; since in fact that mount was at that time filled with all
kinds of persons of that description. Form then in thy mind an image of
that amphitheatre, and hate thou this, which is the devil’s. Neither do
thou condemn the severity of my speech. For I neither “forbid to
marry,” <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) nor hinder thy taking
pleasure; but I would have this be done in chastity, not with shame, and
reproach, and imputations without end. I do not make it a law that you
are to occupy the mountains and the deserts, but to be good and
considerate and chaste, dwelling in the midst of the city. For in fact
all our laws are common to the monks also, except marriage; yea rather,
even with respect to this, Paul commands us to put ourselves altogether
on a level with them; saying, “For the fashion of this world passeth
away:” that “they that have wives be as though they had none.” <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338)

<span id="iii.VII-p81"></span>“Wherefore” (so he speaks) “I do not bid
you take possession of the summits of the mountains; it is true I could
wish it, since the cities imitate the things that were done in Sodom;
nevertheless, I do not enforce this. Abide, having house and children
and wife; only do not insult thy wife, nor put thy children to shame,
neither bring into thine house the infection from the theatre.” Hearest
thou not Paul saying, “The husband hath not power of his own body, but
the wife,” <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) and setting down laws
common to both? But thou, if thy wife be continually thrusting herself
into a public assembly, art severe in blaming her; but thyself, spending
whole days on public shows, thou dost not account worthy of blame. Yea,
touching thy wife’s modesty thou art so strict as even to go beyond
necessity or measure, and not to allow her so much as indispensable
absences; but to thyself thou deemest all things lawful. Yet Paul allows
thee not, who gives the wife likewise the same authority, for thus he
speaks: “Let the husband render unto the wife due honor.” <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) What sort of <span id="page_48">p.
48</span> <span id="iii.VII-Page_48"></span> honor then is this, when
thou insultest her in the chiefest things, and givest up her body to
harlots (for thy body is hers); when thou bringest tumults and wars into
thine house, when thou doest in the market place such things, as being
related by thyself to thy wife at home, overwhelm her with shame, and
put to shame also thy daughter if present, and more than them, surely,
thyself? For thou must necessarily either be silent, or behave thyself
so unseemly, that it would be just for thy very servants to be scourged
for it. What plea then wilt thou have, I pray thee, beholding, as thou
dost, with great eagerness, things which even to name is disgraceful;
preferring to all sights these, which even to recount is intolerable?

<span id="iii.VII-p84"></span>Now then for a season, in order not to be
too burdensome, I will here bring my discourse to an end. But if ye
continue in the same courses, I will make the knife sharper, and the cut
deeper; and I will not cease, till I have scattered the theatre of the
devil, and so purified the assembly of the Church. For in this way we
shall both be delivered from the present disgrace, and shall reap the
fruit of the life to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[42:300](1100015.htm#fr_299) <span
id="iii.VII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p6.1"></span>οκονομεται</span> .

<span id="fn_300"></span>[42:301](1100015.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iii.VII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p7"></span>*i.e*, Their assuming that the Christ
should be born at that time.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[42:302](1100015.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iii.VII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p9.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p9.2"></span>ξ οκονομα</span>.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[42:303](1100015.htm#fr_302) <span
id="iii.VII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p11"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p11.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p11.2"></span>νεπτρωθη</span>.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[42:304](1100015.htm#fr_303) <span
id="iii.VII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p15"></span>[Micah v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="iii.VII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[42:305](1100015.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iii.VII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p16"></span>St. Jerome, de Nom. Hebr. t. 3, 77, ed.
Venet. 1767. *“Zorobabel, ‘princeps vel magister Babylonis’, sive
‘aliena translatio,’ vel ‘ortus in Babylone.’”*

<span id="fn_305"></span>[43:306](1100015.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iii.VII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p18"></span>*i.e*. He made Bethlehem so far greater
than Jerusalem: because “not the least” seems here equivalent to “the
greatest.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[43:307](1100015.htm#fr_306) <span
id="iii.VII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p19"></span>[Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="iii.VII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[43:308](1100015.htm#fr_307) <span
id="iii.VII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p20"></span>\[The R.V. renders more accurately: “Which
shall be shepherd of my people Israel.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_308"></span>[43:309](1100015.htm#fr_308) <span
id="iii.VII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p21"></span>[Matt.
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016), [Ps.
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span id="iii.VII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[43:310](1100015.htm#fr_309) <span
id="iii.VII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p22"></span>[Ps.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001), [Acts
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034)<span id="iii.VII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[43:311](1100015.htm#fr_310) <span
id="iii.VII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p23"></span>[Isa.
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), [Rom.
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012)<span id="iii.VII-p23.1"></span>.
\[The latter passage also follows the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.VII-p23.2"></span>LXX</span>. The word “trust” should be changed
to “hope,” as in R.V., [Rom. xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#012)<span
id="iii.VII-p23.3"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_311"></span>[43:312](1100015.htm#fr_311) <span
id="iii.VII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p26"></span>[Rom. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="iii.VII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[43:313](1100015.htm#fr_312) <span
id="iii.VII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p28"></span>\[R.V. “learned of them carefully” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.VII-p28.1"></span>ἠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.VII-p28.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p28.3"></span>κρβωσεν παρ ατν</span></span>). “Diligently”
is from the Vulgate.—R.\]

<span id="fn_313"></span>[43:314](1100015.htm#fr_313) <span
id="iii.VII-p28.4"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p29"></span>[Matt. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007)<span id="iii.VII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[43:315](1100015.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iii.VII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p31"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p31.2"></span>νοα</span>. \[Rendered “folly,” “extreme
folly,” etc., below.—R.\]

<span id="fn_315"></span>[44:316](1100015.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iii.VII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p34"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p34.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p34.2"></span>πυνθνετο παρ ατν</span>, a paraphrase of the
New Testament passage, a trace of which appears in the A.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_316"></span>[44:317](1100015.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iii.VII-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p35"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p35.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p35.2"></span>κ πολλ τ περιουσα τιθε τ θραμα</span>. Comp.
Viger. de Idiotism. Græc. ix. 3, 3. \[“Marking his prey out of great
superfluity,” is the more literal rendering. The sense seems to be,
“including more than was necessary that he might certainly include his
prey.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_317"></span>[44:318](1100015.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iii.VII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p37"></span>\[“Search out carefully,” R.V. The Greek
text of the New Testament is accurately cited.—R.\]

<span id="fn_318"></span>[44:319](1100015.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iii.VII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p38"></span>[Matt. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#008)<span id="iii.VII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[44:320](1100015.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iii.VII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p43"></span>[Matt. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009)<span id="iii.VII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[44:321](1100015.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iii.VII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p45"></span>Some <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.VII-p45.1"></span>mss</span>. read “the Jews.”

<span id="fn_321"></span>[44:322](1100015.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iii.VII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p46"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p46.1"></span>δμο</span>. The translation is somewhat
obscure, throughout the entire sentence.—R.\]

<span id="fn_322"></span>[45:323](1100015.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iii.VII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p52"></span>Because Marcion denied Christ’s human
nature, Paul His Divinity. See Epiph. Hær. 22 and 65.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[45:324](1100015.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iii.VII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p54"></span>\[That is “preceded;” comp. [1 Thess. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015)<span id="iii.VII-p54.1"></span>
(R.V.) where the same Greek word occurs, which is rendered “prevent” in
the A.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_324"></span>[45:325](1100015.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iii.VII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p55"></span>[Acts xiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)<span id="iii.VII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[45:326](1100015.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iii.VII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p58"></span>[Acts xiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)<span id="iii.VII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[45:327](1100015.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iii.VII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p59"></span>Bethlehem signifies, in Hebrew, “the house
of bread.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[46:328](1100015.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iii.VII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p61"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027)<span id="iii.VII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[46:329](1100015.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iii.VII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p64"></span>Or, “Spiritual Table.” Savile.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[46:330](1100015.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iii.VII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p65"></span>See Hom. vi. 10.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[46:331](1100015.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iii.VII-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p67"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p67.1"></span>εαγαγεν πηγγελλτο</span>, “were promising to
introduce.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_331"></span>[46:332](1100015.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iii.VII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p68"></span>This expression, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p68.1"></span>Τ για το γοι</span>, “Holy Things for Holy
Persons,” is used in the liturgies of St. Clement, St. James, St. Mark,
St. Chrysostom, the Ethiopian liturgy, and that of Severus.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[46:333](1100015.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iii.VII-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p70"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p70.1"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p70.2"></span>δον εριπον</span>.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[47:334](1100015.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iii.VII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p72"></span>[1 Cor.
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#035)<span id="iii.VII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[47:335](1100015.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iii.VII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p74"></span>[Prov. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)<span id="iii.VII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[47:336](1100015.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iii.VII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p76"></span>[Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="iii.VII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[47:337](1100015.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iii.VII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p77"></span>[Acts xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026)<span id="iii.VII-p77.1"></span>.
\[More literally. “the name of the Christians,” indicating more directly
the reference to the passage in Acts.—R.\]

<span id="fn_337"></span>[47:338](1100015.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iii.VII-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p79"></span>[1 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002)<span id="iii.VII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[47:339](1100015.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iii.VII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p80"></span>[1 Cor.
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)<span id="iii.VII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[47:340](1100015.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iii.VII-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p82"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004)<span id="iii.VII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[47:341](1100015.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iii.VII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.VII-p83"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003)<span id="iii.VII-p83.1"></span>. In
our copies of the Greek Testament, and in the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.VII-p83.2"></span>mss</span>. of St. Chrysostom, here it is,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.VII-p83.3"></span>ενοιαν</span>, not
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.VII-p83.4"></span>τιμν</span>. But Mr.
Field writes <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.VII-p83.5"></span>τιμν</span>, 1. from internal evidence; 2,
from comparison of St. Chrysostom’s own Commentary on this place of St.
Paul; and accounts for it by supposing that he quoted from memory, as
often, and confused the verse with [1 Peter iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007)<span id="iii.VII-p83.6"></span>.
\[The text in [1 Cor. vii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003)<span
id="iii.VII-p83.7"></span>, according to most of the best Greek and
Latin <span class="c20"><span id="iii.VII-p83.8"></span>mss</span>., is
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.VII-p83.9"></span>τν φειλν</span>
(R.V., “her duo”). The text and argument of Chrysostom indicate careless
citation. The translator’s note was written before New Testament textual
criticism had received any attention from more modern English
divines.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII](1100016)
