[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100029)  [Next](1100031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXII"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029)<span
id="iii.XXII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p3"></span>“Consider the lilies of the field, how
they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. And yet I say unto you,
That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.”

<span id="iii.XXII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXII-p4.1"></span>Having</span> spoken of our necessary food,
and having signified that not even for this should we take thought, He
passes on in what follows to that which is more easy. For raiment is not
so necessary as food.

<span id="iii.XXII-p5"></span>Why then did He not make use here also of
the same example, that of the birds, neither mention to us the peacock,
and the swan, and the sheep? for surely there were many such examples to
take from thence. Because He would point out how very far the argument
may be carried both ways: <span id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934) both
from the vileness <span id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935) of the things
that partake of such elegance, and from the munificence vouchsafed to
the lilies, in respect of their adorning. For this cause, when He hath
decked them out, He doth not so much as call them lilies any more, but
“grass of the field.” <span id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936) And He is
not satisfied even with this name, but again adds another circumstance
of vileness, saying, “which to-day is.” And He said not, “and to-morrow
is not,” but what is much baser yet, “is cast into the oven.” And He
said not, “clothe,” but “so clothe.”

<span id="iii.XXII-p9"></span>Seest thou everywhere how He abounds in
amplifications and intensities? And this He doth, that He may touch them
home: and therefore He hath also added, “shall He not much more clothe
you?” For this too hath much emphasis: the force of the word, “you,”
being no other than to indicate covertly the great value set upon our
race, and the concern shown for it; as though He had said, “you, to whom
He gave a soul, for whom He fashioned a body, for whose sake He made all
the things that are seen, for whose sake He sent prophets, and gave the
law, and wrought those innumerable good works; for whose sake He gave up
His only begotten Son.”

<span id="iii.XXII-p10"></span>And not till He hath made His proof
clear, doth He proceed also to rebuke them, say <span id="page_148">p.
148</span> <span id="iii.XXII-Page_148"></span> ing, “O ye of little
faith.” For this is the quality of an adviser: He doth not admonish
only, but reproves also, that He may awaken men the more to the
persuasive power of His words.

<span id="iii.XXII-p11"></span>Hereby He teaches us not only to take no
thought, but not even to be dazzled at the costliness of men’s apparel.
Why, such comeliness is of grass, such beauty of the green herb: or
rather, the grass is even more precious than such apparelling. Why then
pride thyself on things, whereof the prize rests with the mere plant,
with a great balance in its favor?

<span id="iii.XXII-p12"></span>And see how from the beginning He
signifies the injunction to be easy; by the contraries again, and by the
things of which they were afraid, leading them away from these cares.
Thus, when He had said, “Consider the lilies of the field,” He added,
“they toil not:” so that in desire to set us free from toils, did He
give these commands. In fact, the labor lies, not in taking no thought,
but in taking thought for these things. And as in saying, “they sow
not,” it was not the sowing that He did away with, but the anxious
thought; so in saying, “they toil not, neither do they spin,” He put an
end not to the work, but to the care.

<span id="iii.XXII-p13"></span>But if Solomon was surpassed by their
beauty, and that not once nor twice, but throughout all his reign:—for
neither can one say, that at one time He was clothed with such apparel,
but after that He was so no more; rather not so much as on one day did
He array Himself so beautifully: for this Christ declared by saying, “in
all his reign:” and if it was not that He was surpassed by this flower,
but vied with that, but He gave place to all alike (wherefore He also
said, “as one of these:” for such as between the truth and the
counterfeit, so great is the interval between those robes and these
flowers):—if then he acknowledged his inferiority, who was more glorious
than all kings that ever were: when wilt thou be able to surpass, or
rather to approach even faintly to such perfection of form?

<span id="iii.XXII-p14"></span>After this He instructs us, not to aim at
all at such ornament. See at least the end thereof; after its triumph
“it is cast into the oven:” and if of things mean, and worthless, and of
no great use, God hath displayed so great care, how shall He give up
thee, of all living creatures the most important?

<span id="iii.XXII-p15"></span>Wherefore then did He make them so
beautiful? That He might display His own wisdom and the excellency of
His power; that from everything we might learn His glory. For not “the
Heavens only declare the glory of God,” <span
id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937) but the earth too; and this David
declared when he said, “Praise the Lord, ye fruitful trees, and all
cedars.” <span id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938) For some by their
fruits, some by their greatness, some by their beauty, send up praise to
Him who made them: this too being a sign of great excellency of wisdom,
when even upon things that are very vile (and what can be viler than
that which to-day is, and to-morrow is not?) He pours out such great
beauty. If then to the grass He hath given that which it needs not (for
what doth the beauty thereof help to the feeding of the fire?) how shall
He not give unto thee that which thou needest? If that which is the
vilest of all things, He hath lavishly adorned, and that as doing it not
for need, but for munificence, how much more will He honor thee, the
most honorable of all things, in matters which are of necessity.

<span id="iii.XXII-p18"></span>2. Now when, as you see, He had
demonstrated the greatness of God’s providential care, and they were in
what follows to be rebuked also, even in this He was sparing, laying to
their charge not want, but poverty, of faith. Thus, “if God,” saith He,
“so clothe the grass of the field, much more you, O ye of little
faith.” <span id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939)

<span id="iii.XXII-p20"></span>And yet surely all these things He
Himself works. For “all things were made by Him, and without Him was not
so much as one thing made.” <span id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) But
yet He nowhere as yet makes mention of Himself: it being sufficient for
the time, to indicate His full power, that He said at each of the
commandments, “Ye have heard that it hath been said to them of old time,
but I say unto you.”

<span id="iii.XXII-p22"></span>Marvel not then, when in subsequent
instances also He conceals Himself, or speaks something lowly of
Himself: since for the present He had but one object, that His word
might prove such as they would readily receive, and might in every way
demonstrate that He was not a sort of adversary of God, but of one mind,
and in agreement with the Father.

<span id="iii.XXII-p23"></span>Which accordingly He doth here also; for
through so many words as He hath spent He ceases not to set Him before
us, admiring His wisdom, His providence, His tender care extending
through all things, both great and small. Thus, both when He was
speaking of Jerusalem, He called it “the city of the Great King;” <span
id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) and when He mentioned Heaven, He spake
of it again as “God’s throne;” <span id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942)
and when He was discoursing of His economy in the world, to Him again He
attributes it all, saying, “He maketh His sun <span id="page_149">p.
149</span> <span id="iii.XXII-Page_149"></span> to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.” <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) And in the prayer too He taught us to
say, His “is the kingdom and the power and the glory.” And here in
discoursing of His providence, and signifying how even in little things
He is the most excellent of artists, He saith, that “He clothes the
grass of the field.” And nowhere doth He call Him His own Father, but
theirs; in order that by the very honor He might reprove them, and that
when He should call Him His Father, they might no more be displeased.

<span id="iii.XXII-p27"></span>Now if for bare necessaries one is not to
take thought, what pardon can we <span id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944)
deserve, who take thought for things expensive? Or rather, what pardon
can they deserve, who do even without sleep, that they may take the
things of others?

<span id="iii.XXII-p29"></span>3. “Therefore take no thought, saying,
what shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or, wherewithal shall we be
clothed? For after all these things do the nations of the world
seek.” <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945)

<span id="iii.XXII-p31"></span>Seest thou how again He hath both shamed
them the more, and hath also shown by the way, that He had commanded
nothing grievous nor burdensome? As therefore when He said, “If ye love
them which love you,” it is nothing great which ye practise, for the
very Gentiles do the same; by the mention of the Gentiles He was
stirring them up to something greater: so now also He brings them
forward to reprove us, and to signify that it is a necessary debt which
He is requiring of us. For if we must show forth something more than the
Scribes or Pharisees, what can we deserve, who so far from going beyond
these, do even abide in the mean estate of the Gentiles, and emulate
their littleness of soul?

<span id="iii.XXII-p32"></span>He doth not however stop at the rebuke,
but having by this reproved and roused them, and shamed them with all
strength of expression, by another argument He also comforts them,
saying, “For your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things.” He said not, “God knoweth,” but, “your Father knoweth;” to lead
them to a greater hope. For if He be a Father, and such a Father, He
will not surely be able to overlook His children in extremity of evils;
seeing that not even men, being fathers, bear to do so.

<span id="iii.XXII-p33"></span>And He adds along with this yet another
argument. Of what kind then is it? That “ye have need” of them. What He
saith is like this. What! are these things superfluous, that He should
disregard them? Yet not even in superfluities did He show Himself
wanting in regard, in the instance of the grass: but now are these
things even necessary. So that what thou considerest a cause for thy
being anxious, this I say is sufficient to draw thee from such anxiety.
I mean, if thou sayest, “Therefore I must needs take thought, because
they are necessary;” on the contrary, I say, “Nay, for this self-same
reason take no thought, because they are necessary.” Since were they
superfluities, not even then ought we to despair, but to feel confident
about the supply of them; but now that they are necessary, we must no
longer be in doubt. For what kind of father is he, who can endure to
fail in supplying to his children even necessaries? So that for this
cause again God will most surely bestow them.

<span id="iii.XXII-p34"></span>For indeed He is the artificer of our
nature, and He knows perfectly the wants thereof. So that neither canst
thou say, “He is indeed our Father, and the things we seek are
necessary, but He knows not that we stand in need of them.” For He that
knows our nature itself, and was the framer of it, and formed it such as
it is; evidently He knows its need also better than thou, who art placed
in want of them: it having been by His decree, that our nature is in
such need. He will not therefore oppose Himself to what He hath willed,
first subjecting it of necessity to so great want, and on the other hand
again depriving it of what it wants, and of absolute necessaries.

<span id="iii.XXII-p35"></span>Let us not therefore be anxious, for we
shall gain nothing by it, but tormenting ourselves. For whereas He gives
both when we take thought, and when we do not, and more of the two, when
we do not; what dost thou gain by thy anxiety, but to exact of thyself a
superfluous penalty? Since one on the point of going to a plentiful
feast, will not surely permit himself to take thought for food; nor is
he that is walking to a fountain anxious about drink. Therefore seeing
we have a supply more copious than either any fountain, or innumerable
banquets made ready, the providence of God; let us not be beggars, nor
little minded.

<span id="iii.XXII-p36"></span>4. For together with what hath been said,
He puts also yet another reason for feeling confidence about such
things, saying,

<span id="iii.XXII-p37"></span>“Seek ye the kingdom of Heaven, and all
these things shall be added unto you.” <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946)

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="iii.XXII-Page_150"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p39"></span>Thus when He had set the soul free from
anxiety, then He made mention also of Heaven. For indeed He came to do
away with the old things, and to call us to a greater country. Therefore
He doeth all, to deliver us from things unnecessary, and from our
affection for the earth. For this cause He mentioned the heathens also,
saying that “the Gentiles seek after these things;” they whose whole
labor is for the present life, who have no regard for the things to
come, nor any thought of Heaven. But to you not these present are the
chief things, <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947) but other than
these. For we were not born for this end, that we should eat and drink
and be clothed, but that we might please God, and attain unto the good
things to come. Therefore as things here are secondary in our labor, so
also in our prayers let them be secondary. Therefore He also said, “Seek
ye the kingdom of Heaven, and all these things shall be added unto you.”

<span id="iii.XXII-p41"></span>And He said not, “shall be given,” but
“shall be added,” that thou mightest learn, that the things present are
no great part of His gifts, compared with the greatness of the things to
come. Accordingly, He doth not bid us so much as ask for them, but while
we ask for other things, to have confidence, as though these also were
added to those. Seek then the things to come, and thou wilt receive the
things present also; seek not the things that are seen, and thou shalt
surely attain unto them. Yea, for it is unworthy of thee to approach thy
Lord for such things. And thou, who oughtest to spend all thy zeal and
thy care for those unspeakable blessings, dost greatly disgrace thyself
by consuming it on the desire of transitory things.

<span id="iii.XXII-p42"></span>“How then?” saith one, “did He not bid us
ask for bread?” Nay, He added, “daily,” and to this again, “this day,”
which same thing in fact He doth here also. For He said not, “Take no
thought,” but, “Take no thought for the morrow,” at the same time both
affording us liberty, and fastening our soul on those things that are
more necessary to us.

<span id="iii.XXII-p43"></span>For to this end also He bade us ask even
those, not as though God needed reminding by us, but that we might learn
that by His help we accomplish whatever we do accomplish, and that we
might be made more His own by our continual prayer for these things.

<span id="iii.XXII-p44"></span>Seest thou how by this again He would
persuade them, that they shall surely receive the things present? For He
that bestows the greater, much more will He give the less. “For not for
this end,” saith He, “did I tell you not to take thought nor to ask,
that ye should suffer distress, and go about naked, but in order that ye
might be in abundance of these things also:” and this, you see, was
suited above all things to attract them to Him. So that like as in
almsgiving, when deterring them from making a display to men, He won
upon them chiefly by promising to furnish them with it more
liberally;—“for thy Father,” saith He, “who seeth in secret, shall
reward thee openly;” <span id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948) —even so
here also, in drawing them off from seeking these things, this is His
persuasive topic, that He promises to bestow it on them, not seeking it,
in greater abundance. Thus, to this end, saith He, do I bid thee not
seek, not that thou mayest not receive, but that thou mayest receive
plentifully; that thou mayest receive in the fashion <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) that becomes thee, with the profit
which thou oughtest to have; that thou mayest not, by taking thought,
and distracting thyself in anxiety about these, render thyself unworthy
both of these, and of the things spiritual; that thou mayest not undergo
unnecessary distress, and again fall away from that which is set before
thee.

<span id="iii.XXII-p47"></span>5. “Take therefore no thought for the
morrow: for sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof:” that is to
say, the affliction, and the bruising thereof. <span
id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) Is it not enough for thee, to eat thy
bread in the sweat of thy face? Why add the further affliction that
comes of anxiety, when thou art on the point to be delivered henceforth
even from the former toils?

<span id="iii.XXII-p49"></span>By “evil” here He means, not wickedness,
far from it, but affliction, and trouble, and calamities; much as in
another place also He saith, “Is there evil in a city, which the Lord
hath not done?” <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) nor any thing
like these, but the scourges which are borne from above. And again, “I,”
saith He, “make peace, and create evils:” <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) For neither in this place doth He
speak of wickedness, <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) but of
famines, and pestilences, things accounted evil by most men: the
generality being wont to call these things evil. Thus, for example, the
priests and prophets of those five lordships, when having yoked the kine
to the ark, they let them go without their calves, <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) gave the name of “evil” to those
heaven-sent plagues, and <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="iii.XXII-Page_151"></span> the dismay and anguish which thereby
sprang up within them.

<span id="iii.XXII-p54"></span>This then is His meaning here also, when
He saith, “sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.” For nothing so
pains the soul, as carefulness and anxiety. Thus did Paul also, when
urging to celibacy, give counsel, saying, “I would have you without
carefulness.” <span id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955)

<span id="iii.XXII-p56"></span>But when He saith, “the morrow shall take
thought for itself,” He saith it not, as though the day took thought for
these things, but forasmuch as He had to speak to a people somewhat
imperfect, willing to make what He saith more expressive, He personifies
the time, speaking unto them according to the custom of the generality.

<span id="iii.XXII-p57"></span>And here indeed He advises, but as He
proceeds, He even makes it a law, saying, “provide neither gold nor
silver, nor scrip for your journey.” <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) Thus, having shown it all forth in His
actions, then after that He introduces the verbal enactment of it more
determinately, the precept too having then become more easy of
acceptance, confirmed as it had been previously by His own actions.
Where then did He confirm it by His actions? Hear Him saying, “The Son
of Man hath not where to lay His head.” <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) Neither is He satisfied with this
only, but in His disciples also He exhibits His full proof of these
things, by fashioning them too in like manner, yet not suffering them to
be in want of anything.

<span id="iii.XXII-p60"></span>But mark His tender care also, how He
surpasses the affection of any father. Thus, “This I command,” saith He,
“for nothing else, but that I may deliver you from superfluous
anxieties. For even if to-day thou hast taken thought for to-morrow,
thou wilt also have to take thought again to-morrow. Why then what is
over and above? Why force the day to receive more than the distress
which is allotted to it, and together with its own troubles add to it
also the burden of the following day; and this, when there is no chance
of thy lightening the other by the addition so taking place, but thou
art merely to exhibit thyself as coveting superfluous troubles?” Thus,
that He may reprove them the more, He doth all but give life to the very
time, and brings it in as one injured, and exclaiming against them for
their causeless despite. Why, thou hast received the day, to care for
the things thereof. Wherefore then add unto it the things of the other
day also? Hath it not then burden enough in its own anxiety? Why now, I
pray, dost thou make it yet heavier? Now when the Lawgiver saith these
things, and He that is to pass judgment on us, consider the hopes that
He suggests to us, how good they are; He Himself testifying, that this
life is wretched and wearisome, so that the anxiety even of the one day
is enough to hurt and afflict us.

<span id="iii.XXII-p61"></span>6. Nevertheless, after so many and so
grave words, we take thought for these things, but for the things in
Heaven no longer: rather we have reversed His order, on either side
fighting against His sayings. For mark; “Seek ye not the things
present,” saith He, “at all;” but we are seeking these things for ever:
“seek the things in Heaven,” saith He; but those things we seek not so
much as for a short hour, but according to the greatness of the anxiety
we display about the things of the world, is the carelessness we
entertain in things spiritual; or rather even much greater. But this
doth not prosper for ever; neither can this be for ever. What if for ten
days we think scorn? if for twenty? if for an hundred? must we not of
absolute necessity depart, and fall into the hands of the Judge?

<span id="iii.XXII-p62"></span>“But the delay hath comfort.” And what
sort of comfort, to be every day looking for punishment and vengeance?
Nay, if thou wouldest have some comfort from this delay, take it by
gathering for thyself the fruit of amendment after repentance. Since if
the mere delay of vengeance seem to thee a sort of refreshment, far more
is it gain not to fall into the vengeance. Let us then make full use of
this delay, in order to have a full deliverance from the dangers that
press upon us. For none of the things enjoined is either burdensome or
grievous, but all are so light and easy, that if we only bring a genuine
purpose of heart, we may accomplish all, though we be chargeable with
countless offenses. For so Manasses had perpetrated innumerable
pollutions, having both stretched out his hands against the saints, and
brought abominations into the temple, and filled the city with murders,
and wrought many other things beyond excuse; yet nevertheless after so
long and so great wickedness, he washed away from himself all these
things. <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) How and in what manner?
By repentance, and consideration.

<span id="iii.XXII-p64"></span>For there is not, yea, there is not any
sin, that doth not yield and give way to the power of repentance, or
rather to the grace of Christ. Since if we would but only change, we
have Him to assist us. And if thou art desirous to become good, there is
none to <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="iii.XXII-Page_152"></span> hinder us; or rather there is one to
hinder us, the devil, yet hath he no power, so long as thou choosest
what is best, and so attractest God to thine aid. But if thou art not
thyself willing, but startest aside, how shall He protect thee? Since
not of necessity or compulsion, but of thine own will, He wills thee to
be saved. For if thou thyself, having a servant full of hatred and
aversion for thee, and continually going off, and fleeing away from
thee, wouldest not choose to keep him, and this though needing his
services; much less will God, who doeth all things not for His own
profit, but for thy salvation, choose to retain thee by compulsion; as
on the other hand, if thou show forth a right intention only, He would
not choose ever to give thee up, no, not whatever the devil may do. So
that we are ourselves to blame for our own destruction. Because we do
not approach, nor beseech, nor entreat Him, as we ought: but even if we
do draw nigh, it is not as persons who have need to receive, neither is
it with the proper faith, nor as making demand, but we do all in a
gaping and listless way.

<span id="iii.XXII-p65"></span>7. And yet God would have us demand
things of Him, and for this accounts Himself greatly bound to
thee. <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) For He alone of all
debtors, when the demand is made, counts it a favor, and gives what we
have not lent Him. And if He should see him pressing earnestly that
makes the demand, He pays down even what He hath not received of us; but
if sluggishly, He too keeps on making delays; not through unwillingness
to give, but because He is pleased to have the demand made upon Him by
us. For this cause He told thee also the example of that friend, who
came by night, and asked a loaf; <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960)
and of the judge that feared not God, nor regarded men. <span
id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) And He stayed not at similitudes, but
signified it also in His very actions, when He dismissed that Phœnician
woman, having filled her with His great gift. <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) For through her He signified, that He
gives to them that ask earnestly, even the things that pertain not to
them. “For it is not meet,” saith He, “to take the children’s bread, and
to give <span id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) it unto the dogs.” But
for all that He gave, because she demanded of him earnestly. But by the
Jews He showed, that to them that are careless, He gives not even their
own. They accordingly received nothing, but lost what was their own. And
while these, because they asked not, did not receive so much as their
very own; she, because she assailed Him with earnestness, had power to
obtain even what pertained to others, and the dog received what was the
children’s. So great a good is importunity. For though thou be a dog,
yet being importunate, thou shalt be preferred to the child being
negligent: for what things affection accomplishes not, these, all of
them, importunity did accomplish. Say not therefore, “God is an enemy to
me, and will not hearken.” He doth straightway answer thee, continually
troubling him, if not because thou art His friend, yet because of thine
importunity. And neither the enmity, or the unseasonable time, nor
anything else becomes an hindrance. Say not, “I am unworthy, and do not
pray;” for such was the Syrophœnician woman too. Say not, “I have sinned
much, and am not able to entreat Him whom I have angered;” for God looks
not at the desert, but at the disposition. For if the ruler that feared
not God, neither was ashamed of men, was overcome by the widow, much
more will He that is good be won over by continual entreaty.

<span id="iii.XXII-p71"></span>So that though thou be no friend, though
thou be not demanding thy due, though thou hast devoured thy Father’s
substance, and have been a long time out of sight, though without honor,
though last of all, though thou approach Him angry, though much
displeased; be willing only to pray, and to return, and thou shalt
receive all, and shall quickly extinguish the wrath and the
condemnation.

<span id="iii.XXII-p72"></span>But, “behold, I pray,” saith one, “and
there is no result.” Why, thou prayest not like those; such I mean as
the Syrophœnician woman, the friend that came late at night, and the
widow that is continually troubling the judge, and the son that consumed
his father’s goods. For didst thou so pray, thou wouldest quickly
obtain. For though despite have been done unto Him, yet is He a Father;
and though He have been provoked to anger, yet is He fond of His
children; and one thing only doth He seek, not to take vengeance for our
affronts, but to see thee repenting and entreating Him. Would that we
were warmed in like measure, as those bowels are moved to the love of
us. But this fire seeks a beginning only, and if thou afford it a little
spark, thou kindlest a full flame of beneficence. For not because He
hath been insulted, is He sore vexed, but because it is thou who art
insulting Him, and so becoming frenzied. For if we being evil, when our
children molest <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) us, grieve on
their account; much more is God, who can <span id="page_153">p.
153</span> <span id="iii.XXII-Page_153"></span> not so much as suffer
insult, sore vexed on account of thee, who hast committed it. If we, who
love by nature, much more He, who is kindly affectioned beyond nature.
“For though,” saith He, “a woman should forget the fruits of her womb,
yet will I not forget thee.” <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965)

<span id="iii.XXII-p75"></span>8. Let us therefore draw nigh unto Him,
and say, “Truth, Lord; for even the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall
from their masters’ table.” <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) Let
us draw nigh “in season, out of season:” or rather, one can never draw
nigh out of season, for it is unseasonable not to be continually
approaching. For of Him who desires to give it is always seasonable to
ask: yea, as breathing is never out of season, so neither is praying
unseasonable, but rather not praying. Since as we need this breath, so
do we also the help that comes from Him; and if we be willing, we shall
easily draw Him to us. And the prophet, to manifest this, and to point
out the constant readiness of His beneficence, said, “We shall find Him
prepared as the morning.” <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) For as
often as we may draw nigh, we shall see Him awaiting our movements. And
if we fail to draw from out of His ever-springing goodness, the blame is
all ours. This, for example, was His complaint against certain Jews,
when He said, “My mercy is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it
goeth away.” <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) And His meaning is
like this; “I indeed have supplied all my part, but ye, as a hot sun
coming over scatters both the cloud and the dew, and makes them vanish,
so have ye by your great wickedness restrained the unspeakable
Beneficence.”

<span id="iii.XXII-p79"></span>Which also itself again is an instance of
providential care: that even when He sees us unworthy to receive good,
He withholds His benefits, lest He render us careless. But if we change
a little, even but so much as to know that we have sinned, He gushes out
beyond the fountains, He is poured forth beyond the ocean; and the more
thou receivest, so much the more doth He rejoice; and in this way is
stirred up again to give us more. For indeed He accounts it as His own
wealth, that we should be saved, and that He should give largely to them
that ask. And this, it may seem, Paul was declaring when He said, that
He is “rich unto all and over all that call upon Him.” <span
id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) Because when we pray not, then He is
wroth; when we pray not, then doth He turn away from us. For this cause
“He became poor, that He might make us rich;” <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) for this cause He underwent all those
sufferings, that He might incite us to ask.

<span id="iii.XXII-p82"></span>Let us not therefore despair, but having
so many motives and good hopes, though we sin every day, let us approach
Him, entreating, beseeching, asking the forgiveness of our sins. For
thus we shall be more backward to sin for the time to come; thus shall
we drive away the devil, and shall call forth the lovingkindness of God,
and attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_934"></span>[147:935](1100030.htm#fr_934) <span
id="iii.XXII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p6.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p6.2"></span>κατρωθεν δεξαι τν περβολν</span>.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[147:936](1100030.htm#fr_935) <span
id="iii.XXII-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p7"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p7.1"></span>ετελεα</span>, “cheapness” first, then
“meanness.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_936"></span>[147:937](1100030.htm#fr_936) <span
id="iii.XXII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p8"></span>[Matt. vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[148:938](1100030.htm#fr_937) <span
id="iii.XXII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p16"></span>[Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[148:939](1100030.htm#fr_938) <span
id="iii.XXII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p17"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[148:940](1100030.htm#fr_939) <span
id="iii.XXII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p19"></span>[Matt. vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[148:941](1100030.htm#fr_940) <span
id="iii.XXII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p21"></span>[John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[148:942](1100030.htm#fr_941) <span
id="iii.XXII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p24"></span>[Matt. v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035)<span id="iii.XXII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[148:943](1100030.htm#fr_942) <span
id="iii.XXII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p25"></span>[Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="iii.XXII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[149:944](1100030.htm#fr_943) <span
id="iii.XXII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p26"></span>[Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="iii.XXII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[149:945](1100030.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iii.XXII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p28"></span>\[Or, “they,” as in the next
sentence.—R.\]

<span id="fn_945"></span>[149:946](1100030.htm#fr_945) <span
id="iii.XXII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p30"></span>[Matt.
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXII-p30.1"></span>.
\[The text of Chrysostom is in doubt here: one <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXII-p30.2"></span>ms</span>. omits “of the world.” The longer
reading is probably due to a recollection of [Luke xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXII-p30.3"></span>,
where this form occurs.—R.\]

<span id="fn_946"></span>[149:947](1100030.htm#fr_946) <span
id="iii.XXII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p38"></span>[Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="iii.XXII-p38.1"></span>.
\[The reading of this verse given by Chrysostom is peculiar. The best
authorities support the form accepted in the R.V., “his kingdom and his
righteousness.” But the reading of the received text is ancient. Some
other Fathers agree with Chrysostom. The phrase “kingdom of heaven” is
peculiar to Matthew.—R.\]

<span id="fn_947"></span>[150:948](1100030.htm#fr_947) <span
id="iii.XXII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p40"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p40.1"></span>προηγομενα</span> .

<span id="fn_948"></span>[150:949](1100030.htm#fr_948) <span
id="iii.XXII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p45"></span>[Matt. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[150:950](1100030.htm#fr_949) <span
id="iii.XXII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p46"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p46.1"></span>σχματο</span>.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[150:951](1100030.htm#fr_950) <span
id="iii.XXII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p48"></span>[Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="iii.XXII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[150:952](1100030.htm#fr_951) <span
id="iii.XXII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p50"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p50.1"></span>συντριβ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p50.2"></span>πλεονεξα</span>; but one <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XXII-p50.3"></span>mss</span>. reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXII-p50.4"></span>δυναστεα</span>,
referring to oppressive oligarchies, Latin, *principatus*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_952"></span>[150:953](1100030.htm#fr_952) <span
id="iii.XXII-p50.5"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p51"></span>[Isa. xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[150:954](1100030.htm#fr_953) <span
id="iii.XXII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p52"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p52.1"></span>κακαν</span>, the word rendered “evil”
throughout this passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_954"></span>[150:955](1100030.htm#fr_954) <span
id="iii.XXII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p53"></span>[1 Sam. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[151:956](1100030.htm#fr_955) <span
id="iii.XXII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p55"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)<span id="iii.XXII-p55.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “to be free from care;” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p55.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p55.3"></span>μερμνου</span>, a compound of the same origin
as the word rendered “take no thought” in the A.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_956"></span>[151:957](1100030.htm#fr_956) <span
id="iii.XXII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p58"></span>[Matt.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[151:958](1100030.htm#fr_957) <span
id="iii.XXII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p59"></span>[Matt. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[151:959](1100030.htm#fr_958) <span
id="iii.XXII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p63"></span>[2 Chr.
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#001), [2 Kings
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[152:960](1100030.htm#fr_959) <span
id="iii.XXII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p66"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p66.1"></span>κα χριν χει σοι τοτου πολλν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_960"></span>[152:961](1100030.htm#fr_960) <span
id="iii.XXII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p67"></span>[Luke xi.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[152:962](1100030.htm#fr_961) <span
id="iii.XXII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p68"></span>[Luke xviii.
1-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)<span id="iii.XXII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[152:963](1100030.htm#fr_962) <span
id="iii.XXII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p69"></span>[Matt.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021), [Mark
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024)<span id="iii.XXII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[152:964](1100030.htm#fr_963) <span
id="iii.XXII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p70"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p70.1"></span>δοναι</span>. See Hom. LII.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[152:965](1100030.htm#fr_964) <span
id="iii.XXII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p73"></span>\[The Greek word is that rendered
“insult” in this and the preceding sentence.—R.\]

<span id="fn_965"></span>[153:966](1100030.htm#fr_965) <span
id="iii.XXII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p74"></span>[Isa. xlix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[153:967](1100030.htm#fr_966) <span
id="iii.XXII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p76"></span>[Matt. xv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[153:968](1100030.htm#fr_967) <span
id="iii.XXII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p77"></span>[Hosea vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXII-p77.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXII-p77.2"></span>LXX</span>. “His
going forth is prepared as the morning,” agreeing with the present
Hebrew copies. The sentiment of both readings (as we so often find,
apparently by a special Providence) is the same. \[R.V., “His going
forth is sure as the morning.” This, too, conveys the same general
sentiment, but is a more accurate rendering of the Hebrew.—R.\]

<span id="fn_968"></span>[153:969](1100030.htm#fr_968) <span
id="iii.XXII-p77.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p78"></span>[Hosea vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXII-p78.1"></span>.
A.V., “Your goodness is as the morning cloud;” and so also <span
class="c41"><span id="iii.XXII-p78.2"></span>LXX.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXII-p78.3"></span>τ λεο μν</span>. And with
this the Hebrew copies agree, as did St. Jerome’s (*in loc.* t. vi. 63,
Venet. 1768). But St. Cyril (*in loc.* t. iii. 96), reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXII-p78.4"></span>τ λεο μο</span> And St.
Jerome’s Commentary shows that according to his interpretation the two
readings came to the same meaning. “Your mercy, that wherewith I have
always had mercy upon you, hath passed by…for now is the captivity
near.” \[R.V., “For your goodness (or, kindness) is as a morning cloud.”
In the Homily <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXII-p78.5"></span>δ</span> occurs, but is not translated.—R.\]

<span id="fn_969"></span>[153:970](1100030.htm#fr_969) <span
id="iii.XXII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p80"></span>[Rom. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXII-p80.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXII-p80.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXII-p80.3"></span>κα π πντα</span></span>
is omitted in our present copies. Mr. Field refers to [Rom. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)<span id="iii.XXII-p80.4"></span>;
“unto all *and upon all* them that believe.” \[There is no authority for
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXII-p80.5"></span>κα π παντα</span>
in [Rom. x. 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)<span
id="iii.XXII-p80.6"></span>, and in [Rom.
3.22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)<span
id="iii.XXII-p80.7"></span>the weight of authority is against the phrase
(see R.V. *in loco*); but Chrysostom undoubtedly accepted the longer
reading in the latter passage, and seems to have combined the two in the
present instance.—R.\]

<span id="fn_970"></span>[153:971](1100030.htm#fr_970) <span
id="iii.XXII-p80.8"></span>

<span id="iii.XXII-p81"></span>[2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXII-p81.1"></span>.
\[The citation is not accurate, probably the variation is
intentional.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIII](1100031)
