[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100088)  [Next](1100090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXXI"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXV.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067),
[68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#068)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p3"></span>*“Then did they spit in His face, and
buffeted Him, and others smote Him with the palms of their hands,* <span
id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026) *saying, Prophesy unto us, thou
Christ, who is he that smote* <span id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027)
*thee?”* <span id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p7.1"></span>Wherefore</span> did they these things, when
they were to put Him to death? What need of this mockery? That thou
mightest learn their intemperate spirit by all things, and that having
taken Him like a prey, they thus showed forth their intoxication, and
gave full swing to their madness; making this a festival, and assaulting
Him with pleasure, and showing forth their murderous disposition.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p8"></span>But admire, I pray thee, the self command
of the disciples, with what exactness they relate these things. Hereby
is clearly shown their disposition to love the truth, because they
relate with all truthfulness the things that seem to be opprobrious,
disguising nothing, nor being ashamed thereof, but rather accounting it
very great glory, as indeed it was, that the Lord of the universe should
endure to suffer such things for us. This shows both His unutterable
tenderness, and the inexcusable wickedness of those men, who had the
heart to do such things to Him that was so mild and meek, and was
charming them with such words, as were enough to change a lion into a
lamb. For neither did He fail in any things of gentleness, nor they of
insolence and cruelty, in what they did, in what they said. All which
things the prophet Isaiah foretold, thus proclaiming beforehand, and by
one word intimating all this insolence. For “like as many were
astonished at thee,” he saith, “so shall thy form be held inglorious of
men, and thy glory of the sons of men.” <span
id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p10"></span>For what could be equal to this
insolence? On that face which the sea, when it saw it, had reverenced,
from which the sun, when it beheld it on the cross, turned away his
rays, they did spit, and struck it with the palms of their hands, and
some upon the head; giving full swing in every way to their own madness.
For indeed they inflicted the blows that are most insulting of all,
buffeting, smiting with the palms of their hands, and to these blows
adding the insult of spitting at Him. And words again teeming with much
derision did they speak, saying, “prophesy unto us, thou Christ, who is
he that smote thee?” because the multitude called Him a prophet.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p11"></span>But another <span
id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030) saith, that they covered His face
with His own garment, and did these things, as though they had got in
the midst of them some vile and worthless fellow. And not freemen only,
but slaves <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031) also were
intemperate with this intemperance towards Him at that time.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p14"></span>These things let us read continually,
these things let us hear aright, these things let us write in our minds,
for these are our honors. In these things do I take a pride, not only in
the thousands of dead which He raised, but also in the sufferings which
He endured. These things Paul puts forward in every way, the cross, the
death, the sufferings, the revilings, the insults, the scoffs. And now
he saith, “let us go forth unto Him bearing His reproach;” <span
id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) and now, “who for the joy that was
set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame.” <span
id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p17"></span>“Now Peter sat in the court
without; <span id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) and a damsel came
unto him, saying, thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. But he denied
before them all, <span id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) saying, I
know not what <span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXI-Page_488"></span> thou sayest. And when he was gone out
into the porch, another maid saw him, and saith, this man also was
there <span id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) with Jesus of Nazareth.
And again he denied with an oath. And after a while came unto him they
that stood by, and said unto Peter, surely thou also art one of them,
for thy speech bewrayeth thee. Then began he to curse and to swear, I
know not the man. And immediately the cock crew. And Peter remembered
the words of Jesus, which said, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me
thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.” <span
id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p22"></span>Oh strange and wonderful acts! When
indeed he saw his master seized only, he was so fervent as both to draw
his sword, and to cut off the man’s ear; but when it was natural for him
to be more indignant, and to be inflamed and to burn, hearing such
revilings, then he becomes a denier. For who would not have been
inflamed to madness by the things that were then done? yet the disciple,
overcome by fears, so far from showing indignation, even denies, and
endures not the threat of a miserable and mean girl, and not once only,
but a second and third time doth he deny Him; and in a short period, and
not so much as before judges, for it was without for “when he had gone
out into the porch,” they asked him, and he did not even readily come to
a sense of his fall. And this Luke saith, <span
id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038) namely, that Christ looked on him
showing that he not only denied Him, but was not even brought to
remembrance from within, and this though the cock had crowed; but he
needed a further remembrance from his master, and His look was to him
instead of a voice; so exceedingly was he full of fear.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p24"></span>But Mark saith, <span
id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039) that when he had once denied, then
first the cock crew, but when thrice, then for the second time; for he
declares more particularly the weakness of the disciple, and that he was
utterly dead with fear; having learnt these things of his master <span
id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) himself, for he was a follower of
Peter. In which respect one would most marvel at him, that so far from
hiding his teacher’s faults, he declared it more distinctly than the
rest, on this very account, that he was his disciple.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p27"></span>2. How then is what is said true, when
Matthew affirms that Christ said, “Verily I say unto thee, that before
the cock crow thou shalt deny me thrice;” <span
id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041) and Mark declares after the third
denial, that “The cock crew the second time?” <span
id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042) Nay, most certainly is it both true
and in harmony. For because at each crowing the cock is wont to crow
both a third and a fourth time, Mark, to show that not even the sound
checked him, and brought him to recollection saith this. So that both
things are true. For before the cock had finished the one crowing, he
had denied a third time. And not even when reminded of his sin by Christ
did he dare to weep openly, lest he should be betrayed by his tears, but
“he went out, and wept bitterly.”

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p30"></span>“And when it was day, they led away
Jesus from Caiaphas to Pilate.” <span
id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043) For because they were desirous to
put Him to death, but were not able themselves because of the feast,
they lead Him to the governor.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p32"></span>But mark, I pray thee, how the act was
forced on, so as to take place at the feast. For so was it typified from
the first.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p33"></span>“Then Judas, which had betrayed him,
when he saw that He was condemned, repented, and brought again the
thirty pieces of silver.” <span id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p35"></span>This was a charge both against him, and
against these men; against him, not because he repented, but because he
did so, late, and slowly, and became self-condemned (for that he
delivered Him up, he himself confessed); and against them, for that
having the power to reverse it, they repented not.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p36"></span>But mark, when it is that he feels
remorse. When his sin was completed, and had received an accomplishment.
For the devil is like this; he suffers not those that are not watchful
to see the evil before this, lest he whom he has taken, should repent.
At least, when Jesus was saying so many things, he was not influenced,
but when his offense was completed, then repentance came upon him; and
not then profitably. For to condemn it, and to throw down the pieces of
silver, and not to regard the Jewish people, were all acceptable things;
but to hang himself, this again was unpardonable, and a work of an evil
spirit. For the devil led him out of his repentance too soon, so that he
should reap no fruit from thence; and carries him off, by a most
disgraceful death, and one manifest to all, having persuaded him to
destroy himself.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p37"></span>But mark, I pray thee, the truth shining
forth on every side, even by what the adversaries both do and suffer.
For indeed even the very end of the traitor stops the mouths <span
id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span id="iii.LXXXI-Page_489"></span> of
them that had condemned Him, and suffers them not to have so much as any
shadow of an excuse, that is surely shameless. For what could they have
to say, when the traitor is shown to pass such a sentence on himself.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p38"></span>But let us see also the words, what is
said; “He brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests, <span id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045) and saith, I have
sinned in that I have betrayed innocent blood. And they said, what is
that to us? see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in
the temple, <span id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046) and departed, and
went and hanged himself.” <span id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p42"></span>For neither could he bear his conscience
scourging him. But mark, I pray thee, the Jews too suffering the same
things. For these men also, when they ought to have been amended by what
they suffered, do not stop, until they have completed their sin. For his
sin had been completed, for it was a betrayal; but theirs not yet. But
when they too had accomplished theirs, and had nailed Him to the cross
then they also are troubled; at one time saying, “Write not, this is the
king of the Jews” <span id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048) (and yet
why are ye afraid? why are ye troubled at a dead body that is nailed
upon the cross?); at another time they guard over Him, saying, “Lest His
disciples steal Him away, and say that He is risen again; so the last
error shall be worse than the first.” <span
id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) And yet if they do it, the thing is
refuted, if it be not true. But how should they say so, which did not
dare so much as to stand their ground, when He was seized; and the
chief <span id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050) of them even thrice
denied Him, not bearing a damsel’s threat. But, as I said, the chief
priests were now troubled; for that they knew the act was a
transgression of the law is manifest, from their saying, “See thou to
that.”

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p46"></span>Hear, ye covetous, consider what befell
him; how he at the same time lost the money, and committed the sin, and
destroyed his own soul. Such is the tyranny of covetousness. He enjoyed
not the money, neither the present life, nor that to come, but lost all
at once, and having got a bad character even with those very men, so
hanged himself.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p47"></span>But, as I said, after the act, then some
see clearly. See at any rate these men too for a time not willing to
have a clear perception of the fact, but saying, “See thou to that:”
which thing of itself is a most heavy charge against them. For this is
the language of men bearing witness to their daring and their
transgression, but intoxicated by their passion, and not willing to
forbear their satanical attempts, but senselessly wrapping themselves up
in a veil of feigned ignorance.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p48"></span>For if indeed these things had been said
after the crucifixion, and His being slain, of a truth even then the
saying would have had no reasonable meaning, nevertheless it would not
have condemned them so much; but now having Him yet in your own hands,
and having power to release Him, how could ye be able to say these
things? For this defense would be a most heavy accusation against you.
How? and in what way? Because while throwing the whole blame upon the
traitor (for they say, “See thou to that”), being able to have set
themselves free from this murder of Christ, they left the traitor, and
even pressed the crime further, adding the cross to the betrayal. For
what hindered them, when they said to him, “See thou to that,”
themselves to forbear the criminal act? But now they even do the
contrary, adding to it the murder and in every thing, both by what they
do, and by what they say, entangling themselves in inevitable ills. For
indeed after these things, when Pilate left it to them, they choose the
robber to be released rather than Jesus; but Him that had done no wrong,
but had even conferred on them so many benefits, they slew.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p49"></span>3. What then did that man? When he saw
that he was laboring to no profit, and that they would not consent to
receive the pieces of silver, “he cast them down in the temple, and went
and hanged himself. <span id="fr_3051"></span>[3052](#fn_3051) And the
chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, it is not lawful for
to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And
they took counsel, and bought with them the potter’s field to bury
strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, the field of blood, unto
this day. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the
prophet, saying, and they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of
Him that was valued, and gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord
appointed me.” <span id="fr_3052"></span>[3053](#fn_3052)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p52"></span>Seest thou them again self-condemned by
their conscience? For because they knew that they had been buying the
murder, they put them not into the treasury, but bought a field to bury
strangers in. And this also became a witness against them, and a proof
of their treason. For the name of the place more clearly than a trumpet
proclaimed their blood- <span id="page_490">p. 490</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXI-Page_490"></span> guiltiness. Neither did they it at
random, but having taking counsel, and in every case in like manner, so
that no one should be clear of the deed, but all guilty. But these
things the prophecy foretold from of old. Seest thou not the apostles
only, but the prophets also declaring exactly those things which were
matters of reproach, and every way proclaiming the passion, and
indicating it beforehand?

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p53"></span>This was the case with the Jews without
their being conscious of it. For if they had cast it into the treasury,
the thing would not have been so clearly discovered; but now having
bought a piece of ground, they made it all manifest even to subsequent
generations.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p54"></span>Hear ye as many as think to do good
works out of murders, and take a reward for the lives of men. These
almsgiving are Judaical, or rather they are Satanical. For there are,
there are now also they, that take by violence countless things
belonging to others, and think that an excuse is made for all if they
cast in some ten or a hundred gold pieces.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p55"></span>Touching whom also the prophet saith,
“Ye covered my altar with tears.” <span
id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053) Christ is not willing to be fed by
covetousness, He accepts not this food. Why dost thou insult thy Lord,
offering Him unclean things? It is better to leave men to pine with
hunger, than to feed them from these sources. That was the conduct of a
cruel man, this of one both cruel and insolent. It is better to give
nothing, than to give the things of one set of persons to others. For
tell me, if you saw any two persons, one naked, one having a garment,
and then having stripped the one that had the garment, thou wert to
clothe the naked, wouldest thou not have committed an injustice? It is
surely plain to every one. But if when thou hast given all that thou
hast taken to another, thou hast committed an injustice, and not shown
mercy; when thou givest not even a small portion of what thou robbest,
and callest the deed alms, what manner of punishment wilt thou not
undergo? For if men offering lame brutes were blamed, what favor wilt
thou obtain doing things more grievous? For if the chief, making
restitution to the owner himself, still doeth an injustice, and so doeth
an injustice, as by adding fourfold scarcely to do away the charge
against himself, and this under the old covenant; <span
id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054) he that is not stealing, but taking
by violence, and not even giving to him that is robbed, but instead of
him to another; nor yet giving fourfold, but not so much as the half;
and moreover not living under the old dispensation, but under the new;
consider how much fire he is heaping together upon his own head. And if
he do not as yet suffer his punishment, for this self-same thing I say
bewail him, for he is treasuring up against himself a greater wrath,
unless he repent. For what? “Think ye,” saith He, “that they alone were
sinners upon whom the tower fell down? Nay, I say unto you, but except
ye repent, ye also shall suffer the same things.” <span
id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p59"></span>Let us repent then, and give alms pure
from covetousness, and in great abundance. Consider that the Jews used
to feed eight thousand Levites, and together with the Levites, widows
also and orphans, and they bore many other public charges, and together
with these things also served as soldiers; but now there are fields, and
houses, and hirings of lodgings, and carriages, and muleteers, and
mules, and a great array of this kind in the church on account of you,
and your hardness of heart. For this store of the church ought to be
with you, and your readiness of mind ought to be a revenue to her; but
now two wrong things come to pass, both you continue unfruitful, and
God’s priests do not practise their proper duties.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p60"></span>Was it not possible for the houses and
the lands to have remained in the time of the apostles? Wherefore then
did they sell them and give away? Because this was a better thing.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p61"></span>4. But now a fear seized our fathers
(when you were so mad after worldly things, and because of your
gatherings, and not dispersing abroad), lest the companies of the widows
and orphans, and of the virgins, should perish of famine; therefore were
they constrained to provide these things. For it was not their wish to
thrust themselves unto what was so unbecoming; but their desire was that
your good will should have been a supply for them, and that they should
gather their fruits from thence, and that they themselves should give
heed to prayers only.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p62"></span>But now ye have constrained them to
imitate the houses of them that manage public affairs; whereby all
things are turned upside down. For when both you and we are entangled in
the same things, who is there to propitiate God? Therefore it is not
possible for us to open our mouths, when the state of the church is no
better than that of worldly men. Have ye not heard that the apostles
would not consent so much as to distribute the money that was collected
without any trouble? But now our bishops have gone beyond agents, and
stewards, and hucksters <span id="page_491">p. 491</span> <span
id="iii.LXXXI-Page_491"></span> in their care about these things; and
when they ought to be careful and thoughtful about your souls, they are
vexing themselves every day about these things, for which the
innkeepers, and tax-gatherers, and accountants, and stewards are
careful.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p63"></span>These things I do not mention for nought
in the way of complaint, but in order that there may be some amendment
and change, in order that we may be pitied for serving a grievous
servitude, in order that you may become a revenue and store for the
church.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p64"></span>But if ye are not willing, behold the
poor before your eyes; as many as it is possible for us to suffice, we
will not cease to feed; but those, whom it is not possible, we will
leave to you, that ye may not hear those words on the awful day, which
shall be spoken to the unmerciful and cruel. “Ye saw me an hungered, and
fed me not.” <span id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056)

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p66"></span>For together with you this inhumanity
makes us laughing-stocks, because leaving our prayers, and our teaching,
and the other parts of holiness, we are fighting all our time, some with
wine merchants, some with corn-factors, others with them that retail
other provisions.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p67"></span>Hence come battles, and strifes, and
daily revilings, and reproaches, and jeers, and on each of the priests
names are imposed more suitable for houses of secular men; when it would
have been fit to take other names in the place of these, and to be named
from those things, from which also the apostles ordained, from the
feeding of the hungry, from the protection of the injured, from the care
of strangers, from succoring them that are despitefully used, from
providing for the orphans, from taking part with the widows, from
presiding over the virgins; and these offices should be distributed
amongst us instead of the care of the lands and houses.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p68"></span>These are the stores of the church,
these the treasures that become her, and that afford in great degree
both ease to us and profit to you; or rather to you ease with the
profit. For I suppose that by the grace of God they that assemble
themselves here amount to the number of one hundred thousand; <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) and if each bestowed one loaf to
some one of the poor, all would be in plenty; but if one farthing only,
no one would be poor; and we should not undergo so many revilings and
jeers, in consequence of our care about the money. For indeed the
saying, “Sell thy goods, and give to the poor, and come and follow
me,” <span id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058) might be seasonably
addressed to the prelates of the church with respect to the property of
the church. For in any other way it is not possible to follow Him as we
ought, not being freed from all grosser and more worldly care.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p71"></span>But now the priests of God attend at the
vintage and harvest, and at the sale and purchase of the produce; and
whereas they that served the shadow had an entire immunity from such
matters, although entrusted with a more carnal service; we, who are
invited to the very inmost shrines of the heavens, and who enter into
the true holy of holies, take upon ourselves the cares of tradesmen and
retail dealers.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p72"></span>Hence great neglect of the Scriptures,
and remissness in prayers, and indifference about all the other duties;
for it is not possible to be split into the two things with due zeal.
Where I pray and beseech you that many fountains may spring up to us
from all quarters, and that your forwardness may be to us the threshing
floor and the wine press.

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p73"></span>For in this way both the poor will more
easily be supported, and God will be glorified, and ye will advance unto
a greater degree of love to mankind, and will enjoy the good things
eternal; unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[487:3027](1100089.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p4"></span>\[R.V. margin, “Or, with rods.”\]

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[487:3028](1100089.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p5"></span>\[R.V., “struck thee.” The variety of
Greek terms used to express the maltreatment is remarkable, and is
indicated in the R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[487:3029](1100089.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p6"></span>\[R.V., “struck thee.” The variety of
Greek terms used to express the maltreatment is remarkable, and is
indicated in the R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[487:3030](1100089.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p9"></span>[Isa. lii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p9.1"></span>
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p9.2"></span>LXX</span>.\].

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[487:3031](1100089.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p12"></span>[Luke xxii.
64](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#064)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[487:3032](1100089.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p13"></span>[Mark xiv.
65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p13.1"></span>.
\[In this passage <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p13.2"></span>δολοι</span> does not occur, but <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p13.3"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p13.4"></span>πηρται</span>, which has
a wider sense.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[487:3033](1100089.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p15"></span>[Heb. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[487:3034](1100089.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p16"></span>[Heb. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[487:3035](1100089.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p18"></span>\[The order here is peculiar to this
Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[487:3036](1100089.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p19"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p19.1"></span>ατν</span> is inserted here.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[488:3037](1100089.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p20"></span>\[The reading is peculiar (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p20.1"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p20.2"></span>λγει Εκε κα
οτο</span></span>), as indicated in the rendering.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[488:3038](1100089.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p21"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
69-75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#069)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p21.1"></span>. \[In [Matt.
26.74](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#074)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p21.2"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p21.3"></span>καταθεματζειν</span> is read; in [Matt.
26.75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p21.4"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p21.5"></span>ατ</span> is omitted. These variations and
those noted above are the only peculiarities.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[488:3039](1100089.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p23"></span>[Luke xxii.
61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[488:3040](1100089.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p25"></span>[Mark
14:68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#068),
[72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#072)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p25.1"></span>.
\[In both passages in Mark there are textual variations in the <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p25.2"></span>mss</span>. The clause in
[Mark 14.68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#068)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p25.3"></span>, telling of the first cock-crowing, is
omitted in three of the best <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p25.4"></span>mss</span>. But the absence of any parallel
statement would account for the omission.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[488:3041](1100089.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p25.5"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p26"></span>[1 Pet. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[488:3042](1100089.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p28"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[488:3043](1100089.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p29"></span>[Mark xiv.
72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#072)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[488:3044](1100089.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p31"></span>[Matt.
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p31.1"></span>.
\[This is not a citation, but a combination of terms occurring in all
four accounts.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[488:3045](1100089.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p34"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p34.1"></span>.
\[R.V. omits “had,” and reads “repented himself,” “brought back.”— R.\]

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[489:3046](1100089.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p39"></span>\[The words “and elders” are omitted,
though Tischendorf cites Chrysostom otherwise.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[489:3047](1100089.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p40"></span>\[R.V., “into the sanctuary,” accepting
the reading given in the Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[489:3048](1100089.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p41"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p41.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “and he went away,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[489:3049](1100089.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p43"></span>[John xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[489:3050](1100089.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p44"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
64](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#064)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p44.1"></span>.
\[Abridged.\]

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[489:3051](1100089.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p45"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p45.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p45.2"></span>κορυφαο</span>.

<span id="fn_3051"></span>[489:3052](1100089.htm#fr_3051) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p50"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p50.1"></span>.
\[See notes on the previous citation of this verse.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3052"></span>[489:3053](1100089.htm#fr_3052) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p51"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
6-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#006)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p51.1"></span>. \[The only textual peculiarities are, the
substitution of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p51.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXXI-p51.3"></span>κα</span></span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXXI-p51.4"></span>δ</span>, at the
beginning of [Matt. 27.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p51.5"></span>; and the omission of a clause in [Matt.
27.9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009)<span
id="iii.LXXXI-p51.6"></span>, as indicated above.—R.\]

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[490:3054](1100089.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p56"></span>[Mal. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[490:3055](1100089.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p57"></span>[Exod. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[490:3056](1100089.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p58"></span>[Luke
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p58.1"></span>.
\[Freely cited.\]

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[491:3057](1100089.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p65"></span>[Matt. xxv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[491:3058](1100089.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p69"></span>*i.e*., the sum of all the congregations
in Antioch.

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[491:3059](1100089.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="iii.LXXXI-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXXI-p70"></span>[Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXXXI-p70.1"></span>.
\[Abridged.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXXII](1100090)
