[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100019)  [Next](1100021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XII"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XII-p1.1"></span>Homily XII.</span>

<span id="iii.XII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. III.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.XII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XII-p3"></span>“Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan,”
etc.

<span id="iii.XII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XII-p4.1"></span>With</span> the servants the Lord, with the
criminals the Judge, cometh to be baptized. But be not thou troubled;
for in these humiliations His exaltation doth most shine forth. For He
who vouchsafed to be borne so long in a Virgin’s womb, and to come forth
thence with our nature, and to be smitten with rods, and crucified, and
to suffer all the rest which He suffered;—why marvellest thou if He
vouchsafed also to be baptized, and to come with the rest to His
servant. For the amazement lay in that one thing, that being God, He
would be made Man; but the rest after this all follows in course of
reason.

<span id="iii.XII-p5"></span>For this cause, let me add, John also by
way of anticipation said all that he had said before, that he “was not
worthy to unloose the latchet of His shoe;” and all the rest, as for
instance, that He is Judge, and rewards every man according to his
desert, and that He will bestow His Spirit abundantly on all; in order
that when thou shouldest see Him coming to the baptism, thou mightest
not suspect anything mean. Therefore he forbids Him, even when He was
come, saying,

<span id="iii.XII-p6"></span>“I have need to be baptized of Thee, and
comest Thou to me.” <span id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) For, because
the baptism was “of repentance,” and led men to accuse themselves for
their offenses, lest any one should suppose that He too “cometh to
Jordan” in this sort of mind, John sets it right beforehand, by calling
Him both Lamb, and Redeemer from all the sin that is in the world. Since
He that was able to take away the sins of the whole race of men, much
more was He Himself without sin. For this cause then he said not,
“Behold, He that is without sin,” but what was much more, He “that
beareth the sin of the world,” in order that together with this truth
thou mightest receive that other with all assurance, and having received
it mightest perceive, that in the conduct of some further economy He
cometh to the baptism. Wherefore also he said to Him when He came, “I
have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?”

<span id="iii.XII-p8"></span>And he said not, “And art Thou baptized of
me?” nay, for this he feared to say: but what? “And comest Thou to me?”
What then doth Christ? What He did afterwards with respect to Peter,
this did He then also. For so he too would have forbidden Him to wash
his feet, but when he had heard, “What I do thou knowest not now, but
thou shalt know hereafter,” and “thou hast no part with me,” <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) he speedily withdrew from his
determination, and went over to the contrary. And this man again in like
manner, when he had heard, “Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh
us to fulfill all righteousness,” <span
id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) straightway obeyed. For they were not
unduly contentious, but they manifested <span id="page_73">p. 73</span>
<span id="iii.XII-Page_73"></span> both love and obedience, and made it
their study to be ruled by their Lord in all things.

<span id="iii.XII-p11"></span>And mark how He urges him on that very
ground which chiefly caused him to look doubtfully on what was taking
place; in that He did not say, “thus it is just,” but “thus it
becometh.” For, inasmuch as the point unworthy of Him was in his mind
chiefly this, His being baptized by His servant, He stated this rather
than anything else, which is directly opposed to that impression: as
though He had said, “Is it not as unbecoming that thou avoidest and
forbiddest this? nay, for this self-same cause I bid thee suffer it,
that it is becoming, and that in the highest degree.”

<span id="iii.XII-p12"></span>And He did not merely say, “suffer,” but
He added, “now.” “For it will not be so forever,” saith He, “but thou
shalt see me such as thou desirest; for the present, however, endure
this.” Next He shows also how this “becometh” Him. How then doth it so?
“In that we fulfill the whole law;” and to express this He said, “all
righteousness.” For righteousness is the fulfilling of the commandments.
“Since then we have performed all the rest of the commandments,” saith
He, “and this alone remains, it also must be added: because I am come to
do away the curse that is appointed for the transgression of the law. I
must therefore first fulfill it all, and having delivered you from its
condemnation, in this way bring it to an end. It becometh me therefore
to fulfill the whole law, by the same rule that it becometh me to do
away the curse that is written against you in the law: this being the
very purpose of my assuming flesh, and coming hither.”

<span id="iii.XII-p13"></span>2. “Then he suffereth Him. And Jesus, when
He was baptized, went up straightway out of the water; and, lo, the
heavens were opened unto Him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
like a dove, and lighting upon Him.” <span
id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510)

<span id="iii.XII-p15"></span>For inasmuch as many supposed that John
was greater than He, because John had been brought up all his time in
the wilderness, and was son of a chief priest, and was clothed with such
raiment, and was calling all men unto his baptism, and had been born of
a barren mother; while Jesus, first of all, was of a damsel of ordinary
rank (for the virgin birth was not yet manifest to all); and besides, He
had been brought up in an house, and held converse with all men, and
wore this common raiment; they suspected Him to be less than John,
knowing as yet nothing of those secret things;—and it fell out moreover
that He was baptized of John, which thing added support to this surmise,
even if none of those mentioned before had existed; for it would come
into their mind that this man was one of the many (for were He not one
of the many, He would not have come with the many to the baptism), but
that John was greater than He and far more admirable:—in order therefore
that this opinion might not prevail with the multitude, the very heavens
are opened, when He is baptized, and the Spirit comes down, and a voice
with the Spirit, proclaiming the dignity of the Only Begotten. For since
the voice that said, “This is my beloved Son,” would seem to the
multitude rather to belong to John, for It added not, “This that is
baptized,” but simply *This*, and every hearer would conceive it to be
said concerning the baptizer, rather than the baptized, partly on
account of the Baptist’s own dignity, partly for all that hath been
mentioned; the Spirit came in form of a dove, drawing the voice towards
Jesus, and making it evident to all, that *This* was not spoken of John
that baptized, but of Jesus who was baptized.

<span id="iii.XII-p16"></span>And how was it, one may say, that they did
not believe, when these things came to pass? Because in the days of
Moses also many wonderful works were done, albeit not such as these; and
after all those, the voices, and the trumpets, and the lightnings, they
both forged a calf, and “were joined unto Baal-peor.” And those very
persons too, who were present at the time, and saw Lazarus arise, so far
from believing in Him, who had wrought these things, repeatedly
attempted even to slay Him. Now if seeing before their eyes one rise
from the dead, they were so wicked, why marvel at their not receiving a
voice wafted from above? Since when a soul is uncandid and perverse, and
possessed by the disease of envy, it yields to none of these things;
even as when it is candid it receives all with faith, and hath no great
need of these.

<span id="iii.XII-p17"></span>Speak not therefore thus, “They believed
not,” but rather inquire, “Did not all things take place which ought to
have made them believe?” For by the prophet also God frames this kind of
defense of His own ways in general. That is, the Jews being on the point
of ruin, and of being given over to extreme punishment; lest any from
their wickedness should calumniate His providence, He saith, “What ought
I to have done to this vineyard, that I have not done?” <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) Just so <span id="page_74">p.
74</span> <span id="iii.XII-Page_74"></span> here likewise do thou
reflect; “what ought to have been done, and was not done?” And indeed
whensoever arguments arise on God’s Providence, do thou make use of this
kind of defense, against those who from the wickedness of the many try
to raise a prejudice against it. See, for instance, what astonishing
things are done, preludes of those which were to come; for it is no more
paradise, but Heaven that is opened.

<span id="iii.XII-p19"></span>But let our argument with the Jews stand
over unto some other time; for the present, God working with us, we
would direct our discourse to what is immediately before us.

<span id="iii.XII-p20"></span>3. “And Jesus, when He was baptized, went
up straightway out of the water; and lo! the heavens were opened unto
Him.” <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512)

<span id="iii.XII-p22"></span>Wherefore were the heavens opened? To
inform thee that at thy baptism also this is done, God calling thee to
thy country on high, and persuading thee to have nothing to do with
earth. And if thou see not, yet never doubt it. For so evermore at the
beginnings of all wonderful and spiritual transactions, sensible visions
appear, and such-like signs, for the sake of them that are somewhat dull
in disposition, and who have need of outward sight, and who cannot at
all conceive an incorporeal nature, but are excited only by the things
that are seen: that so, though afterward no such thing occur, what hath
been declared by them once for all at the first may be received by thy
faith.

<span id="iii.XII-p23"></span>For in the case of the apostles too, there
was a “sound of a mighty wind,” <span id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513)
and visions of fiery tongues appeared, but not for the apostles’ sake,
but because of the Jews who were then present. Nevertheless, even though
no sensible signs take place, we receive the things that have been once
manifested by them. Since the dove itself at that time therefore
appeared, that as in place of a finger (so to say) it might point out to
them that were present, and to John, the Son of God. Not however merely
on this account, but to teach thee also, that upon thee no less at thy
baptism the Spirit comes. But since then we have no need of sensible
vision, faith sufficing instead of all. For signs are “not for them that
believe, but for them that believe not.” <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514)

<span id="iii.XII-p26"></span>But why in the fashion of a dove? Gentle
is that creature, and pure. Forasmuch then as the Spirit too is “a
Spirit of meekness,” <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) He
therefore appears in this sort. And besides, He is reminding us of an
ancient history. For so, when once a common shipwreck had overtaken the
whole world, and our race was in danger of perishing, this creature
appeared, and indicated the deliverance from the tempest, and bearing an
olive branch, <span id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) published the good
tidings of the common calm of the whole world; all which was a type of
the things to come. For in fact the condition of men was then much
worse, and they deserved a much sorer punishment. To prevent thy
despairing, therefore, He reminds thee of that history. Because then
also, when things were desperate, there was a sort of deliverance and
reformation; but then by punishment, now, on the contrary, by grace and
an unspeakable gift. <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) Therefore
the dove also appears, not bearing an olive branch, but pointing out to
us our Deliverer from all evils, and suggesting the gracious hopes. For
not from out of an ark doth she lead one man only, but the whole world
she leads up into heaven at her appearing, and instead of a branch of
peace from an olive, she conveys the adoption to all the world’s
offspring in common.

<span id="iii.XII-p30"></span>Reflect now on the greatness of the gift,
and do not account His dignity the less for His appearing in such a
likeness. For I actually hear some saying, <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) that “such as is the difference
between a man and a dove, so great is that between Christ and the
Spirit: since the one appeared in our nature, the other in the likeness
of a dove.” What must we say then to these things? That the Son of God
did indeed take upon Him the nature of man, but the Spirit took not on
Him the nature of a dove. Therefore the evangelist also said not, “in
the nature of a dove,” but “in the form of a dove.” Accordingly, never
after did He so much as appear in this fashion, but at that moment only.
And if on this account thou affirmest His dignity to be less, the
cherubim too will be made out by this reasoning much His superior, even
as much so as an eagle is to a dove: because they too were figured into
that visible shape. And the angels too superior again, for they no less
have many times appeared in the fashion of men. But these things are not
so, indeed they are not. For the truth of an economy is one thing, and
the condescension of a temporary vision another.

<span id="iii.XII-p32"></span>Do not now, I pray thee, become unthankful
towards thy Benefactor nor with the very contraries <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) requite Him that hath bestowed <span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span id="iii.XII-Page_75"></span> on thee the
fountain of blessedness. For where adoption is vouchsafed, there is also
the removing of evils, and the giving of all good things.

<span id="iii.XII-p34"></span>4. On this very account the Jewish baptism
ceases, and ours takes its beginning. And what was done with regard to
the Passover, the same ensues in the baptism also. For as in that case
too, He acting with a view to both, brought the one to an end, but to
the other He gave a beginning: so here, having fulfilled the Jewish
baptism, He at the same time opens also the doors of that of the Church;
as on one table then, so in one river now, He had both sketched out the
shadow, and now adds the truth. For this baptism alone hath the grace of
the Spirit, but that of John was destitute of this gift. For this very
cause in the case of the others that were baptized no such thing came to
pass, but only in the instance of Him who was to hand on <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) this; in order that, besides what we
have said, thou mightest learn this also, that not the purity of the
baptizer, but the power of the baptized, had this effect. Not until
then, assuredly, were either the heavens opened, nor did the Spirit make
His approach. <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) Because henceforth
He leads us away from the old to the new polity, both opening to us the
gates on high, and sending down His Spirit from thence to call us to our
country there; and not merely to call us, but also with the greatest
mark of dignity. For He hath not made us angels and archangels, but He
hath caused us to become “sons of God,” and “beloved,” and so He draws
us on towards that portion of ours.

<span id="iii.XII-p37"></span>Having then all this in thy mind, do thou
show forth a life worthy of the love of Him who calls thee, and of thy
citizenship in that world, and of the honor that is given thee.
Crucified as thou art to the world, and having crucified it to thyself,
show thyself with all strictness a citizen of the city of the heavens.
And do not, because thy body is not translated unto heaven, suppose that
thou hast anything to do with the earth; for thou hast thy Head abiding
above. Yea with this very purpose the Lord, having first come here and
having brought His angels, did then, taking thee with Him, depart
thither; that even before thy going up to that place, thou mightest
understand that it is possible for thee to inhabit earth as it were
heaven.

<span id="iii.XII-p38"></span>Let us then keep watch over that noble
birth, which we received from the beginning; and let us every day seek
more and more the palaces there, and account all that is here to be a
shadow and a dream. For so, had any king among those on earth, finding
thee poor and a beggar, made thee suddenly his son, never wouldest thou
have thought upon thy cottage, and thy cottage’s mean appointments. Yet
surely in that case the difference is not much. Do not then either in
this case take account of any of the former things, for thou art called
unto much greater. For both He who calls is the Lord of the angels, and
the good things that are given surpass all both word and thought. Since
not from earth to earth doth He remove thee, as the king doth, but from
earth to heaven, and from a mortal nature to an immortal, and to glory
unspeakable, then only possible to be properly manifested, when we shall
actually enjoy it.

<span id="iii.XII-p39"></span>Now then, having to partake of such
blessings, do I see thee minding money, and clinging to the pomp which
is here? And dost thou not esteem all that is seen to be more vile than
beggars rags? And how wilt thou appear worthy of this honor? And what
excuse wilt thou have to plead? or rather, what punishment wilt thou not
have to suffer, who after so great a gift art running to thy former
vomit? For no longer art thou punished merely as a man, but as a son of
God that hath sinned; and the greatness of thy honor becomes a mean of
bringing a sorer punishment on thee. Since we too punish not equally
slaves that do wrong, and sons committing the same offense; and most of
all when they have received some great kindness from us.

<span id="iii.XII-p40"></span>For if he who had paradise for his
portion, for one disobedience underwent such dreadful things after his
honor; we, who have received Heaven, and are become joint heirs with the
Only Begotten, what excuse shall we have, for running to the serpent
after the dove? For it will be no longer, “Dust thou art, and unto dust
shalt thou return,” <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) and thou
“tillest the ground,” <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) and those
former words, that will be said to us; <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) but what is far more grievous than
these, the “outer darkness,” <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) the
bonds that may not be burst, the venomous worm, the “gnashing of teeth;”
and this with great reason. For he that is not made better even by so
great a benefit, would justly suffer the most extreme, and a yet more
grievous punishment. Elias once opened and shut Heaven, but <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span id="iii.XII-Page_76"></span> that was to
bring down rain, and restrain it; whereas to thee the heaven is not so
opened, but in order for thee to ascend thither; and what is yet more,
not to ascend only, but to lead up others also, if thou wilt; such great
confidence and power hath He bestowed on thee in all that is His.

<span id="iii.XII-p45"></span>5. Forasmuch then as our house is there,
there let us store up all, and leave nothing here, lest we lose it. For
here, though thou put a lock on it, and doors, and bars, and set
thousands of servants to watch it; though thou get the better of all the
crafty ones, though thou escape the eyes of the envious, the worms, the
wasting that comes of time; which is impossible;—death at any rate thou
wilt never escape, but wilt be deprived of all those things in one
moment of time; and not deprived of them only, but wilt have to transfer
them into the hands often of thy very enemies. Whereas if thou wouldest
transfer them into that house, thou wilt be far above all. For there is
no need to apply either key, or doors, or bars; such is the virtue <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) of that city, so inviolable is this
place, and by nature inaccessible to corruption and all wickedness.

<span id="iii.XII-p47"></span>How then is it not of the utmost folly,
where destruction and waste is the lot of all that is stored, there to
heap up all, but where things abide untouched and increase, there not to
lay up even the least portion; and this, when we are to live there
forever? For this cause the very heathens <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527) disbelieve the things that we say,
since our doings, not our sayings, are the demonstration which they are
willing to receive from us; and when they see us building ourselves fine
houses, and laying out gardens and baths, and buying fields, they are
not willing to believe that we are preparing for another sort of
residence away from our city.

<span id="iii.XII-p49"></span>“For if this were so,” say they, “they
would turn to money all they have here, and lay them up beforehand
there;” and this they divine from the things that are done in this
world. For so we see those who are very rich getting themselves houses
and fields and all the rest, chiefly in those cities in which they are
to stay. But we do the contrary; and with all earnest zeal we get
possession of the earth, which we are soon after to leave; giving up not
money only, but even our very blood for a few acres and tenements: while
for the purchase of Heaven we do not endure to give even what is beyond
our wants, and this though we are to purchase it at a small price, and
to possess it forever, provided we had once purchased it.

<span id="iii.XII-p50"></span>Therefore I say we shall suffer the utmost
punishment, departing thither naked and poor; or rather it will not be
for our own poverty that we shall undergo these irremediable calamities,
but also for our making others to be such as ourselves. For when
heathens see them that have partaken of so great mysteries earnest about
these matters, much more will they cling themselves to the things
heaping much fire upon our head. For when we, who ought to teach them to
despise all things that appear, do ourselves most of all urge them to
the lust of these things; when shall it be possible for us to be saved,
having to give account for the perdition of others? Hearest thou not
Christ say, that He left us to be for salt and for lights in this world,
in order that we may both brace up <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) those that are melting in luxury, and
enlighten them that are darkened by the care of wealth? When therefore
we even cast them into more thorough darkness, and make them more
dissolute, what hope shall we have of salvation? There is none at all;
but wailing and gnashing our teeth, and bound hand and foot, we shall
depart into the fire of hell, after being full well worn down by the
cares of riches.

<span id="iii.XII-p52"></span>Considering then all these things, let us
loose the bands of such deceit, that we may not at all fall into those
things which deliver us over to the unquenchable fire. For he that is a
slave to money, the chains both here and there will have him continually
liable to them; but he that is rid of this desire will attain to freedom
from both. Unto which that we also may attain, let us break in pieces
the grievous yoke of avarice, and make ourselves wings toward Heaven; by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_507"></span>[72:508](1100020.htm#fr_507) <span
id="iii.XII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p7"></span>[Matt. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014)<span id="iii.XII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[72:509](1100020.htm#fr_508) <span
id="iii.XII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p9"></span>[John
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008)<span id="iii.XII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[72:510](1100020.htm#fr_509) <span
id="iii.XII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p10"></span>[Matt. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015)<span id="iii.XII-p10.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Suffer *it* (or *me*) now, for thus it becometh,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_510"></span>[73:511](1100020.htm#fr_510) <span
id="iii.XII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p14"></span>[Matt.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="iii.XII-p14.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “from the water,” and “coming” for “lighting.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_511"></span>[73:512](1100020.htm#fr_511) <span
id="iii.XII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p18"></span>[Is. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="iii.XII-p18.1"></span>.
\[Chrysostom varies from the <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XII-p18.2"></span>LXX</span>., introducing <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XII-p18.3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p18.4"></span>με δει</span></span>, to strengthen his
argument.—R.\]

<span id="fn_512"></span>[74:513](1100020.htm#fr_512) <span
id="iii.XII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p21"></span>[Matt. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="iii.XII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[74:514](1100020.htm#fr_513) <span
id="iii.XII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p24"></span>[Acts ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)<span id="iii.XII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[74:515](1100020.htm#fr_514) <span
id="iii.XII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p25"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#022)<span id="iii.XII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[74:516](1100020.htm#fr_515) <span
id="iii.XII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p27"></span>[Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span id="iii.XII-p27.1"></span>.
\[The immediate reference in [Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span id="iii.XII-p27.2"></span> is
not to the Holy Spirit, yet there is a suggestion of the influence of
the Holy Spirit.—R.\]

<span id="fn_516"></span>[74:517](1100020.htm#fr_516) <span
id="iii.XII-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p28"></span>[Gen.
viii](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#000)<span id="iii.XII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[74:518](1100020.htm#fr_517) <span
id="iii.XII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p29"></span>[2 Cor. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#015)<span id="iii.XII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[74:519](1100020.htm#fr_518) <span
id="iii.XII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p31"></span>*i.e*., the Macedonians, who were censured
at Constantinople, A.D. 381.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[74:520](1100020.htm#fr_519) <span
id="iii.XII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p33"></span>“The contraries:” for whereas the Spirit
came to exalt, and make us partakers of the Divine Nature, the heretics
would degrade Him to something like our own.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[75:521](1100020.htm#fr_520) <span
id="iii.XII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p35"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p35.1"></span>παραδιδναι</span>; “hand down” would express
the sense more clearly.—R.\]

<span id="fn_521"></span>[75:522](1100020.htm#fr_521) <span
id="iii.XII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p36"></span>\[The sentence in the Greek is not
negative but affirmative: “Then assuredly” both these events
occurred.—R.\]

<span id="fn_522"></span>[75:523](1100020.htm#fr_522) <span
id="iii.XII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p41"></span>[Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="iii.XII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[75:524](1100020.htm#fr_523) <span
id="iii.XII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p42"></span>[Gen. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012)<span id="iii.XII-p42.1"></span>.
\[The LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p42.2"></span>γ</span> in both passages. The verbal
suggestion of the original may be retained by rendering: “Earth thou
art, and unto earth thou shalt return,” and thou “tillest the
earth.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_524"></span>[75:525](1100020.htm#fr_524) <span
id="iii.XII-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p43"></span>\[Literally, “that we shall hear.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_525"></span>[75:526](1100020.htm#fr_525) <span
id="iii.XII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p44"></span>[Matt. xxv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)<span id="iii.XII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[76:527](1100020.htm#fr_526) <span
id="iii.XII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p46"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p46.1"></span>δναμι</span> \]

<span id="fn_527"></span>[76:528](1100020.htm#fr_527) <span
id="iii.XII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p48"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p48.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p48.2"></span>Ελληνε</span>.\] “Greeks.” But the
ecclesiastical use is correctly given in the translation. In the New
Testament, the term was equivalent to “Gentiles,” as opposed to Jews;
but was afterwards applied to heathen as opposed to Christians. See
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XII-p48.3"></span>Sophocles</span>
*Greek Lexicon* of the Roman and Byzantine periods, *sub voce*.—R.\]

<span id="fn_528"></span>[76:529](1100020.htm#fr_528) <span
id="iii.XII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XII-p51"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p51.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XII-p51.2"></span>πισφγγωμεν</span>, The verb means “to bind
tight,” and is variously applied.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIII](1100021)
