[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100073)  [Next](1100075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXVI"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p1.1"></span>Homily LXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXII.
1-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)<span
id="iii.LXVI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p3"></span>*“And Jesus answered and spake
again* <span id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582) *in parables. The
kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a
marriage* <span id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583) *for his son; and
sent forth his servants to call them which were bidden to the wedding;
and they would not come. Again, he sent forth other servants, saying,
Tell them which are bidden, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come unto the marriage.
But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another
to his merchandise: and the remnant took his servants, and entreated
them spitefully, and slew them.”* <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584)

<span id="iii.LXVI-p7"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p7.1"></span>Seest</span> thou both in the former parable
and in this the difference between the Son and the servants? Seest thou
at once the great affinity between both parables, and the great
difference also? For this also indicates God’s <span id="page_403">p.
403</span> <span id="iii.LXVI-Page_403"></span> long-suffering, and His
great providential care, and the Jews’ ingratitude.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p8"></span>But this parable hath something also more
than the other. For it proclaims beforehand both the casting out of the
Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles; and it indicates together with
this also the strictness of the life required, and how great the
punishment appointed for the careless.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p9"></span>And well is this placed after the other.
For since He had said, “It shall be given to a nation bringing forth the
fruits thereof,” He declares next to what kind of nation; and not this
only, but He also again sets forth His providential care towards the
Jews as past utterance. For there He appears before His crucifixion
bidding them; but here even after He is slain, He still urges them,
striving to win them over. And when they deserved to have suffered the
most grievous punishment, then He both presses them to the marriage, and
honors them with the highest honor. And see how both there He calls not
the Gentiles first, but the Jews, and here again. But as there, when
they would not receive Him, but even slew Him when He was come, then He
gave away the vineyard; thus here too, when they were not willing to be
present at the marriage, then He called others.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p10"></span>What then could be more ungrateful than
they, when being bidden to a marriage they rush away? For who would not
choose to come to a marriage, and that a King’s marriage, and of a King
making a marriage for a Son?

<span id="iii.LXVI-p11"></span>And wherefore is it called a marriage?
one may say. That thou mightest learn God’s tender care, His yearning
towards us, the cheerfulness of the state of things, that there is
nothing sorrowful there, nor sad, but all things are full of spiritual
joy. Therefore also John calls Him a bridegroom, therefore Paul again
saith, “For I have espoused you to one husband;” <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585) and, “This is a great mystery, but
I speak concerning Christ and the Church.” <span
id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586)

<span id="iii.LXVI-p14"></span>Why then is not the bride said to be
espoused to Him, but to the Son? Because she that is espoused to the
Son, is espoused to the Father. For it is indifferent in Scripture that
the one or the other should be said, because of the identity <span
id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) of the substance.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p16"></span>Hereby He proclaimed the resurrection
also. For since in what went before He had spoken of the death, He shows
that even after the death, then is the marriage, then the bridegroom.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p17"></span>But not even so do these become better
men nor more gentle, than which what can be worse? For this again is a
third accusation. The first that they killed the prophets; then the son;
afterwards that even when they had slain Him, and were bidden unto the
marriage of Him that was slain, by the very one that was slain, they
come not, but feign excuses, yokes of oxen, and pieces of ground, and
wives. And yet the excuses seem to be reasonable; but hence we learn,
though the things which hinder us be necessary, to set the things
spiritual at a higher price than all.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p18"></span>And He not suddenly, but a long time
before. For, “Tell,” He saith, “them that are bidden;” and again, “Call
them that were bidden;” which circumstance makes the charge against them
heavier. And when were they bidden? By all the prophets; by John again;
for unto Christ he would pass all on, saying, “He must increase, I must
decrease;” <span id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588) by the Son Himself
again, “Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you;” <span id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) and again, “If
any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.” <span
id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590)

<span id="iii.LXVI-p22"></span>But not by words only, but also by
actions did He bid them, after His ascension by Peter, and those with
him. “For He that wrought effectually in Peter,” it is said, “to the
apostleship of the circumcision, was mighty also in me towards the
Gentiles.” <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591)

<span id="iii.LXVI-p24"></span>For since on seeing the Son, they were
wroth and slew Him, He bids them again by His servants. And unto what
doth He bid them? Unto labors, and toils, and sweat? Nay but unto
pleasure. For, “My oxen,” He saith, “and my fatlings are killed.” See
how complete His banquet, <span id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) how
great His munificence.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p26"></span>And not even this shamed them, but the
more long-suffering He showed, so much the more were they hardened. For
not for press of business, but from “making light of it,” they did not
come.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p27"></span>“How then do some bring forward
marriages, others yokes of oxen? these things surely are of want of
leisure.”

<span id="iii.LXVI-p28"></span>By no means, for when spiritual things
call us, there is no press of business that has the power of necessity.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p29"></span>And to me they seem moreover to make use
of these excuses, putting forward these things as cloke for their
negligence. And not this only is the grievous thing, that they came not,
but also that which is a far more violent <span id="page_404">p.
404</span> <span id="iii.LXVI-Page_404"></span> and furious act, to have
even beaten them that came, and to have used them despitefully, and to
have slain them; this is worse than the former. For those others came,
demanding produce and fruits, and were slain; but these, bidding them to
the marriage of Him that had been slain by them, and these again are
murdered.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p30"></span>What is equal to this madness? This Paul
also was laying to their charge, when he said, “Who both killed the
Lord, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us.” <span
id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593)

<span id="iii.LXVI-p32"></span>Moreover, that they may not say, “He is
an adversary of God, and therefore we do not come,” hear what they say
who are bidding them; that it is the father who is making the marriage,
and that it is He who is bidding them.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p33"></span>What then did He after these things?
Since they were not willing to come, yea and also slew those that came
unto them; He burns up their cities, and sent His armies and slew them.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p34"></span>And these things He saith, declaring
beforehand the things that took place under Vespasian and Titus, and
that they provoked the father also, by not believing in Him; it is the
father at any rate who was avenging.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p35"></span>And for this reason let me add, not
straightway after Christ was slain did the capture take place, but after
forty years, that He might show His long suffering, when they had slain
Stephen, when they had put James to death, when they had spitefully
entreated the apostles.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p36"></span>Seest thou the truth of the event, and
its quickness? For while John was yet living, and many other of them
that were with Christ, these things came to pass, and they that had
heard these words were witnesses of the events.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p37"></span>See then care utterable. He had planted a
vineyard; He had done all things, and finished; when His servants had
been put to death, He sent other servants; when those had been slain, He
sent the son; and when He was put to death, He bids them to the
marriage. They would not come. After this He sends other servants, and
they slew these also.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p38"></span>Then upon this He slays them, as being
incurably diseased. For that they were incurably diseased, was proved
not by their acts only, but by the fact, that even when harlots and
publicans had believed, they did these things. So that, not by their own
crimes alone, but also from what others were able to do aright, these
men are condemned,

<span id="iii.LXVI-p39"></span>But if any one should say, that not then
were they out of the Gentiles called, I mean, when the apostles had been
beaten and had suffered ten thousand things, but straightway after the
resurrection (for then He said to them, “Go ye and make disciples of all
nations.” <span id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594) ) We would say,
that both before the crucifixion, and after the crucifixion, they
addressed themselves to them first. For both before the crucifixion, He
saith to them, “Go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel;” <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595) and after the crucifixion, so far
from forbidding, He even commanded them to address themselves to the
Jews. For though He said, “Make disciples of all nations,” yet when on
the point of ascending into Heaven, He declared that unto those first
they were to address themselves; For, “ye shall receive power,” saith
He, “after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judæa, and unto the
uttermost part of the earth;” <span id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596)
and Paul again, “He that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship
of the circumcision, was mighty in me also toward the Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597) Therefore the apostles also went
first unto the Jews, and when they had tarried a long time in Jerusalem,
and then had been driven away by them, in this way they were scattered
abroad unto the Gentiles.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p44"></span>2. And see thou even herein His bounty;
“As many as ye shall find,” saith He, “bid to the marriage.” For before
this, as I said, they addressed themselves both to Jews and Greeks,
tarrying for the most part in Judæa; but since they continued to lay
plots against them, hear Paul interpreting this parable, and saying
thus, “It was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken to you, but since ye judge yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn to
the Gentiles.” <span id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598)

<span id="iii.LXVI-p46"></span>Therefore Christ also saith, “The wedding
is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy.”

<span id="iii.LXVI-p47"></span>He knew this indeed even before, but that
He might leave them no pretext of a shameless sort of contradiction,
although He knew it, to them first He both came and sent, both stopping
their mouths, and teaching us to fulfill all our parts, though no one
should derive any profit.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p48"></span>Since then they were not worthy, go ye,
saith He, into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid; both the
common sort, and the outcasts. For because He had said in every
way, <span id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599) “The harlots and
publicans shall inherit heaven;” and, “The first shall <span
id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span id="iii.LXVI-Page_405"></span> be
last, and the last first;” He shows that justly do these things come to
pass; which more than anything stung the Jews, and goaded them far more
grievously than their overthrow, to see those from the Gentiles brought
into their privileges, and into far greater than theirs.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p50"></span>Then in order that not even these should
put confidence in their faith alone, He discourses unto them also
concerning the judgment to be passed upon wicked actions; to them that
have not yet believed, of coming unto Him by faith, and to them that
have believed, of care with respect to their life. For the garment is
life and practice.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p51"></span>And yet the calling was of grace;
wherefore then doth He take a strict account? Because although to be
called and to be cleansed was of grace, yet, when called and clothed in
clean garments, to continue keeping them so, this is of the diligence of
them that are called.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p52"></span>The being called was not of merit, but of
grace. It was fit therefore to make a return for the grace, and not to
show forth such great wickedness after the honor. “But I have not
enjoyed,” one may say, “so much advantage as the Jews.” Nay, but thou
hast enjoyed far greater benefits. For what things were being prepared
for them throughout all their time, these thou hast received at once,
not being worthy. Wherefore Paul also saith, “And that the Gentiles
might glorify God for His mercy.” <span
id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600) For what things were due to them,
these thou hast received.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p54"></span>Wherefore also great is the punishment
appointed for them that have been remiss. For as they did despite by not
coming, so also thou by thus sitting down with a corrupt life. For to
come in with filthy garments is this namely, to depart hence having
one’s life impure; wherefore also he was speechless.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p55"></span>Seest thou how, although the fact was so
manifest, He doth not punish at once, until he himself, who has sinned,
has passed the sentence? For by having nothing to reply he condemned
himself, and so is taken away to the unutterable torments.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p56"></span>For do not now, on hearing of darkness,
suppose he is punished by this, by sending into a place where there is
no light only, but where “there is” also “weeping and gnashing of
teeth.” <span id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601) And this He saith,
indicating the intolerable pains.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p58"></span>Hear ye, as many as having partaken of
the mysteries, and having been present at the marriage, clothe your
souls with filthy deeds. Hear whence ye were called.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p59"></span>From the highway. Being what? Lame and
halt in soul, which is a much more grievous thing than the mutilation of
the body. Reverence the love of Him, who called you, and let no one
continue to have filthy garments, but let each of you busy himself about
the clothing of your soul.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p60"></span>Hear, ye women; hear, ye men; we need not
these garments that are bespangled with gold, *that adorn our outward
parts*, <span id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602) but those others,
that adorn the inward. Whilst we have these former, it is difficult to
put on those latter. It is not possible at the same time to deck both
soul and body. It is not possible at the same time both to serve mammon,
and to obey Christ as we ought.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p62"></span>Let us put off us therefore this grievous
tyranny. For neither if any one were to adorn thy house by hanging it
with golden curtains, and were to make thee sit there in rags, naked,
wouldest thou endure it with meekness. But lo, now thou doest this to
thyself, decking the house of thy soul, I mean the body, with curtains
beyond number, but leaving the soul itself to sit in rags. Knowest thou
not that the king ought to be adorned more than the city? so therefore
while for the city hangings are prepared of linen, for the king there is
a purple robe and a diadem. Even so do thou wrap the body with a much
meaner dress, but the mind do thou clothe in purple, and put a crown on
it, and set it on a high and conspicuous chariot. For now thou art doing
the opposite, decking the city in various ways, but suffering the king,
the mind, to be dragged bound after the brute passions.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p63"></span>Rememberest thou not, that thou art
bidden to a marriage, and to God’s marriage? Considerest thou not how
the soul that is bidden ought to enter into those chambers, clad, and
decked with fringes of gold.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p64"></span>3. Wilt thou that I show thee them that
are clad thus, them that have on a marriage garment?

<span id="iii.LXVI-p65"></span>Call to mind those holy persons, of whom
I discoursed to you of late, them that wear garments of hair, them that
dwell in the deserts. These above all are the wearers of the garments of
that wedding; this is evident from hence, that how many soever purple
robes thou wert to give them, they would not choose to receive them; but
much as a king, if any one were to take the beggar’s rags, and exhort
him to put them on, would abhor the clothing, so would those persons
also his purple robe. And from no other cause have they this feeling,
but because of knowing the beauty of their own raiment. Therefore even
<span id="page_406">p. 406</span> <span id="iii.LXVI-Page_406"></span>
that purple robe they spurn like the spider’s web. For these things hath
their sackcloth taught them; for indeed they are far more exalted and
more glorious than the very king who reigns.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p66"></span>And if thou wert able to open the doors
of the mind, and to look upon their soul, and all their ornaments
within, surely thou wouldest fall down upon the earth, not bearing the
glory of their beauty, and the splendor of those garments, and the
lightning brightness of their conscience.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p67"></span>For we could tell also of men of old,
great and to be admired; but since visible examples lead on more those
of grosser souls, therefore do I send you even to the tabernacles of
those holy persons. For they have nothing sorrowful, but as if in heaven
they had pitched their tents, even so are they encamped far off the
wearisome things of this present life, in campaign against the devils;
and as in choirs, so do they war against him. Therefore I say, they have
fixed their tents, and have fled from cities, and markets, and houses.
For he that warreth cannot sit in a house, but he must make his
habitation of a temporary kind, as on the point of removing straightway,
and so dwell. Such are all those persons, contrary to us. For we indeed
live not as in a camp, but as in a city at peace.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p68"></span>For who in a camp ever lays foundation,
and builds himself a house, which he is soon after to leave? There is
not one; but should any one attempt it, he is put to death as a traitor.
Who in a camp buys acres of land, and makes for himself trades? There is
not one, and very reasonably. “For thou art come here,” they would say,
“to fight, not to traffic; why then dost thou trouble thyself about the
place, which in a little time thou wilt leave? When we are gone away to
our country, do these things.”

<span id="iii.LXVI-p69"></span>The same do I now say to thee also. When
we have removed to the city that is above, do these things: or rather
thou wilt have no need of labors there; after that the king will do all
things for thee. But here it is enough to dig a ditch round only, and to
fix a palisade, but of building houses there is no need.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p70"></span>Hear what was the life of the Scythians,
that lived in their wagons, such, as they say, are the habits of the
shepherd tribes. So ought Christians to live; to go about the world,
warring against the devil, rescuing the captives held in subjection by
him, and to be in freedom from all worldly things.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p71"></span>Why preparest thou a house, O man, that
thou mayest bind thyself more? Why dost thou bury a treasure, and invite
the enemy against thyself? Why dost thou compass thyself with walls, and
prepare a prison for thyself?

<span id="iii.LXVI-p72"></span>But if these things seem to thee to be
hard, let us go away unto the tents of those men, that by their deeds we
may learn the easiness thereof. For they having set up huts, if they
must depart from these, depart like as soldiers, having left their camp
in peace. For so likewise are they encamped, or rather even much more
beautifully.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p73"></span>For indeed it is more pleasant to behold
a desert containing huts of monks in close succession, than soldiers
stretching the canvas in a camp, and fixing spears, and suspending from
the point of the spears saffron garments, <span
id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603) and a multitude of men having heads
of brass, and the bosses of the shields glistening much, and men armed
all throughout with steel, and royal courts hastily made, and ground
levelled far, and men dining and piping. For neither is this spectacle
so delightful as that of which I now speak.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p75"></span>For if we were to go away into the
wilderness, and look at the tents of Christ’s soldiers, we shall see not
canvas stretched, neither points of spears, nor golden garments making a
royal pavilion; but like as if any one upon an earth much larger than
this earth, yea infinite, had stretched out many heavens, strange and
awful would be the sight he showed; even so may one see here.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p76"></span>For in nothing are their lodging-places
in a condition inferior to the heavens; for the angels lodge with them,
and the Lord of the angels. For if they came to Abraham, a man having a
wife, and bringing up children, because they saw him hospitable; when
they find much more abundant virtue, and a man delivered from the body,
and in the flesh disregarding the flesh, much more do they tarry there,
and celebrate the choral feast that becomes them. For there is moreover
a table amongst them pure from all covetousness, and full of
self-denial.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p77"></span>No streams of blood are amongst them, nor
cutting up of flesh, nor heaviness of head, nor dainty cooking, neither
are there unpleasing smells of meat amongst them, nor disagreeable
smoke, neither runnings and tumults, and disturbances, and wearisome
clamors; but bread and water, the latter from a pure fountain, the
former from honest labor. But if any time they should be minded to feast
more sumptuously, their sumptuousness consists of fruits, and greater is
the pleasure there than at royal tables. There is no fear there, or
trembling; no ruler accuses, no wife provokes, no child casts into
sadness, no dis <span id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span
id="iii.LXVI-Page_407"></span> orderly mirth dissipates, no multitude of
flatterers puffs up; but the table is an angel’s table free from all
such turmoil.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p78"></span>And for a couch they have grass only
beneath them, like as Christ did when making a dinner in the wilderness.
And many of them do this, not being even under shelter, but for a roof
they have heaven, and the moon instead of the light of a candle, not
wanting oil, nor one to attend to it; on them alone does it shine
worthily from on high.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p79"></span>4. This table even angels from heaven
beholding are delighted and pleased. For if over one sinner that
repenteth they rejoice, over so many just men imitating them, what will
they not do? There are not master and slave; all are slaves, all free
men. And do not think the saying to be a dark proverb, for they are
indeed slaves one of another, and masters one of another.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p80"></span>They have no occasion to be in sadness
when evening has overtaken them, as many men feel, revolving the anxious
thoughts that spring from the evils of the day. They have no occasion
after their supper to be careful about robbers, and to shut the doors,
and to put bars against them, neither to dread the other ills, of which
many are afraid, extinguishing their candles with strict care, lest a
spark anywhere should set the house on fire.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p81"></span>And their conversation again is full of
the same calm. For they talk not of these things, whereof we discourse,
that are nothing to us; such a one is made governor, such a one has
ceased to be governor; such a one is dead, and another has succeeded to
the inheritance, and all such like, but always about the things to come
do they speak and seek wisdom; and as though dwelling in another world,
as though they had migrated unto heaven itself, as living there, even so
all their conversation is about the things there, about Abraham’s bosom,
about the crowns of the saints, about the choiring with Christ; and of
things present they have neither any memory nor thought, but like as we
should not deign to speak at all of what the ants do in their holes and
clefts; so neither do they of what we do; but about the King that is
above, about the war in which they are engaged, about the devil’s
crafts, about the good deeds which the saints have achieved.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p82"></span>Wherein therefore are we different from
ants, when compared with them? For like as they care for the things of
the body, so also do we; and would it were for these alone: but now it
is even for things far worse. For not for necessary things only do we
care like them, but also for things superfluous. For those insects
pursue a business free from all blame, but we follow after all
covetousness, and not even the ways of ants do we imitate, but the ways
of wolves, but the ways of leopards, or rather we are even worse than
these. For to them nature has assigned that they should be thus fed, but
us God hath honored with speech, and a sense of equity, <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) and we are become worse than the
wild beasts.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p84"></span>And whereas we are worse than the brutes,
those men are equal to the angels, being strangers and pilgrims as to
the things here; and all things in them are made different from us,
clothing, and food, and house, and shoes, and speech. And if any one
were to hear them conversing and us, then he would know full well, how
they indeed are citizens of heaven, but we are not worthy so much as of
the earth.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p85"></span>So that therefore, when any one invested
with rank is come unto them, then is all inflated pride found utterly
vain. For the laborer there, and he that hath no experience of worldly
affairs, sits near him that is a commander of troops, and prides himself
on his authority, upon the grass, upon a mean cushion. For there are
none to extol him, none to puff him up; but the same result takes place,
as if any one were to go to a goldsmith, and a garden of roses, for he
receives some brightness from the gold and from the roses; so they too,
gaining a little from the splendor of these, are delivered from their
former arrogance. And like as if any were to go upon a high place,
though he be exceedingly short, he appears high; so these too, coming
unto their exalted minds, appear like them, so long as they abide there,
but when they are gone down are abased again, on descending from that
height.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p86"></span>A king is nothing amongst them, a
governor is nothing; but like as we, when children are playing at these
things, laugh; so do they also utterly spurn the inflamed pride of them
who strut without. And this is evident from hence, that if any one would
give them a kingdom to possess in security, they would never take it;
yet they would take it, unless their thoughts were upon what is greater
than it, unless they accounted the thing to be but for a season.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p87"></span>What then? Shall we not go over unto
blessedness so great? Shall we not come unto these angels; shall we not
receive clean garments, and join in the ceremonies of this wedding
feast; but shall we continue begging, in no respect in a better
condition than the poor in the streets, or rather in a state far worse
and more wretched? For much worse <span id="page_408">p. 408</span>
<span id="iii.LXVI-Page_408"></span> than these are they that are rich
in evil ways, and it is better to beg than to spoil, for the one hath
excuse, but the other brings punishment; and the beggar in no degree
offends God, but this other both men and God; and undergoes the labors
of rapine, but all the enjoyment thereof other men often reap.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p88"></span>Knowing then these things, let us lay
aside all covetousness, and covet the things above, with great
earnestness “taking the kingdom by force.” <span
id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605) For it cannot be, it cannot be that
any one who is remiss should enter therein.

<span id="iii.LXVI-p90"></span>But God grant that we all having become
earnest, and watchful may attain thereto, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might, world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[402:2583](1100074.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p4"></span>\[The order here is slightly varied, and
“unto them” is omitted. With these exceptions the entire passage is in
verbal agreement with the received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[402:2584](1100074.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p5"></span>\[R.V., “marriage feast.”\]

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[402:2585](1100074.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p6"></span>\[[Matt.
22.7-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007)<span
id="iii.LXVI-p6.1"></span> do not appear in the Greek text of Migne’s
edition, but are added in the Oxford translation, and in Field’s Greek
text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[403:2586](1100074.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p12"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[403:2587](1100074.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p13"></span>[Eph. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="iii.LXVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[403:2588](1100074.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p15"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p15.2"></span>παρλλακτον</span> .

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[403:2589](1100074.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p19"></span>[John iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[403:2590](1100074.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p20"></span>[Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="iii.LXVI-p20.1"></span>.
\[“Refresh” is the rendering of the Greek term answering to “give rest”
in the English versions.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[403:2591](1100074.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p21"></span>[John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span id="iii.LXVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[403:2592](1100074.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p23"></span>[Gal. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXVI-p23.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “wrought for” twice; the Greek verb is the same in both
clauses.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[403:2593](1100074.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p25"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p25.1"></span>πση πανδαισα</span>.

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[404:2594](1100074.htm#fr_2593) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p31"></span>[1 Thess. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXVI-p31.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “and drove out us.”\]

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[404:2595](1100074.htm#fr_2594) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p40"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="iii.LXVI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[404:2596](1100074.htm#fr_2595) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p41"></span>[Matt. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)<span id="iii.LXVI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[404:2597](1100074.htm#fr_2596) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p42"></span>[Acts i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXVI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[404:2598](1100074.htm#fr_2597) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p43"></span>[Gal. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXVI-p43.1"></span>.
\[Comp. note 7, p. 421.\]

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[404:2599](1100074.htm#fr_2598) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p45"></span>[Acts xiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)<span id="iii.LXVI-p45.1"></span>.
\[Slightly abridged.\]

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[404:2600](1100074.htm#fr_2599) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p49"></span>Or, “repeatedly.”

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[405:2601](1100074.htm#fr_2600) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p53"></span>[Rom. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXVI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[405:2602](1100074.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p57"></span>[Matt. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXVI-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[405:2603](1100074.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p61"></span>\[The clause in italics is not found in
the <span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXVI-p61.1"></span>mss</span>.
collated by Field, but occurs in the Benedictine edition.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[406:2604](1100074.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p74"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p74.1"></span>φρη κροκωτ</span>.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[407:2605](1100074.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p83"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p83.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXVI-p83.2"></span>σονομ</span>.

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[408:2606](1100074.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="iii.LXVI-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVI-p89"></span>[Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXVI-p89.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXVII](1100075)
