[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100045)  [Next](1100047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXXVIII"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p3"></span>*“At that time Jesus answered and said,
I make acknowledgment unto Thee,* <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) *O Father, Lord of Heaven and
earth; because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in
Thy sight.”* <span id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606)

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p6.1"></span>Seest</span> thou, how many ways He leads
them on to the faith? First, <span id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607)
by His praises of John. For by pointing to him as a great and marvellous
one, He proved likewise all his sayings credible, whereby he used to
draw them on to the knowledge of Him. Secondly, <span
id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) by saying, “The kingdom of Heaven
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force;” for this is the
language of one who is pressing and urging them. Thirdly, <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) by signifying that the number of
the prophets was finished; for this too manifested Himself to be the
person that was announced beforehand by them. Fourthly, <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) by pointing out that whatsoever
things should be done by him, were all accomplished; at which time <span
id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span id="iii.XXXVIII-Page_246"></span> also
He made mention of the parable of the children. Fifthly, by His
upbraiding them that had not believed, and by His alarming and
threatening them greatly. <span id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611)
Sixthly, by His giving thanks for them that believed. For the
expression, “I make acknowledgment to Thee,” here is, “I thank Thee.” “I
thank Thee,” He saith, “because Thou hast hid these things from the wise
and prudent.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p12"></span>What then? doth He rejoice in
destruction, and in the others not having received this knowledge? By no
means; but this is a most excellent way of His to save men, His not
forcing them that utterly reject, and are not willing to receive His
sayings; that, since they were not bettered by His call, but fell back,
and despised it, His casting them out might cause them to fall into a
longing for these things. And so likewise the attentive would grow more
earnest.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p13"></span>And while His being revealed to these
was fit matter of joy, His concealment from those was no more of joy but
of tears. Thus at any rate He acts, where He weeps for the city. Not
therefore because of this doth He rejoice, but because what wise men
knew not, was known to these. As when Paul saith, “I thank God, that ye
were servants of sin, but ye obeyed from the heart the form of doctrine
which was delivered unto you.” <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612) You see, neither doth Paul
therefore rejoice, because they were “servants of sin,” but because
being such, they had been so highly favored.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p15"></span>Now by the “wise,” here, He means the
Scribes, and the Pharisees. And these things He saith, to make the
disciples more earnest, and to show what had been vouchsafed to the
fishermen, when all those others had missed of it. And in calling them
“wise,” He means not the true and commendable wisdom, but this which
they seemed to have through natural shrewdness. Wherefore neither did He
say, “thou hast revealed it to fools,” but “to babes;” to
unsophisticated, that is, to simple-minded men; and He implies that so
far from their missing these privileges contrary to their desert, it was
just what might be expected. And He instructs us throughout, to be free
from pride, and to follow after simplicity. For this cause Paul also
expressed it with more exceeding earnestness, writing on this wise: “If
any man among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a
fool, that he may be wise.” <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613)
For thus is God’s grace manifested.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p17"></span>But wherefore doth He give thanks to
the Father, although of course it was Himself who wrought this? As He
prays and intercedes with God, showing His great love towards us, in the
same way doth He this too: for this also is of much love. And He
signifies, that not from Him only had they fallen away, but also from
the Father. Thus, what He said, speaking to His disciples, “Cast not the
holy things unto dogs,” <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614) this
He Himself anticipated them in performing.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p19"></span>Moreover He signifies hereby both His
own principal <span id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) will, and that
of the Father; His own, I say, by His giving thanks and rejoicing at
what had taken place; His Father’s, by intimating that neither had He
done this upon entreaty, but of Himself upon His own will; “For so,”
saith He, “it seemed good in Thy sight:” that is, “so it pleased Thee.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p21"></span>And wherefore was it hidden from them?
Hear Paul, saying, that “Seeking to establish their own righteousness,
they have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.” <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616)

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p23"></span>Consider now how it was likely the
disciples should <span id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617) be affected,
hearing this; that what wise men knew not, these knew, and knew it
continuing babes, and knew it by God’s revelation. But Luke saith, that
“at the very hour,” when the seventy came telling Him about the devils,
then He “rejoiced” and spake these things, <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) which, besides increasing their
diligence, would also dispose them to be modest. That is, since it was
natural for them to pride themselves on their driving away devils, on
this among other grounds He refrains them; that it was a revelation,
whatever had been done, no diligence on their part. Wherefore also the
scribes, and the wise men, thinking to be intelligent for themselves,
fell away through their own vanity. Well then, if for this cause it was
hidden from them, “do you also,” saith He, “fear, and continue babes.”
For this caused you to have the benefit of the revelation, as indeed on
the other hand the contrary made them be deprived of it. For by <span
id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span id="iii.XXXVIII-Page_247"></span> no
means, when He saith, “Thou hast hid,” doth He mean that it is all God’s
doing: but as when Paul saith, “He gave them over to a reprobate
mind,” <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) and, “He hath blinded
their minds,” <span id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) it is not meant
to bring Him in as the doer of it, but those who gave the occasion: so
here also He uses the expression, “Thou hast hid.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p28"></span>For since He had said, “I thank <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621) Thee, because Thou hast hid them,
and hast revealed them unto babes;” to hinder thy supposing that as
being Himself deprived of this power, and unable to effect it, so He
offers thanks, He saith,

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p30"></span>“All things are delivered unto me of
my Father.” <span id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) And to them that
are rejoicing, because the devils obey them, “Nay, why marvel,” saith
He, <span id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623) “that devils yield to
you? All things are mine; “All things are delivered unto me.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p33"></span>But when thou hearest, “they are
delivered,” do not surmise anything human. For He uses this expression,
to prevent thine imagining two unoriginate Gods. Since, that He was at
the same time both begotten, and Lord of all, He declares in many ways,
and in other places also.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p34"></span>2. Then He saith what is even greater
than this, lifting up thy mind; “And no man knoweth the Son, but the
Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, but the Son.” Which seems
indeed to the ignorant unconnected with what went before, but hath full
accordance therewith. As thus: having said, “All things are delivered
unto me of my Father,” He adds, “And what marvel,” so He speaks, “if I
be Lord of all? I who have also another greater privilege, the knowing
the Father, and being of the same substance.” Yea, for this too He
covertly signifies by His being the only one who so knew Him. For this
is His meaning, when He saith, “No man knoweth the Father but the Son.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p35"></span>And see at what time He saith this.
When they by His works had received the certain proof of His might, not
only seeing Him work miracles, but endowed also in His name with so
great powers. Then, since He had said, “Thou hast revealed them unto
babes,” He signifies this also to pertain to Himself; for “neither
knoweth any man the Father,” saith He, “save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son is willing <span id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624)
to reveal Him; <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) not “to
whomsoever He may be enjoined,” “to whomsoever He may be commanded.” But
if He reveals Him, then Himself too. This however He let pass as
acknowledged, but the other He hath set down. And everywhere He affirms
this; as when He saith, “No man cometh unto the Father, but by
me.” <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626)

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p39"></span>And thereby he establishes another
point also, His being in harmony and of one mind with Him. “Why,” saith
He, “I am so far from fighting and warring with Him, that no one can
even come to Him but by me.” For because this most offended them, His
seeming to be a rival God, He by all means doth away with this; and
interested Himself about this not less earnestly, but even more so, than
about His miracles.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p40"></span>But when He saith, “Neither knoweth
any man the Father, save the Son,” He means not this, that all men were
ignorant of Him, but that with the knowledge wherewith He knows <span
id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627) Him, no man is acquainted with Him;
which may be said of the Son too. <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628) For it was not of some God unknown,
and revealed to no man, that He was so speaking, as Marcion saith; <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) but it is the perfection of
knowledge that He is here intimating, since neither do we know the Son
as He should be known; and this very thing, to add no more, Paul was
declaring, when he said, “We know in part, and we prophesy in
part.” <span id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630)

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p45"></span>3. Next, having brought them by His
words to an earnest desire, and having signified His unspeakable power,
He after that invites them, saying, “Come unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” <span
id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) Not this or that person, but all
that are in anxiety, in sorrows, in sins. Come, not that I may call you
to account, but that I may do away your sins; come, not that I want your
honor, but that I want your salvation. “For I,” saith He, “will give you
rest.” He said not, “I will save you,” only; but what was much more, “I
will place you in all security.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p47"></span>“Take my yoke upon you, and learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your
souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.” <span
id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632) Thus, “be not afraid,” saith He,
“hearing of a yoke, for it is easy: fear not, because I said, “a
burden,” for it is light.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p49"></span>And how said He before, “The gate is
<span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-Page_248"></span> narrow and the way strait?” <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) Whilst thou art careless, whilst
thou art supine; whereas, if thou duly perform His words, the burden
will be light; wherefore also He hath now called it so.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p51"></span>But how are they duly performed? If
thou art become lowly, and meek, and gentle. For this virtue is the
mother of all strictness of life. Wherefore also, when beginning those
divine laws, with this He began. <span
id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) And here again He doeth the very
same, and exceeding great is the reward He appoints. “For not to another
only dost thou become serviceable; but thyself also above all thou
refreshest,” saith He. “For ye shall find rest unto your souls.”

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p53"></span>Even before the things to come, He
gives thee here thy recompense, and bestows the prize already, making
the saying acceptable, both hereby, and by setting Himself forward as an
example. For, “Of what art thou afraid?” saith He, “lest thou shouldest
be a loser by thy low estate? Look to me, and to all that is mine; learn
of me, and then shalt thou know distinctly how great thy blessing.”
Seest thou how in all ways He is leading them to humility? By His own
doings: “Learn of me, for I am meek.” By what themselves are to gain;
for, “Ye shall find,” saith He,” rest unto your souls.” By what He
bestows on them; for, “I too will refresh you,” saith He. By rendering
it light; “For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.” So likewise
doth Paul, saying, “For the present light affliction, which is but for a
moment, worketh a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635)

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p55"></span>And how, some one may say, is the
burden light, when He saith, “Except one hate father and mother;” and,
“Whosoever taketh not up his cross, and followeth after me, is not
worthy of me:” and, “Whosoever forsaketh not all that he hath, cannot be
my disciple:” <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636) when He
commands even to give up our very life? <span
id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) Let Paul teach thee, saying, “Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or
sword? <span id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638) ” And that, “The
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us.” <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639) Let those teach thee, who return
from the council of the Jews after plenty of stripes, and “rejoice that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ.” <span
id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) And if thou art still afraid and
tremblest at hearing of the yoke and the burden, the fear comes not of
the nature of the thing, but of thy remissness; since if thou art
prepared, and in earnest, all will be easy to thee and light. Since for
this cause Christ also, to signify that we too must needs labor
ourselves, did not mention the gracious things only, and then hold His
peace, nor the painful things only, but set down both. Thus He both
spake of “a yoke,” and called it “easy;” both named a burden, and added
that it was “light;” that thou shouldest neither flee from them as
toilsome, nor despise them as over easy.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p61"></span>But if even after all this, virtue
seem to thee an irksome thing, consider that vice is more irksome. And
this very thing He was intimating, in that He said not first, “Take my
yoke upon you,” but before that, “Come, ye that labor and are heavy
laden;” implying that sin too hath labor, and a burden that is heavy and
hard to bear. For He said not only, “Ye that labor,” but also, “that are
heavy laden.” This the prophet too was speaking of, when in that
description of her nature, “As an heavy burden they weighed heavy upon
me.” <span id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) And Zacharias too,
describing her, saith she is “A talent of lead.” <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642)

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p64"></span>And this moreover experience itself
proves. For nothing so weighs upon the soul, and presses it down, as
consciousness of sin; nothing so much gives it wings, and raises it on
high, as the attainment of righteousness and virtue.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p65"></span>And mark it: what is more grievous, I
pray thee, than to have no possessions? to turn the cheek, and when
smitten not to smite again? to die by a violent death? Yet nevertheless,
if we practise self-command, all these things are light and easy, and
pleasurable.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p66"></span>But be not disturbed; rather let us
take up each of these, and inquire about it accurately; and if ye will,
that first which many count most painful. Which then of the two, tell
me, is grievous and burdensome, to be in care for one belly, or to be
anxious about ten thousand? To be clothed with one outer garment, and
seek for nothing more; or having many in one’s house, to bemoan one’s
self every day and night in fear, in trembling, about the preservation
of them, grieved, and ready to choke about the loss of them; lest one
should be moth-eaten, lest a servant purloin and go off with them?

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p67"></span>4. But whatever I may say, my speech
will present no such proof as the actual trial. Wherefore I would there
were present here with us some one of those who have attained unto that
summit of self-restraint, and then <span id="page_249">p. 249</span>
<span id="iii.XXXVIII-Page_249"></span> you would know assuredly the
delight thereof; and that none of those that are enamored of voluntary
poverty would accept wealth, though ten thousand were to offer it.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p68"></span>But would these, say you, ever consent
to become poor, and to cast away the anxieties which they have? And what
of that? This is but a proof of their madness and grievous disease, not
of anything very pleasurable in the thing. And this even themselves
would testify to us, who are daily lamenting over these their anxieties,
and accounting their life to be not worth living. But not so those
others; rather they laugh, leap for joy, and the wearers of the diadem
do not so glory, as they do in their poverty.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p69"></span>Again, to turn the cheek is, to him
that gives heed, a less grievous thing than to smite another; for from
this the contest hath beginning, in that termination: and whereas by the
former thou hast kindled the other’s pile too, by the latter thou hast
quenched even thine own flames. But that not to be burnt is a pleasanter
thing than to be burnt, is surely plain to every man. And if this hold
in regard of bodies, much more in a soul.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p70"></span>And whether is lighter, to contend, or
to be crowned? to fight, or to have the prize? and to endure waves, or
to run into harbor? Therefore also, to die is better than to live. For
the one withdraws us from waves and dangers, while the other adds unto
them, and makes a man subject to numberless plots and distresses, which
have made life not worth living in thine account.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p71"></span>And if thou disbelievest our sayings,
hearken to them that have seen the countenances of the martyrs in the
time of their conflicts, how when scourged and flayed, they were
exceeding joyful and glad, and when exposed upon hot irons, rejoiced,
and were glad of heart, more than such as lie upon a bed of roses.
Wherefore Paul also said, when he was at the point of departing hence,
and closing his life by a violent death, “I joy, and rejoice with you
all; for the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.” <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643) Seest thou with what exceeding
strength of language he invites the whole world to partake in his
gladness? So great a good did he know his departure hence to be, so
desirable, and lovely, and worthy of prayer, that formidable thing,
death.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p73"></span>5. But that virtue’s yoke is sweet and
light, is manifest many other ways also; but to conclude, if you please,
let us look also at the burdens of sin. Let us then bring forward the
covetous, the retailers and second-hand dealers in shameless bargains.
What now could be a heavier burden than such transactions? how many
sorrows, how many anxieties, how many disappointments, how many dangers,
how many plots and wars, daily spring up from these gains? how many
troubles and disturbances? For as one can never see the sea without
waves, so neither such a soul without anxiety, and despondency, and
fear, and disturbance; yea, the second overtakes the first, and again
others come up, and when these are not yet ceased, others come to a
head.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p74"></span>Or wouldest thou see the souls of the
revilers, and of the passionate? Why, what is worse than this torture?
what, than the wounds they have within? what, than the furnace that is
continually burning, and the flame that is never quenched?

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p75"></span>Or of the sensual, and of such as
cleave unto this present life? Why, what more grievous than this
bondage? They live the life of Cain, dwelling in continual trembling and
fear at every death that happens; the kinsmen of the dead mourn not so
much, as these do for their own end.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p76"></span>What again fuller of turmoil, and more
frantic, than such as are puffed up with pride? “For learn,” saith He,
“of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls.” Because long-suffering is the mother of all good things.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p77"></span>Fear thou not therefore, neither start
away from the yoke that lightens thee of all these things, but put
thyself under it with all forwardness, and then thou shalt know well the
pleasure thereof. For it doth not at all bruise thy neck, but is put on
thee for good order’s sake only, and to persuade thee to walk seemly,
and to lead thee unto the royal road, and to deliver thee from the
precipices on either side, and to make thee walk with ease in the narrow
way.

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p78"></span>Since then so great are its benefits,
so great its security, so great its gladness, let us with all our soul,
with all our diligence, draw this yoke; that we may both here “find rest
unto our souls,” and attain unto the good things to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[245:1606](1100046.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p4"></span>\[A.V., “I thank thee,” so R.V., with
margin, “Or, praise.” The Oxford translator gives the exact sense of the
Greek verb, but below reverts to the rendering “thank,” in accordance
with the explanation of Chrysostom.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[245:1607](1100046.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p5"></span>\[R.V., “Yea, Father, for (or, that) so
it was well-pleasing in thy sight.” Comp. the explanation in the
Homily.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[245:1608](1100046.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p7"></span>[Matt. xi.
7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[245:1609](1100046.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p8"></span>[Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[245:1610](1100046.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p9"></span>[Matt. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#013)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[245:1611](1100046.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p10"></span>[Matt. vi.
14-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[246:1612](1100046.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p11"></span>[Matt. xi.
20-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[246:1613](1100046.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p14"></span>[Rom. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p14.1"></span>. \[R.V., “that form of teaching whereunto
ye were delivered.” The A.V. renders the passage incorrectly: there
being no doubt as to the Greek text. The R.V. also brings out the
thought which the Homily indicates.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[246:1614](1100046.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p16"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[246:1615](1100046.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p18"></span>[Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[246:1616](1100046.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p20"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p20.1"></span>προηγομενον</span>. In the same sense in
which Hooker says, “He willeth positively that which Himself worketh; He
willeth by permission that which His creatures do.” E. P. v. App. No. 1,
p. 714, cf. in Walton’s Life, p. 29. “That in God there were two wills,
an antecedent and a consequent will; His first will, that all mankind
should be saved; His second, that those only should be saved, who lived
answerable to that degree of grace which He had offered.”

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[246:1617](1100046.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p22"></span>[Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[246:1618](1100046.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p24"></span>\[“would;” but the whole clause has
been freely paraphrased.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[246:1619](1100046.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p25"></span>[Luke x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[247:1620](1100046.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p26"></span>[Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[247:1621](1100046.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p27"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p27.1"></span>.
\[“This passage is irrelevant, since it speaks of “the god of this
world.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[247:1622](1100046.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p29"></span>\[See above, and note 1, p. 250.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[247:1623](1100046.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p31"></span>[Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[247:1624](1100046.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p32"></span>[Luke x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[247:1625](1100046.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p36"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p36.1"></span>βοληται</span>. \[R.V., “willeth.”\]

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[247:1626](1100046.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p37"></span>[Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[247:1627](1100046.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p38"></span>[John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[247:1628](1100046.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p41"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p41.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p41.2"></span>πσταται</span>.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[247:1629](1100046.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p42"></span>That is, that none but the Father has
full knowledge of Him.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[247:1630](1100046.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p43"></span>Tertull. adv. Marc. i. 8. “The
Marcionites bring forward a new God, as if we were ashamed of the
ancient One.…I hear them talk of a new God, in the old world and in the
old age, and under that ancient God, unknown and unheard of.”
\[*Ante-Nicene Fathers*, vol. iii. p. 276.\] It seems to have been
common to all the Oriental sects, to speak of the Supreme God as utterly
unknown until the Christian dispensation began.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[247:1631](1100046.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p44"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[247:1632](1100046.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p46"></span>[Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[247:1633](1100046.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p48"></span>[Matt.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[248:1634](1100046.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p50"></span>[Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[248:1635](1100046.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p52"></span>[Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[248:1636](1100046.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p54"></span>[2 Cor. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[248:1637](1100046.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p56"></span>[Luke
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#027),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033), [Matt.
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[248:1638](1100046.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p57"></span>[Matt. xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[248:1639](1100046.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p58"></span>[Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[248:1640](1100046.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p59"></span>[Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[248:1641](1100046.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p60"></span>[Acts v.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[248:1642](1100046.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p62"></span>[Ps. xxxviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[248:1643](1100046.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p63"></span>[Zech.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[249:1644](1100046.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVIII-p72"></span>[Phil.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#018)<span
id="iii.XXXVIII-p72.1"></span>. \[R.V., “and in the same manner also,”
etc.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXIX](1100047)
