[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100056)  [Next](1100058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLIX"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIX.</span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XIV.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)<span
id="iii.XLIX-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p3"></span>*“But when Jesus heard of it, He departed
thence by ship into a desert place apart; and when the multitudes had
heard thereof, they followed Him on foot out of all the cities.”* <span
id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p5.1"></span>See</span> Him on every occasion
“departing,” <span id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) For not by His
appearance only, but by His actions He would have this confirmed,
because He knew the devil’s craft, and that he would leave nothing
undone to destroy this doctrine.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p7"></span>He then for this end retires; but the
multitudes not even so withdraw themselves from Him, but they follow,
riveted to Him, and not even John’s tragical end alarmed them. So great
a thing is earnest desire, so great a thing is love; in such wise doth
it overcome and dispel all dangers.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p8"></span>Therefore they straightway also received
their reward. For “Jesus,” it is said, “went forth, and saw a great
multitude, and was moved with compassion toward them, and He healed
their sick.” <span id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p10"></span>For great as their assiduity was, yet
nevertheless His doings exceeded what any diligence could earn.
Wherefore He sets forth also His motive for so healing them, His mercy,
intense mercy: and He healeth all.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p11"></span>And He requires not faith here. For both
by coming to Him, and by leaving their cities, and by diligently seeking
Him, and by abiding with Him even when hunger was pressing, they display
their own faith.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p12"></span>But He is about to feed them also. And He
doth not this of Himself, but waits to be entreated; on every occasion,
as I have said, maintaining this rule, not to spring onward to His
miracles, preventing them, but upon some call. <span
id="fr_1921"></span>[1922](#fn_1921)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p14"></span>And why did none of the multitude come
near and speak for them? They reverenced Him exceedingly, and felt not
even their hunger, through their longing to stay with Him. Neither
indeed do His disciples, when they were come to Him, say, “Feed them;”
for as yet they were rather in an imperfect state; but what?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p15"></span>“And when it was evening,” it is said,
“His disciples came to Him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time
is now passed; send the multitude away, that they may go and buy
themselves victuals.” <span id="fr_1922"></span>[1923](#fn_1922)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p17"></span>For if even after the miracle they forgot
what had been done, and after the baskets, supposed Him to be speaking
of loaves, when He gave the name of “leaven” to the doctrine of the
Pharisees; <span id="fr_1923"></span>[1924](#fn_1923) much less, when
they had never yet had experience of such a miracle, would they have
expected any such thing. And yet He had made a beginning by actually
healing many sick; but nevertheless, not even from this did they expect
the miracle of the loaves; so imperfect were they as yet.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p19"></span>But mark thou, I pray, the Teacher’s
skill, how distinctly He summons them on towards believing. For He said
not at once, “I feed them;” which indeed would not have been easily
received; but what?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p20"></span>“But Jesus,” so it is written, “said unto
them, “They need not depart; give ye them to eat.” <span
id="fr_1924"></span>[1925](#fn_1924)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p22"></span>He said not, “I give them,” but, “Give ye
them;” for as yet their regard to Him was as to a man. But they not even
so are awakened, but still reason as with a man, saying,

<span id="iii.XLIX-p23"></span>“We have but five loaves, and two
fishes.” <span id="fr_1925"></span>[1926](#fn_1925)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p25"></span>Wherefore Mark also saith, “They
understood not the saying, for their heart was hardened.” <span
id="fr_1926"></span>[1927](#fn_1926)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p27"></span>They continuing therefore to crawl on the
ground, then at length He brings in His own part, and saith, “Bring them
hither to me.” For although the place be desert, yet He that feeds the
world is here; and although the time be now past, yet He that is not
subject to time is discoursing with you.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p28"></span>But John saith also, that they were
“barley loaves,” <span id="fr_1927"></span>[1928](#fn_1927) not
mentioning it without object, but teaching us to trample under foot the
pride of costly living. Such was the diet of the prophets also. <span
id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p31"></span>2. “He took therefore the five loaves,
and the two fishes, and commanded the multitude,” it is said, “to sit
down upon the grass, and looking up to Heaven, He blessed, and brake,
and gave to His disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. <span
id="fr_1929"></span>[1930](#fn_1929) And they did all eat and were
filled, and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets
full. And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside women
and children.” <span id="fr_1930"></span>[1931](#fn_1930)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p34"></span>Wherefore did He look up to Heaven, and
bless? It was to be believed of Him, both that He is of the Father, and
that He is equal to Him. But the proofs of these things <span
id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span id="iii.XLIX-Page_295"></span> seemed
to oppose one another. For while His equality was indicated by His doing
all with authority, of His origin from the Father they could no
otherwise be persuaded, than by His doing all with great lowliness, and
with reference to Him, and invoking Him on His works. Wherefore we see
that He neither did these actions only, nor those, that both might be
confirmed; and now He works miracles with authority, now with prayer.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p35"></span>Then again, that what He did might not
seem an inconsistency, in the lesser things He looks up to Heaven, but
in the greater doth all with authority; to teach thee in the lesser
also, that not as receiving power from elsewhere, but as honoring Him
that begat Him, so He acts. For example: when He forgave sins, and
opened paradise, and brought in the thief, and most utterly set aside
the old law, and raised innumerable dead, and bridled the sea, and
reproved the un-uttered thoughts of men, and created an eye;—which are
achievements of God only and of none else;—we see Him in no instance
praying: but when He provided for the loaves to multiply themselves, a
far less thing than all these, then He looks up to Heaven; at once
establishing these truths which I have spoken of, and instructing us not
to touch a meal, until we have given thanks to Him who giveth us this
food.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p36"></span>And why doth He not make it of things
that are not? Stopping the mouth of Marcion, and of Manichæans, who
alienate His creation from Him, and teaching by His very works, that
even all the things that are seen are His works and creatures, and
signifying that it is Himself who gives the fruits, who said at the
beginning, “Let the earth put forth the herb of grass,” and “Let the
waters bring forth things moving with living souls.” <span
id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p38"></span>For this is not at all a less work than
the other. For though those were made of things that are not, yet
nevertheless were they of water; and it was no greater thing to produce
fruits out of the earth, and moving things with life out of the water,
than out of five loaves to make so many; and of fishes again, which was
a sign that He was ruler both of the earth and of the sea.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p39"></span>Thus, since the sick were constantly the
subject of His miracles, He works also a general benefit, that the many
might not be spectators only of what befell others, but themselves also
partakers of the gift.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p40"></span>And that which in the wilderness seemed
to the Jews marvellous, (they said at least, “Can He give bread also? or
prepare a table in the wilderness?” <span
id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932) ) this He shows forth in His works.
With this view also He leads them into the wilderness, that the miracle
might be very far beyond suspicion, and that no one might think that any
village lying near contributed ought to the meal. For this reason He
mentions the hour also, not the place only.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p42"></span>And another thing too we learn, the
self-restraint of the disciples which they practised in necessary
things, and how little they accounted of food. For being twelve, they
had five loaves only and two fishes; so secondary to them were the
things of the body: so did they cling to the things spiritual only.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p43"></span>And not even that little did they hold
fast, but gave up even it when asked. Whereby we should be taught, that
though we have but little, this too we ought to give up to them that are
in need. Thus, when commanded to bring the five loaves, they say not,
“and whence are we to have food? whence to appease our own hunger?” but
they obey at once.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p44"></span>And besides what I have mentioned, to
this end, as I at least think, He makes it out of the materials which
they had, namely, that He might lead them to faith; for as yet they were
rather in a weak state. <span id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p46"></span>Wherefore also “He looks up to Heaven.”
For of the other miracles they had many examples, but of this
none. <span id="fr_1934"></span>[1935](#fn_1934)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p48"></span>3. “He took the loaves,” therefore, “and
brake them, and gave them by His disciples,” hereby to honor them; and
not in honor to them only, but also that, when the miracle had been done
they might not disbelieve it, nor forget it when it had past, their own
hands bearing them witness. <span id="fr_1935"></span>[1936](#fn_1935)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p50"></span>Wherefore also He suffers the multitudes
first to have a sense of hunger, and waits for these to come to Him
first and ask Him, and by them makes the people sit down, and by them
distributes; being minded by their own confessions and actions to
prepossess them every one. <span id="fr_1936"></span>[1937](#fn_1936)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p52"></span>Therefore also, from them He receives the
loaves, that the testimonies of what was doing might be many, and that
they might have memorials of the miracle. For if even after these
occurrences they forgot, <span id="fr_1937"></span>[1938](#fn_1937) what
would not have been their case, had He omitted those provisions?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p54"></span>And He commands them to sit down on the
trampled grass, instructing the multitudes in self-denial. For His will
was not to feed <span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iii.XLIX-Page_296"></span> their bodies only, but also to instruct
their souls. As well by the place therefore, as by His giving them
nothing more than loaves and fishes, and by setting the same before all,
and making it common, and by affording no one more than another, He was
teaching them humility, and temperance, and charity, and to be of like
mind one towards another, and to account all things common.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p55"></span>“And He brake and gave to the disciples,
and the disciples to the multitude.” The five loaves He brake and gave,
and the five multiplied themselves in the hands of the disciples. And
not even here doth He stay the miracle, but He made them even to exceed;
to exceed, not as whole loaves, but as fragments; to signify that of
those loaves these were remains, and in order that the absent might
learn what had been done.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p56"></span>For this purpose indeed He suffered the
multitudes to hunger, that no one might suppose what took place to be
illusion.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p57"></span>For this also He caused just twelve
baskets to remain over, that Judas also might bear one. For He was able
indeed to have appeased their hunger, but the disciples would not have
known His power, since in Elijah’s case also this took place. <span
id="fr_1938"></span>[1939](#fn_1938)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p59"></span>At all events, so greatly were the Jews
amazed at Him for this, that they wished even to make Him a king, <span
id="fr_1939"></span>[1940](#fn_1939) although with regard to the other
miracles they did not so in any instance.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p61"></span>What reasoning now may set forth, how the
loaves multiplied <span id="fr_1940"></span>[1941](#fn_1940) themselves;
how they flowed together in the wilderness; how they were enough for so
many (for there were “five thousand men beside women and children;”
which was a very great commendation of the people, that both women and
men attended Him); how the remnants had their being (for this again is
not less than the former), and became so abundant, that the baskets were
equal in number to the disciples, and neither more nor less?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p63"></span>Having then taken the fragments, He gave
them not to the multitudes, but to the disciples, and that, because the
multitudes were in a more imperfect state than the disciples.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p64"></span>And, having wrought the miracle,
“straightway He constrained His disciples to get into a ship, and to go
before Him unto the other side, while He sent the multitudes
away.” <span id="fr_1941"></span>[1942](#fn_1941)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p66"></span>For even if He had seemed, when in sight,
to be presenting an illusion, and not to have wrought a truth; yet
surely not in His absence also. For this cause then, submitting His
proceedings to an exact test, He commanded those that had got the
memorials, and the proof of the miracles, to depart from Him.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p67"></span>And besides this, when He is doing great
works, He disposes elsewhere of the multitudes and the disciples,
instructing us in nothing to follow after the glory that comes from the
people, nor to collect a crowd about us.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p68"></span>Now by saying, “He constrained them,” He
indicates the very close attendance of the disciples.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p69"></span>And His pretext indeed for dismissing
them was the multitude, but He was Himself minded to go up into the
mountain; and He did this, instructing us neither to be always in
intercourse with multitudes, nor always to fly from the crowd, but each
of the two as may be expedient, and giving each duly his turn.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p70"></span>4. Let us learn therefore ourselves also
to wait upon Jesus; but not for His bounty in things sensible, lest we
be upbraided like the Jews. For “ye seek me,” saith He, “not because ye
saw the miracles, <span id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942) but because
ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled.” <span
id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) Therefore neither doth He work this
miracle continually, but a second time only; that they might be taught
not to be slaves to their belly, but to cling incessantly to the things
of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p73"></span>To these then let us also cling, and let
us seek the heavenly bread, and having received it, let us cast away all
worldly care. For if those men left houses, and cities, and kinsmen, and
all, and abode in the wilderness, and when hunger was pressing, withdrew
not; much more ought we, when approaching such a table, to show forth a
more abundant self-command, and to set our love on the things of the
Spirit, and to seek the things of sense as secondary to these.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p74"></span>Since even they were blamed, not because
they sought Him for the bread, but because it was for this only they
sought Him, and for this primarily. For should any one despise the great
gifts, but cling to the small, and to those which the giver would have
him despise, he loses these latter too: as on the other hand, if we love
those, He adds these also. For these are but an appendage to the others;
so vile are they and trifling, compared with those, although they be
great. Let us not therefore spend our diligence on them, but account
both the acquisition and loss of them alike indifferent, even as Job
also neither clung to them when present, nor sought them <span
id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span id="iii.XLIX-Page_297"></span> absent.
For on this account, they are called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p74.1"></span>χρματα</span>, <span
id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) not that we should bury them in the
earth, but that we should use them aright.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p76"></span>And as of artisans every one hath his
peculiar skill, even so the rich man, as he knows not how to work in
brass, nor to frame ships, nor to weave, nor to build houses, nor any
such thing;—let him learn then to use his wealth aright, and to pity the
poor; so shall he know a better art than all those.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p77"></span>For indeed this is above all those arts.
Its workshop is builded in Heaven. It hath its tools not of iron and
brass, but of goodness and of a right will. Of this art Christ is the
Teacher, and His Father. “For be ye merciful,” saith He, “as your Father
which is in Heaven.” <span id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p79"></span>And what is indeed marvellous, being so
much superior to the rest, it needs no labor, no time for its
perfection; it is enough to have willed, and the whole is accomplished.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p80"></span>But let us see also the end thereof, what
it is. What then is the end of it? Heaven, the good things in the
heavens, that unspeakable glory, the spiritual bride-chambers, the
bright lamps, the abiding with the Bridegroom; the other things, which
no speech, nor even understanding, is able to set forth.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p81"></span>So that herein likewise great is its
difference from all others. For most of the arts profit us for the
present life, but this for the life to come also.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p82"></span>5. But if it so far excels the arts that
are necessary to us for the present, as medicine, for instance, and
house-building, and all others like them: much more the rest, which if
any one were nicely to examine, he would not even allow them to be arts.
Wherefore I at least would not call those others, as they are
unnecessary, so much as arts at all. For wherein is delicate cookery and
making sauces profitable to us? Nowhere: yea, they are greatly
unprofitable and hurtful, doing harm both to body and soul, by bringing
upon us the parent of all diseases and sufferings, luxury, together with
great extravagance. <span id="fr_1946"></span>[1947](#fn_1946)

<span id="iii.XLIX-p84"></span>But not these only, but not even
painting, or embroidery, would I for one allow to be an art, for they do
but throw men into useless expense. But the arts ought to be concerned
with things necessary and important to our life, to supply and work them
up. For to this end God gave us skill at all, that we might invent
methods, whereby to furnish out our life. But that there should be
figures <span id="fr_1947"></span>[1948](#fn_1947) either on walls, or
on garments, wherein is it useful, I pray thee? For this same cause the
sandal-makers too, and the weavers, should have great retrenchments made
in their art. For most things in it they have carried into vulgar
ostentation, <span id="fr_1948"></span>[1949](#fn_1948) having corrupted
its necessary use, and mixed with an honest art an evil craft; which has
been the case with the art of building also. But even as to this, so
long as it builds houses and not theatres, and labors upon things
necessary, and not superfluous, I give the name of an art; so the
business of weaving too, as long as it makes clothes, and coverlids, but
does not imitate the spiders, and overwhelm men with much absurdity, and
unspeakable effeminacy, so long I call it an art.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p87"></span>And the sandal-makers’ trade, so long as
it makes sandals, I will not rob of the appellation of art; but when it
perverts men to the gestures of women, and causes them by their sandals
to grow wanton and delicate, we will set it amidst the things hurtful
and superfluous, and not so much as name it an art.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p88"></span>And I know well, that to many I seem
over-minute in busying myself about these things; I shall not however
refrain for this. For the cause of all our evils is this, such faults
being at all counted trifling, and therefore disregarded.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p89"></span>And what sin, say you, can be of less
account than this, of having an ornamented and glittering sandal, which
fits the foot; if indeed it seem right at all to denominate it a sin?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p90"></span>Will ye then that I let loose my tongue
upon it, and show its unseemliness, how great it is? and will ye not be
angry? Or rather, though ye be angry, I care not much. Nay, for
yourselves are to blame for this folly, who do not so much as think it
is a sin, and hereby constrain us to enter upon the reproof of this
extravagance. Come then, let us examine it, and let us see what sort of
an evil it is. For when the silken threads, which it is not seemly
should be even inwoven in your garments, these are sewn by you into your
shoes, what reproach, what derision do these things deserve?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p91"></span>And if thou despise our judgments, hear
the voice of Paul, with great earnestness forbidding these things, and
then thou wilt perceive the absurdity of them. What then saith he? “Not
with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array.” <span
id="fr_1949"></span>[1950](#fn_1949) Of what favor then canst thou be
worthy; when, in spite of Paul’s prohibiting the married woman to have
costly clothing, thou extendest this effeminacy even to thy shoes, and
hast no end of contri <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="iii.XLIX-Page_298"></span> vances for the sake of this ridicule and
reproach? Yes: for first a ship is built, then rowers are mustered, and
a man for the prow, and a helmsman, and a sail is spread, and an ocean
traversed, and, leaving wife and children and country, the merchant
commits his very life to the waves, and comes to the land of the
barbarians, and undergoes innumerable dangers for these threads, that
after it all thou mayest take them, and sew them into thy shoes, and
ornament the leather. And what can be done worse than this folly?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p93"></span>But the old ways are not like these, but
such as become men. Wherefore I for my part expect that in process of
time the young men amongst us will wear even women’s shoes, and not be
ashamed. And what is more grievous, men’s fathers seeing these things
are not much displeased, but do even account it an indifferent matter.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p94"></span>Would ye that I should add what is still
more grievous; that these things are done even when there are many poor?
Would ye that I bring before you Christ, an hungered, naked, wandering
everywhere, in chains? And how many thunderbolts must ye not deserve,
overlooking Him in want of necessary food, and adorning these pieces of
leather with so much diligence? And He indeed, when He was giving law to
His disciples, would not so much as suffer them to have shoes at all,
but we cannot bear to walk, I say not barefooted, but even with feet
shod as they ought to be.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p95"></span>7. What then can be worse than this
unseemliness, this absurdity? For the thing marks a soul, in the first
place effeminate, then unfeeling and cruel, then curious and idly busy.
For when will he be able to attend to any necessary matter, who is taken
up with these superfluous things? when will such a youth endure to take
heed to his soul, or to consider so much as that he hath a soul? Yes, he
surely will be a trifler who cannot help admiring such things; he cruel,
who for their sake neglects the poor; he void of virtue, who spends all
his diligence on them.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p96"></span>For he that is curious about the beauty
of threads, and the bloom of colors, and the tendrils made of such woven
work, when will he be able to look upon the heaven? when will he admire
the beauty there, who is excited about a kind of beauty that belongs to
pieces of leather, and who is bending to the earth? And whereas God hath
stretched out the Heaven, and lighted up the sun, drawing thy looks
upwards; thou constrainest thyself to look downwards, and to the earth,
like the swine, and obeyest the devil. For indeed this wicked demon hath
devised this unseemliness, to draw thee off from that beauty. For this
intent hath he drawn thee this way; and God, showing Heaven, is outvied
by a devil showing certain skins, or rather not even skins (for indeed
these too are God’s works), but effeminacy and a bad kind of skill.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p97"></span>And the young man goes about bending down
towards the earth, he that is required to seek wisdom concerning the
things in Heaven; priding himself more on these trifles than if he had
accomplished some great and good work, and walking on tiptoe in the
forum, and hereby begetting to himself superfluous sorrows and
distresses, lest he should stain them with the mud when it is winter;
lest he should cover them with the dust, when summer is come.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p98"></span>What sayest thou, O man? Hast thou cast
thy whole soul into the mire through this extravagance, and dost thou
overlook it trailing on the ground, and art thou so anxious about a pair
of shoes? Mark their use, and respect the verdict thou passest on them.
For to tread on mud and mire, and all the spots on the pavement, for
this were thy shoes made. Or if thou canst not bear this, take and hang
them from thy neck, or put them on thy head.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p99"></span>And ye indeed laugh at hearing this. But
I am inclined to weep for these men’s madness, and their earnest care
about these matters. For in truth they would rather stain their body
with mud, than those pieces of leather.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p100"></span>Triflers then they become in this way,
and fond of money again in another way. For he that has been used to be
frantic and eager upon such matters, requires also for his clothes and
for all other things much expense, and a large income.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p101"></span>And if he have a munificent father, his
thraldom becomes worse, his absurd fancy more intense; but if a
parsimonious one, he is driven to other unseemliness, by way of getting
together a little money for such expenses.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p102"></span>Hence many young men have even sold
their manhood, and have become parasites to the rich, and have
undertaken other servile offices, purchasing thereby the fulfillment of
such desires.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p103"></span>So then, that this man is sure to be at
once fond of money, and a trifler, and about important things the most
indolent of all men, and that he will be forced to commit many sins, is
hereby evident. And that he is cruel and vainglorious, neither this will
any one gainsay: cruel, in that when he sees a poor man, through the
love of finery he makes as though he did not even see him, but while he
<span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="iii.XLIX-Page_299"></span>
is decking out these things with gold, overlooks him perishing of
hunger; vainglorious, since even in such little matters he trains
himself to hunt after the admiration of the beholders. For I suppose no
general prides himself so much on his legions and trophies, as our
profligate youths on the decking out of their shoes, on their trailing
garments, on the dressing of their hair; yet surely all these are works
of other persons, in their trades. But if men do not cease from vain
boasting in the works of others, when will they cease from it in their
own?

<span id="iii.XLIX-p104"></span>8. Shall I mention yet other things more
grievous than these? or are even these enough for you? Well then; I must
end my speech here; since even this have I said, because of the
disputatious, who maintain the thing not to be so very wrong.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p105"></span>And although I know that many of the
young will not so much as attend to what I have said, being once for all
intoxicated with this fancy, I yet ought not therefore to keep silence.
For such fathers as have understanding, and are as yet sound, will be
able to force them, even against their will, to a becoming decency.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p106"></span>Say not then, “this is of no
consequence, that is of no consequence;” for this, this hath ruined all.
For even hereby ought you to train them, and by the things which seem
trifling to make them grave, great of soul, superior to outward
habiliments; so shall we find them approved in the great things also.
For what is more ordinary than the learning of letters? nevertheless
thereby do men become rhetoricians, <span
id="fr_1950"></span>[1951](#fn_1950) and sophists, and philosophers, and
if they know not their letters, neither will they ever have that
knowledge.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p108"></span>And this we have spoken not to young men
only, but to women also, and to young damsels. For these too are liable
to the like charges, and much more, inasmuch as seemliness is a thing
appropriate to a virgin.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p109"></span>What has been said therefore to the
others; do ye account to have been said to you also, that we may not
repeat again the same things.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p110"></span>For it is full time now to close our
discourse with prayer. All of you then pray with us, that the young men
of the church above all things may be enabled to live orderly, and to
attain an old age becoming them. Since for those surely who do not so
live, it were well not to come to old age at all. But for them that have
grown old even in youth, I pray that they may attain also to the very
deep of gray hairs, and become fathers of approved children, and may be
a joy to them that gave them birth, and above all surely to the God that
made them, and may exterminate every distempered fancy, not that about
their shoes, nor about their clothes only, but every other kind also.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p111"></span>For as untilled land, such is also youth
neglected, bringing forth many thorns from many quarters. Let us then
send forth on them the fire of the Spirit, and burn up these wicked
desires, and let us break up our fields, and make them ready for the
reception of the seed, and the young men amongst us let us exhibit with
soberer minds than the old elsewhere. For this in fact is the marvellous
thing, when temperance shines forth in youth; since he surely that is
temperate in old age cannot have a great reward, having in perfection
the security from his age. But what is wonderful, is to enjoy a calm
amidst waves, and in a furnace not to be burnt, and in youth not to run
wanton.

<span id="iii.XLIX-p112"></span>With these things then in our minds, let
us emulate that blessed Joseph, who shone through all these trials, that
we may attain unto the same crowns with him; unto which may we all
attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
whom be glory unto the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, now and
always, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[294:1919](1100057.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p4"></span>\[R.V., “from the cities;” the word “all”
is not found in the text of Matthew, but in [Mark vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#033)<span
id="iii.XLIX-p4.1"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[294:1920](1100057.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p6"></span>\[“withdrawing;” so the R.V. properly
renders <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p6.2"></span>ναχωρεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p6.3"></span>οκονομα</span>, that is, of His incarnation
and manhood.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[294:1921](1100057.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p9"></span>[Matt. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#014)<span id="iii.XLIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1921"></span>[294:1922](1100057.htm#fr_1921) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p13"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p13.1"></span>τ μ πρτερο πιπηδν το θαμασιν, λλ
καλομενο</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1922"></span>[294:1923](1100057.htm#fr_1922) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p16"></span>[Matt. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015)<span id="iii.XLIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1923"></span>[294:1924](1100057.htm#fr_1923) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p18"></span>[Matt. xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#006)<span id="iii.XLIX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1924"></span>[294:1925](1100057.htm#fr_1924) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p21"></span>[Matt. xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#016)<span id="iii.XLIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1925"></span>[294:1926](1100057.htm#fr_1925) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p24"></span>[Matt. xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#017)<span id="iii.XLIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1926"></span>[294:1927](1100057.htm#fr_1926) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p26"></span>[Matt. vi.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#052)<span id="iii.XLIX-p26.1"></span>.
\[Slightly altered.\]

<span id="fn_1927"></span>[294:1928](1100057.htm#fr_1927) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p29"></span>[John vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLIX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[294:1929](1100057.htm#fr_1928) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p30"></span>See [2 Kings
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042), [2 Kings
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#019)<span id="iii.XLIX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1929"></span>[294:1930](1100057.htm#fr_1929) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p32"></span>\[In [Matt.
14.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019)<span id="iii.XLIX-p32.1"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIX-p32.2"></span>τονυν</span> is
inserted; the order of the clauses changed, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIX-p32.3"></span>το ρτου</span>
omitted.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1930"></span>[294:1931](1100057.htm#fr_1930) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p32.4"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p33"></span>[Matt.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#021)<span id="iii.XLIX-p33.1"></span>
are verbally exact. The R.V. renders more accurately the last clause of
[Matt. 14.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#020)<span
id="iii.XLIX-p33.2"></span>, “that which remained over of the broken
pieces, twelve baskets full.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[295:1932](1100057.htm#fr_1931) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p37"></span>[Gen.
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#011),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020)<span id="iii.XLIX-p37.1"></span>.
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XLIX-p37.2"></span>LXX</span>., <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIX-p37.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLIX-p37.4"></span>ρπετ ψυχν ζωσν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[295:1933](1100057.htm#fr_1932) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p41"></span>[Ps. lxxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020)<span id="iii.XLIX-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[295:1934](1100057.htm#fr_1933) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p45"></span>In these and other places of this Homily
there may be perhaps a tacit reference to the Holy Eucharist, and to the
aptitude of the miracle of the loaves as a preparation of the apostles
for it.

<span id="fn_1934"></span>[295:1935](1100057.htm#fr_1934) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p47"></span>In these and other places of this Homily
there may be perhaps a tacit reference to the Holy Eucharist, and to the
aptitude of the miracle of the loaves as a preparation of the apostles
for it.

<span id="fn_1935"></span>[295:1936](1100057.htm#fr_1935) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p49"></span>In these and other places of this Homily
there may be perhaps a tacit reference to the Holy Eucharist, and to the
aptitude of the miracle of the loaves as a preparation of the apostles
for it.

<span id="fn_1936"></span>[295:1937](1100057.htm#fr_1936) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p51"></span>In these and other places of this Homily
there may be perhaps a tacit reference to the Holy Eucharist, and to the
aptitude of the miracle of the loaves as a preparation of the apostles
for it.

<span id="fn_1937"></span>[295:1938](1100057.htm#fr_1937) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p53"></span>[Matt. xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLIX-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1938"></span>[296:1939](1100057.htm#fr_1938) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p58"></span>[1 Kings xvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#016)<span id="iii.XLIX-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1939"></span>[296:1940](1100057.htm#fr_1939) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p60"></span>[John vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015)<span id="iii.XLIX-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1940"></span>[296:1941](1100057.htm#fr_1940) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p62"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p62.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p62.2"></span>πγαζον</span>.

<span id="fn_1941"></span>[296:1942](1100057.htm#fr_1941) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p65"></span>[Matt. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022)<span id="iii.XLIX-p65.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “till he should send,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[296:1943](1100057.htm#fr_1942) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p71"></span>\[R.V., “ye saw signs.”\]

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[296:1944](1100057.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p72"></span>[John vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#026)<span id="iii.XLIX-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[297:1945](1100057.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p75"></span>That is, “things for use.”

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[297:1946](1100057.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p78"></span>[Luke vi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#036)<span id="iii.XLIX-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[297:1947](1100057.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p83"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p83.1"></span>φιλοτιμα</span>.

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[297:1948](1100057.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p85"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p85.1"></span>ζωδων</span>. See Herod. i. 70, and
Schweighæuser’s note, as quoted here by Mr. Field.

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[297:1949](1100057.htm#fr_1948) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p85.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p86"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p86.1"></span>τ βναυσον</span>.

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[297:1950](1100057.htm#fr_1949) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p92"></span>[1 Tim. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.XLIX-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[299:1951](1100057.htm#fr_1950) <span
id="iii.XLIX-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLIX-p107"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p107.1"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p107.2"></span>ή</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLIX-p107.3"></span>τορε</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily L](1100058)
