[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100043)  [Next](1100045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXXVI"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XI.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)<span
id="iii.XXXVI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p3"></span>“And it came to pass, when Jesus had made
an end of commanding His twelve disciples, He departed thence to teach
and to preach in their cities.”

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p4.1"></span>That</span> is, after He had sent them, He
proceeded to withdraw Himself, to give them room and opportunity to do
what He had enjoined. For while He was present and healing, no one would
be willing to approach them.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p5"></span>“Now when John had heard in the prison
the works of Jesus, <span id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506) he sent
two of <span id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507) his disciples, and
asked Him, saying, Art thou He that should come, <span
id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508) or do we look for another?” <span
id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p10"></span>But Luke saith, they also told John of
the miracles, and then he sent them. <span
id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510) However, this contains no matter of
difficulty, but of consideration only; for this, among other things,
indicates their jealousy towards Him.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p12"></span>But what follows is completely among the
controverted points. Of what nature then is this? Their saying, “Art
Thou He that should come, or do we look for another?” That is, he that
knew Him before His miracles, he that had learned it of the Spirit, he
that heard it of the Father, he who had proclaimed Him before all men;
doth he now send to learn of Him, whether it be Himself or no? And if
yet thou didst not know that it is surely He, how thinkest thou thyself
credible, affirming as thou dost concerning things, whereof thou art
ignorant? For he that is to bear witness to others, must be first worthy
of credit himself. Didst thou not say, “I am not meet to loose the
latchet of His shoe?” <span id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511) Didst
thou not say, “I knew Him not, but He that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit
descending and resting upon Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the
Holy Ghost?” <span id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512) Didst thou not
see the Spirit in form of a dove? didst thou not hear the voice? Didst
thou not utterly forbid Him, saying, “I have need to be baptized of
Thee?” <span id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513) Didst thou not say
even to thy disciples, “He must increase, I must decrease?” <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514) Didst thou not teach all the
people, that “He should baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with
fire?” <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) and that He “is the
Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world?” <span
id="fr_1516"></span>[1517](#fn_1516) Didst thou not before His signs and
miracles proclaim all these things? How then now, when He hath been made
manifest to all, and the fame of Him hath gone out everywhere, and dead
men have been raised, and devils driven away, and a display made of so
great miracles, dost thou after this send to learn of Him?

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p19"></span>What then is the fact? Were all these
sayings a kind of fraud: a stage play and fables? Nay, who that hath any
understanding would say so? I say not, John, who leaped in the womb, who
before his own birth proclaimed Him, the citizen of the wilderness, the
exhibitor of the conversation of <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="iii.XXXVI-Page_234"></span> angels; but even though he were one of
the common sort, and of them that are utterly outcast, he would not have
hesitated, after so many testimonies, both on his own part and on the
part of others.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p20"></span>Whence it is evident, that neither did
he send as being himself in doubt, nor did he ask in ignorance. Since no
one surely could say this, that though he knew it fully, yet on account
of his prison he was become rather timid: for neither was he looking to
be delivered therefrom, nor if he did look for it, would he have
betrayed his duty to God, armed as he was against various kinds of
death. For unless he had been prepared for this, he would not have
evinced so great courage towards a whole people, practised in shedding
blood of prophets; nor would he have rebuked that savage tyrant with so
much boldness in the midst of the city and the forum, severely chiding
him, as though he were a little child, in hearing of all men. And even
if he were grown more timid, how was he not ashamed before his own
disciples, in whose presence he had so often borne witness unto Him, but
asked his question by them, which he should have done by others? And yet
surely he knew full well, that they too were jealous of Christ, and
desired to find some handle against Him. And how could he but be abashed
before the Jewish people, in whose presence he had proclaimed such high
things? Or what advantage accrued to him thereby, towards deliverance
from his bonds? For not for Christ’s sake had he been cast into prison,
nor for having proclaimed His power, but for his own rebuke touching the
unlawful marriage. And what child so silly, what person so frantic, but
that so he would have put on himself their character? <span
id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p22"></span>2. What then is it which he is bringing
about? For that it belongs not to John to have doubt hereupon, no nor to
any ordinary person, nor even to one extremely foolish and frenzied; so
much is evident from what we have said. And now we have only to add the
solution.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p23"></span>For what intent then did he send to ask?
John’s disciples were starting aside from Jesus, and this surely any one
may see, and they had always a jealous feeling towards Him. And it is
plain, from what they said to their master: “He that was with thee,” it
is said, “beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same
baptizeth, and all men come unto Him.” <span
id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) And again, “There arose a question
between John’s disciples and the Jews about purifying.” <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) And again they came unto Him, and
said, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but Thy disciples fast
not?” <span id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520) For as yet they knew
not who Christ was, but imagining Jesus to be a mere man, but John
greater than after the manner of man, were vexed at seeing the former
held in estimation, but the latter, as he had said, now ceasing. And
this hindered them from coming unto Him, their jealousy quite blocking
up the access. Now so long as John was with them, he was exhorting them
continually and instructing them, and not even so did he persuade them;
but when he was now on the point of dying, he uses the more diligence:
fearing as he did lest he might leave a foundation for bad doctrine, and
they continue broken off from Christ. For as he was diligent even at
first to bring to Christ all that pertained to himself; so on his
failing to persuade them, now towards his end he does but exert the more
zeal.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p27"></span>Now if he had said, “Go ye away unto
Him, He is better than I,” he would not have persuaded them, minded as
they were not easily to be separated from him, but rather he would have
been thought to say it out of modesty, and they would have been the more
rivetted to him; or if he had held his peace, then again nothing was
gained. What then doth he? He waits to hear from them that Christ is
working miracles, and not even so doth he admonish them, nor doth he
send all, but some two (whom he perhaps knew to be more teachable than
the rest); that the inquiry might be made without suspicion, in order
that from His acts they might learn the difference between Jesus and
himself. And he saith, Go ye, and say, “Art thou He that should come, or
do we look for another?” <span id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p29"></span>But Christ knowing the purpose of John,
did not say, I am He; for this would again have offended the hearers,
although this was what it naturally followed for Him to say, but He
leaves them to learn it from His acts. For it saith, “when these were
come to Him, then “He cured many.” <span
id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522) And yet what congruity was there,
that being asked, “Art thou He,” He should say nothing to that, but
should presently cure them that were sick; unless it had been His mind
to establish this which I have mentioned? Because they of course would
account the testimony of His deeds surer, and more above suspicion than
that of His words.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p31"></span>Knowing therefore, as being God, the
mind <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="iii.XXXVI-Page_235"></span> with which John had sent them, He
straightway cured blind, lame, and many others; not to teach him (for
how should He him that was convinced), but these that were doubting: and
having healed them, He saith,

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p32"></span>“Go and show John again those things
which ye do hear and see; the blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk, and the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are
raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached unto them.” <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) And he added, “And blessed is he,
whosoever shall not be offended in me;” <span
id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) implying that He knows even their
unuttered thoughts. For if He had said, “I am He,” both this would have
offended them, as I have already said; and they would have thought, even
if they had not spoken, much as the Jews said to Him, “Thou bearest
record of Thyself.” <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) Wherefore
He saith not this Himself, but leaves them to learn all from the
miracles, freeing what He taught from suspicion, and making it plainer.
Wherefore also He covertly added His reproof of them. That is, because
they were “offended in Him,” He by setting forth their case and leaving
it to their own conscience alone, and by calling no witness of this His
accusation, but only themselves that knew it all, did thus also draw
them the more unto Himself, in saying, Blessed is he, whosoever shall
not be offended in me.” For indeed His secret meaning was of them when
He said this.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p36"></span>3. But in order to our making the truth
more evident to you by the comparison of the several statements,
producing not only our own sayings, but also what is stated by others;
we must needs add some account of them.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p37"></span>What then do some affirm? That this
which we have stated was not the cause, but that John was in ignorance,
yet not in ignorance of all; but that He was the Christ, he knew, but
whether He was also to die for mankind, he knew not, therefore he said,
“Art Thou He that should come?” that is, He that is to descend into
hell. <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526) But this is not
tenable; for neither of this was John ignorant. This at least he
proclaimed even before all the others, and bare record of this first,
“Behold,” saith he, “the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the
world.” <span id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) Now he called Him a
lamb, as proclaiming the cross, and again in saying, “That taketh away
the sin of the world,” he declared this same thing. For not otherwise
than by the cross did He effect this; as Paul likewise said: “And the
handwriting which was contrary to us, even it He took out of the way,
nailing it to His cross.” <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) And
his saying too, “He shall baptize you with the Spirit,” <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) is that of one who was foretelling
the events after the resurrection.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p42"></span>Well: that He was to rise again, he
knew, say they, and that He was to give the Holy Ghost; but that He
should likewise be crucified, he knew not. How then was He to rise
again, who had not suffered, nor been crucified? And how was this man
greater than a prophet, who knew not even what the prophets knew? For
that he was greater than a prophet, even Christ Himself bare
record, <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) but that the prophets
knew of the passion is surely plain to every one. For so Isaiah saith,
“He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
shearer is dumb.” <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) And before
this testimony also he saith, “There shall be a root of Jesse, and He
that shall rise again to rule the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles
trust.” <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) Then speaking of His
passion, and of the ensuing glory, he added, “And His rest shall be
honor.” And this prophet foretold not only that He should be crucified,
but also with whom. “For,” saith he, “He was numbered with the
transgressors.” <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) And not this
only, but that He should not even plead for Himself; “For this man,” he
saith, “openeth not His mouth:” and that He should be unjustly
condemned; “For in His humiliation,” saith he, “His judgment was taken
away.” <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) And before this again,
David both saith this, and describes the judgment hall. “Why,” saith he,
“do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of
the earth stand up, and the rulers are gathered together against the
Lord, and against His anointed.” <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) And elsewhere he mentions also the
image of the cross, saying on this wise, “They pierced my hand and my
feet,” <span id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) and those things which
the soldiers were emboldened to do, he adds with all exactness, “For
they parted my garments,” saith he, “among them, and for my vesture they
did cast lots.” <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) And elsewhere
again he saith, that they also offered Him vinegar; “For they gave me,”
saith He, “gall for my meat, and for my thirst they made me drink
vinegar.” <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p52"></span>So then the prophets, so many years
before, speak of the hall of judgment, and of the condemnation, and of
them that were <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span
id="iii.XXXVI-Page_236"></span> crucified with Him, and of the division
of the garments, and of the lot cast upon them, and of many more things
besides (for indeed it is unnecessary to allege all now, lest we make
our discourse long): and was this man, greater than them all, ignorant
of all these things? Nay, how should this be reasonable?

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p53"></span>And why did he not say, “Art thou He
that should come to hell,” <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539)
but simply, “He that should come?” Although this were far more absurd
than the others, I mean their saying, “he therefore said these things,
that he might preach there also after his departure.” To whom it were
seasonable to say, “Brethren, be not children in understanding, howbeit
in malice be ye children.” <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540)
For the present life indeed is the season for right conversation, but
after death is judgment and punishment. “For in hell,” it is said, “who
will confess unto thee?” <span id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p57"></span>How then were “the gates of brass burst,
and the bars of iron broken in sunder”? <span
id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) By His body; for then first was a
body shown, immortal, and destroying the tyranny of death. And besides,
this indicates the destruction of the might of death, not the loosing of
the sins of those who had died before His coming. And if this were not
so, but He have delivered all that were before Him from hell, <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) how saith He, “It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah?” <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544) For this saying supposes that those
are also to be punished; more mildly indeed, yet still that they are to
be punished. And yet they did also suffer here the most extreme
punishment, nevertheless not even this will deliver them. And if it is
so with them, much more with such as have suffered nothing.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p61"></span>“What then?” one may say, “were they
wronged, who lived before His coming?” By no means, for men might then
be saved, even though they had not confessed Christ. For this was not
required of them, but not to worship idols, and to know the true God.
“For the Lord thy God,” it is said, “is one Lord.” <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) Therefore the Maccabees were
admired, because for the observance of the law they suffered what they
did suffer; and the three children, and many others too amongst the
Jews, having shown forth a very virtuous life, and having maintained the
standard of this their knowledge, had nothing more required of them. For
then it was sufficient for salvation, as I have said already, to know
God only; but now it is so no more, but there is need also of the
knowledge of Christ. Therefore He said, “If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their
sin.” <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p64"></span>So likewise with regard to the rule of
practice. Then murder was the destruction of him that committed it, but
now even to be angry. And then to commit adultery, and to lie with
another man’s wife, brought punishment, but now even to look with
unchaste eyes. For as the knowledge, so also the rule of life is now
made stricter. So that there was no need of a forerunner there.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p65"></span>And besides, if unbelievers are after
death to be saved on their believing, no man shall ever perish. For all
will then repent and adore. And in proof that this is true, hear Paul
saying, “Every tongue shall confess, and every knee shall bow, of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth.” <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) And, “The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death.” <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) But
there is no advantage in that submission, for it comes not of a rightly
disposed choice, but of the necessity of things, as one may say,
thenceforth taking place.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p68"></span>Let us not then any more bring in such
old wives’ doctrines, and Jewish fables. Hear at least what Paul saith
touching these things. “For as many as have sinned without law, shall
also perish without law;” <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549)
where his discourse is of those who lived in the time before the law;
and, “As many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the
law,” <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) speaking of all after
Moses. And, “That the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men,” <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) and, “indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that worketh evil, of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile.” <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) And yet countless were the evils
which the Gentiles have suffered in this world, and this is declared
alike by the histories of the heathens, and by the Scriptures that are
in our hands. For who could recount the tragic calamities of the
Babylonians, or those of the Egyptians? But in proof that they who, not
having known Christ before His coming in the flesh, yet refrained from
idolatry and worshipped God only, and showed forth an excellent life,
shall enjoy all the blessings; hear what is said: “But glory, and honor,
and peace to every one that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile.” Seest thou that for their good deeds there are many
rewards, and chastisements again, and penalties for such as have done
the contrary?

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span id="iii.XXXVI-Page_237"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p73"></span>4. Where now, tell me, are the utter
unbelievers in hell? Why, if those before Christ’s coming, who had not
so much as heard the name of hell, <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) nor of a resurrection, and were
punished here, shall suffer punishment there also; how much more we that
have been nurtured in so many lessons of strict virtue? <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554)

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p76"></span>And how is it reasonable, asks one, that
they that have never heard of hell, <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) should fall into hell? For they
will say, “If thou hadst threatened hell, we should have feared more,
and have been sobered.” To be sure; (is it not so?) at our rate of
living now, who hear daily the sayings about hell, and give no heed at
all.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p78"></span>And besides, there is this also to be
said; that he who is not restrained by the judgments in sight, much less
will he be restrained by those others. For the less reasonable sort, and
those of a grosser disposition, are wont to be sobered rather by things
which are at hand, and straightway to happen, than by such as will come
to pass a long time after. “But over us,” one may say, “a greater fear
is suspended, and herein were they wronged.” By no means. For first,
there are not the same measures <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) set to us as to them, but much
greater for us. Now they that have undertaken greater labors, ought to
enjoy greater help. And it is no little help, that our fear has been
increased. And if we have an advantage over them in knowing things to
come, they have an advantage over us in that the severe punishments are
presently laid upon them.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p80"></span>But there is something else, which the
multitude say with respect to this also. For “where,” say they, “is
God’s justice, when any one for sinning here, is punished both here and
there?” Would ye then I should put you in mind of your own sayings, that
ye may no longer give us trouble, but furnish the solution from within
yourselves. I have heard many of our people, if haply they were told of
a murderer cut off in a court of justice, how they had indignation, and
talked in this way: “This unholy and accursed wretch, having perpetrated
thirty murders, or even many more, hath himself undergone one death
only; and where is the justice of it?” So that ye yourselves confess,
that one death is not sufficient for punishment; how give ye then an
opposite sentence now. Because not others but yourselves are the objects
of your judgment: so great a hindrance is self-love to our perceiving
what is just. Because of this, when we are judging others, we search out
all things with strictness, but when we are sitting in judgment on
ourselves, we are blinded. Since if we were to search into these things
in our own case too, as we do with regard to other men, we should give
an uncorrupt sentence. For we also have sins, deserving not two or
three, but ten thousand deaths. And to pass over all the rest, let us
recollect ourselves, as many of us as partake unworthily of the
mysteries; such men being guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
Wherefore, when thou art talking of the murderer, take account of
thyself also. For he indeed hath murdered a man, but thou art under the
guilt of slaying the Lord; and he, not having partaken of mysteries, but
we, while enjoying the benefit of the sacred table.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p81"></span>And what are they that bite and devour
their brethren, and pour out such abundance of venom? What is he that
robs the poor of their food? For if he who imparts not of his own, is
such as I have said, *much more he that takes the things of
others*. <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557) How many robbers do
the covetous surpass in wickedness! how many murderers and robbers of
tombs, the rapacious! and how many after spoiling men are desirous even
of their blood!

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p83"></span>“Nay,” saith he, “God forbid.” Now thou
sayest, God forbid. When thou hast an enemy, then say, God forbid, and
call to mind what hath been said, and show forth a life full of great
strictness; lest the portion of Sodom await us also, lest we suffer the
lot of Gomorrha, lest we undergo the ills of the Tyrians and Sidonians;
or rather, lest we offend Christ, which were a thing more grievous *and
more to be feared* than all.

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p84"></span>For though to many hell <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) seem to be a fearful thing, yet I
for my part will not cease continually to say, that this is more
grievous and fearful than any hell; and you I entreat to be of the same
mind. For so shall we both be delivered from hell, and enjoy the glory
that is bestowed of Christ; unto which may we all attain, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[233:1507](1100044.htm#fr_1506) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p6"></span>\[R.V., “Of the Christ,” as in nearly all
authorities, but Chrysostom reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p6.1"></span>το Ιησο</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[233:1508](1100044.htm#fr_1507) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p7"></span>\[R.V., “by his disciples,” but some
ancient authorities (Vulgate also) support “two.” Taken from [Luke vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#019)<span
id="iii.XXXVI-p7.1"></span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[233:1509](1100044.htm#fr_1508) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p8"></span>\[R.V., “He that cometh.”\]

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[233:1510](1100044.htm#fr_1509) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p9"></span>[Matt.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[233:1511](1100044.htm#fr_1510) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p11"></span>[Luke vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[233:1512](1100044.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p13"></span>[John i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[233:1513](1100044.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p14"></span>[John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[233:1514](1100044.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p15"></span>[Matt. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[233:1515](1100044.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p16"></span>[John iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[233:1516](1100044.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p17"></span>[Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[233:1517](1100044.htm#fr_1516) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p18"></span>[John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p18.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “Or, beareth the sin,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[234:1518](1100044.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p21"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p21.1"></span>οκ ν αυτ δξαν περιθηκε</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[234:1519](1100044.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p24"></span>[John iii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[234:1520](1100044.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p25"></span>[John iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p25.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “with a Jew.” So one <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p25.2"></span>ms</span>. here. In Homily XXIX. on John,
Chrysostom distinctly accepts the singular, as do nearly all Greek <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXVI-p25.3"></span>mss</span>.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[234:1521](1100044.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p25.4"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p26"></span>[Matt. ix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[234:1522](1100044.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p28"></span>[Matt. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[234:1523](1100044.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p30"></span>[Luke vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#021)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[235:1524](1100044.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p33"></span>[Matt. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[235:1525](1100044.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p34"></span>[Matt. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p34.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “shall find none occasion of stumbling in me.”\]

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[235:1526](1100044.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p35"></span>[John viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p35.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “witness.”\]

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[235:1527](1100044.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p38"></span>See Origen, 2 Hom. *in Reg*. t. ii. p.
495, 6; St. Ambr. *in Luc*. vii. 19; St. Jerome *in loc*. \[The Greek
term used is “Hades,” not “Gehenna.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[235:1528](1100044.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p39"></span>[John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[235:1529](1100044.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p40"></span>[Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p40.1"></span>.
\[Comp. R.V., *in loco*.\]

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[235:1530](1100044.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p41"></span>[Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[235:1531](1100044.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p43"></span>[Matt. xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[235:1532](1100044.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p44"></span>[Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[235:1533](1100044.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p45"></span>[Isa. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[235:1534](1100044.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p46"></span>[Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[235:1535](1100044.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p47"></span>[Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p47.1"></span>,
from <span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXVI-p47.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[235:1536](1100044.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p48"></span>[Ps.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[235:1537](1100044.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p49"></span>[Ps. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[235:1538](1100044.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p50"></span>[Ps. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[235:1539](1100044.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p51"></span>[Ps. lxix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[236:1540](1100044.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p54"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p54.1"></span>ε τν δν</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[236:1541](1100044.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p55"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[236:1542](1100044.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p56"></span>[Ps. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p56.1"></span>
\[<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXXVI-p56.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXXVI-p56.3"></span>ἅ</span></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXXVI-p56.4"></span>δ</span>\].

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[236:1543](1100044.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p58"></span>[Ps. cvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[236:1544](1100044.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p59"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p59.1"></span>γεννη</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[236:1545](1100044.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p60"></span>[Matt. x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[236:1546](1100044.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p62"></span>[Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[236:1547](1100044.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p63"></span>[John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p63.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “excuse.”\]

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[236:1548](1100044.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p66"></span>[Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[236:1549](1100044.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p67"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[236:1550](1100044.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p69"></span>[Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[236:1551](1100044.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p70"></span>[Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[236:1552](1100044.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p71"></span>[Rom. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[236:1553](1100044.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p72"></span>[Rom.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009)<span id="iii.XXXVI-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[237:1554](1100044.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p74"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p74.1"></span>γεννη</span>.\]

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[237:1555](1100044.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p75"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p75.1"></span>φιλοσοφα</span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[237:1556](1100044.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p77"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p77.1"></span>γεννη</span>, and so throughout the
paragraph.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[237:1557](1100044.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p79"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p79.1"></span>σκμματα</span>.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[237:1558](1100044.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p82"></span>The words in italics, both here and
below, are omitted in several <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p82.1"></span>mss</span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[237:1559](1100044.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="iii.XXXVI-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXVI-p85"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXVI-p85.1"></span>γεννα</span>, and similarly throughout the
paragraph.—R.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXVII](1100045)
