[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100038)  [Next](1100040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XXXI"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXI.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p2.1"></span>[Matt. IX.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)<span
id="iii.XXXI-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p3"></span>*“While He spake these things unto them,
behold, there came in* <span id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) *a
ruler, and worshipped Him, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but
come and lay Thy hand upon her, and she shall live.”*

<span id="iii.XXXI-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p5.1"></span>The</span> deed overtook the words; so that
the mouths of the Pharisees were the more stopped. For both he that came
was a ruler of the synagogue, and his affliction terrible. For the young
damsel was both his only child, and twelve years old, the very flower of
her age; on which account especially He raised her up again, and that
immediately.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p6"></span>And if Luke say that men came, saying,
“Trouble not the Master, for she is dead;” <span
id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296) we will say this, that the
expression, “she is even now dead,” was that of one conjecturing from
the time of his journeying, or exaggerating his affliction. For it is an
usual thing with persons in need to heighten their own evils by their
report, and to say something more than is really true, the more to
attract those whom they are beseeching.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p8"></span>But see his dullness: how he requires of
Christ two things, both His actual presence, and the laying on of His
hand: and this by the way is a sign that he had left her still
breathing. This Naaman also, that Syrian, required of the prophet. “For
I thought,” saith he, “he will surely come out, and will lay on his
hand.” <span id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297) For in truth they who
are more or less dull of temper, require sight and sensible things.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p10"></span>And whereas Mark <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298) saith, He took the three disciples,
and so doth Luke; <span id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299) our
evangelist merely saith, “the disciples.” Wherefore then did He not take
with Him Matthew, though he had but just come unto Him? To bring him to
a more earnest longing, and because he was yet rather in an imperfect
state. For to this intent doth He honor those, that these may grow such
as those are. But for him it sufficed for the present, to see what
befell the woman with the issue of blood, and to be honored by His
table, and by His partaking of his salt.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p13"></span>And when He had risen up many followed
Him, as for a great miracle, both on account of the person who had come,
and because the more part being of a grosser disposition were seeking
not so much the care of the soul, as the healing of the body; and they
flowed together, some urged by their own afflictions, some hastening to
behold how other men’s were cured: however, there were as yet but few in
the habit of coming principally for the sake of His words and doctrine.
Nevertheless, He did not suffer them to enter into the house, but His
disciples only; and not even all of these, everywhere instructing us to
repel the applause of the multitude.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p14"></span>2. “And, behold,” it is said, “a woman
that had an issue of blood twelve years, came behind Him, and touched
the hem of His garment. For she said within herself, If I may but touch
His garment, I shall be whole.” <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p16"></span>Wherefore did she not approach Him
boldly? She was ashamed on account of her affliction, accounting herself
to be unclean. For if the menstruous woman was judged not to be clean,
much more would she have the same thought, who was afflicted with such a
disease; since in fact that complaint was under the law accounted a
great uncleanness. <span id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301) Therefore
she lies hidden, and conceals herself. For neither had she as yet the
proper and correct opinion concerning Him: else she <span
id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span id="iii.XXXI-Page_201"></span> would
not have thought to be concealed. And this is the first woman that came
unto Him in public, having heard of course that He heals women also, and
that He is on His way to the little daughter that was dead.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p18"></span>And she durst not invite Him to her
house, although she was wealthy; <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302) nay, neither did she approach
publicly, but secretly with faith she touched His garments. For she did
not doubt, nor say in herself, “Shall I indeed be delivered from the
disease? shall I indeed fail of deliverance?” But confident of her
health, she so approached Him. “For she said,” we read, “in herself, If
I may only touch His garment, I shall be whole.” Yea, for she saw out of
what manner of house He was come, that of the publicans, and who they
were that followed Him, sinners and publicans; and all these things made
her to be of good hope.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p20"></span>What then doth Christ? He suffers her not
to be hid, but brings her into the midst, and makes her manifest for
many purposes.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p21"></span>It is true indeed that some of the
senseless ones say, “He does this for love of glory. For why,” say they,
“did He not suffer her to be hid?” What sayest thou, unholy, yea, all
unholy one? He that enjoins silence, He that passes by miracles
innumerable, is He in love with glory?

<span id="iii.XXXI-p22"></span>For what intent then doth He bring her
forward? In the first place He puts an end to the woman’s fear, lest
being pricked by her conscience, as having stolen the gift, she should
abide in agony. In the second place, He sets her right, in respect of
her thinking to be hid. Thirdly, He exhibits her faith to all, so as to
provoke the rest also to emulation; and His staying of the fountains of
her blood was no greater sign than He affords in signifying His
knowledge of all things. Moreover the ruler of the synagogue, who was on
the point of thorough unbelief, and so of utter ruin, He corrects by the
woman. Since both they that came said, “Trouble not the Master, for the
damsel is dead;” and those in the house laughed Him to scorn, when He
said, “She sleepeth;” and it was likely that the father too should have
experienced some such feeling. Therefore to correct this weakness
beforehand, He brings forward the simple woman. For as to that ruler
being quite of the grosser sort, hear what He saith unto him: “Fear not,
do thou believe only, and she shall be made whole.” <span
id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p24"></span>Thus He waited also on purpose for death
to come on, and that then He should arrive; in order that the proof of
the resurrection might be distinct. With this view He both walks more
leisurely, and discourses more with the woman; that He might give time
for the damsel to die, and for those to come, who told of it, and said,
“Trouble not the Master.” <span id="fr_1304"></span>[1305](#fn_1304)
This again surely the evangelist obscurely signifies, when he saith,
“While He yet spake, there came from the house certain which said, Thy
daughter is dead, trouble not the Master.” For His will was that her
death should be believed, that her resurrection might not be suspected.
And this He doth in every instance. So also in the case of Lazarus, He
waited a first and a second and a third day. <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p27"></span>On account then of all these things He
brings her forward, and saith, “Daughter, be of good cheer,” <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306) even as He had said also to the
paralyzed person, “Son, be of good cheer.” Because in truth the woman
was exceedingly alarmed; therefore He saith, “be of good cheer,” and He
calls her “daughter;” for her faith had made her a daughter. After that
comes also her praise: “Thy faith hath made thee whole.”

<span id="iii.XXXI-p29"></span>But Luke tells us also other things more
than these concerning the woman. Thus, when she had approached Him,
saith he, and had received her health, Christ did not immediately call
her, but first He saith, “Which is he that touched me?” Then when Peter
and they that were with Him said, Master, the multitude throng Thee, and
press Thee, and sayest Thou, who touched me?” <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[1308](#fn_1307) (which was a very sure sign both
that He was encompassed with real flesh, and that He trampled on all
vainglory, for they did not follow Him at all afar off, but thronged Him
on every side); He for His part continued to say, “Somebody hath touched
me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me;” <span
id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308) answering after a grosser manner
according to the impression of His hearers. But these things He said,
that He might also induce her of herself to make confession. For on this
account neither did He immediately convict her, in order that having
signified that He knows all things clearly, He might induce her of her
own accord to publish all, and work upon her to proclaim herself what
had been done, and that He might not incur suspicion by saying it.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span id="iii.XXXI-Page_202"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p32"></span>Seest thou the woman superior to the
ruler of the synagogue? She detained Him not, she took no hold of Him,
but touched Him only with the end of her fingers, and though she came
later, she first went away healed. And he indeed was bringing the
Physician altogether to his house, but for her a mere touch suffered.
For though she was bound by her affliction, yet her faith had given her
wings. And mark how He comforts her, saying, “Thy faith hath saved
thee.” Now surely, had He drawn her forward for display, He would not
have added this; but He saith this, partly teaching the ruler of the
synagogue to believe, partly proclaiming the woman’s praise, and
affording her by these words delight and advantage equal to her bodily
health.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p33"></span>For that He did this as minded to glorify
her, and to amend others, and not to show Himself glorious, is manifest
from hence; that He indeed would have been equally an object of
admiration even without this (for the miracles were pouring around Him
faster than the snow-flakes, and He both had done and was to do far
greater things than these): but the woman, had this not happened, would
have gone away hid, deprived of those great praises. For this cause He
brought her forward, and proclaimed her praise, and cast out her fear,
(for “she came,” it is said, “trembling” <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309) ); and He caused her to be of good
courage, and together with health of body, He gave her also other
provisions for her journey, in that He said, “Go in peace.” <span
id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p36"></span>3. “And when He came into the ruler’s
house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, He saith
unto them, Give place, for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they
laughed Him to scorn.” <span id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p38"></span>Noble tokens, surely, these, of the
rulers of synagogues; in the moment of her death pipes and cymbals
raising a dirge! What then doth Christ? All the rest He cast out, but
the parents He brought in; to leave no room for saying that He healed
her in any other way. And before her resurrection too, He raises her in
His word; saying, “The maid is not dead, but sleepeth.” And in many
instances besides He doeth this. As then on the sea He expels tumult
from the mind of the by-standers, at the same time both signifying that
it is easy for Him to raise the dead (which same thing He did with
respect to Lazarus also, saying, “Our friend Lazarus sleepeth <span
id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312) ;” and also teaching us not to fear
death; for that it is not death, but is henceforth become a sleep. Thus,
since He Himself was to die, He doth in the persons of others prepare
His disciples beforehand to be of good courage, and to bear the end
meekly. Since in truth, when He had come, death was from that time
forward a sleep.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p40"></span>But yet they laughed Him to scorn: He
however was not indignant at being disbelieved by those for whom He was
a little afterwards to work miracles; neither did He rebuke their
laughter, in order that both it and the pipes, and the cymbals, and all
the other things, might be a sure proof of her death. For since for the
most part, after the miracles are done, men disbelieve, He takes them
beforehand by their own answers; which was done in the case both of
Lazarus and of Moses. For to Moses first He saith, “What is that in
thine hand?” <span id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313) in order that
when he saw it become a serpent, He should not forget that it was a rod
before, but being reminded of his own saying, might be amazed at what
was done. And with regard to Lazarus He saith, “Where have ye laid
him?” <span id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314) that they who had said,
“Come and see,” and “he stinketh, for he hath been dead four days,”
might no longer be able to disbelieve His having raised a dead man.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p43"></span>Seeing then the cymbals and the
multitude, He put them all out, and in the presence of the parents works
the miracle; not introducing another soul, but recalling the same that
had gone out, and awakening her as it were out of a sleep.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p44"></span>And He holds her by the hand, assuring
the beholders; so as by that sight to make a way for the belief of her
resurrection. For whereas the father said, “Lay thy hand upon
her;” <span id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315) He on His part doth
somewhat more, for He lays no hand on her, but rather takes hold of her,
and raises her, implying that to Him all things are ready. And He not
only raises her up, but also commands to give her meat, that the event
might not seem to be an illusion. And He doth not give it Himself, but
commands them; as also with regard to Lazarus He said, “Loose him, and
let him go,” <span id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316) and afterwards
makes him partaker of His table. <span
id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317) For so is He wont always to
establish both points, making out with all completeness the
demonstration alike of the death and of the resurrection.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p48"></span>But do thou mark, I pray thee, not her
resurrection only, but also His commanding “to tell no man;” and by all
learn thou this especially, His freedom from haughtiness <span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span id="iii.XXXI-Page_203"></span> and
vainglory. And withal learn this other thing also, that He cast them
that were beating themselves out of the house, and declared them
unworthy of such a sight; and do not thou go out with the minstrels, but
remain with Peter, and John, and James.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p49"></span>For if He cast them out then, much more
now. For then it was not yet manifest that death was become a sleep, but
now this is clearer than the very sun itself. But is it that He hath not
raised thy daughter now? But surely He will raise her, and with more
abundant glory. For that damsel, when she had risen, died again; but thy
child, if she rise again, abides thenceforth in immortal being.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p50"></span>4. Let no man therefore beat himself any
more, nor wail, neither disparage Christ’s achievement. For indeed He
overcame death. Why then dost thou wail for nought? The thing is become
a sleep. Why lament and weep? Why, even if Greeks <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318) did this, they should be laughed to
scorn; but when the believer behaves himself unseemly in these things,
what plea hath he? What excuse will there be for them that are guilty of
such folly, and this, after so long a time, and so clear proof of the
resurrection?

<span id="iii.XXXI-p52"></span>But thou, as though laboring to add to
the charge against thee, dost also bring us in heathen women singing
dirges, to kindle thy feelings, and to stir up the furnace thoroughly:
and thou hearkenest not to Paul, saying, “What concord hath Christ with
Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel?” <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p54"></span>And while the children of heathens, who
know nothing of resurrection, do yet find words of consolation, saying,
“Bear it manfully, for it is not possible to undo what hath taken place,
nor to amend it by lamentations;” art not thou, who hearest sayings
wiser and better than these, ashamed to behave thyself more unseemly
than they? For we say not at all, “Bear it manfully, because it is not
possible to undo what hath taken place,” but, “bear it manfully, because
he will surely rise again;” the child sleeps and is not dead; he is at
rest and hath not perished. For resurrection will be his final lot, and
eternal life, and immortality, and an angel’s portion. Hearest thou not
the Psalm that saith, “Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord
hath dealt bountifully with thee?” <span
id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320) God calleth it “bountiful dealing,”
and dost thou make lamentation?

<span id="iii.XXXI-p56"></span>And what more couldest thou have done, if
thou wert a foe and an enemy of the dead? Why, if there must be
mourning, it is the devil that ought to mourn. He may beat himself, he
may wail, at our journeying to greater blessings. This lamentation
becomes his wickedness, not thee, who art going to be crowned and to
rest. Yea, for death is a fair haven. Consider, at any rate, with how
many evils our present life is filled; reflect how often thou thyself
hast cursed our present life. For indeed things go on to worse, and from
the very beginning thou wert involved in no small condemnation. For,
saith He, “In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children;” and, “In the
sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread;” <span
id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321) and, “In the world ye shall have
tribulation.” <span id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322)

<span id="iii.XXXI-p59"></span>But of our state there, no such word at
all is spoken, but all the contrary; that “grief and sorrow and sighing
have fled away.” <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323) And that
“men shall come from the east and from the west, and shall recline in
the bosoms of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob.” <span
id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324) And that the region there is a
spiritual bride-chamber, and bright lamps, and a translation to Heaven.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p62"></span>5. Why then disgrace the departed? Why
dispose the rest to fear and tremble at death? Why cause many to accuse
God, as though He had done very dreadful things? Or rather, why after
this invite poor persons, and entreat priests to pray? <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325) “In order,” saith he, “that the
dead may depart into rest; that he may find the Judge propitious.” For
these things then art thou mourning and wailing? Thou art therefore
fighting and warring with thyself: exciting a storm against thyself on
account of his having entered into harbor.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p64"></span>“But what can I do?” saith he: “such a
thing is nature.” The blame is not nature’s, neither doth it belong to
the necessary consequence of the thing; but it is we that are turning
all things upside down, are overcome with softness, are giving up our
proper nobility, and are making the unbelievers worse. For how shall we
reason with another concerning immortality? how shall we persuade the
heathen, when we fear death, and shudder at it more than he? Many, for
instance, among the Greeks <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326)
although they knew nothing of course about immortality, have crowned
themselves at the decrease of their children, and appeared in white
garments, <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="iii.XXXI-Page_204"></span> that they might reap the present glory;
but thou not even for the future glory’s sake ceasest thy woman’s
behavior and wailing.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p66"></span>But hast thou no heirs, nor any to
succeed to thy goods? And which wouldest thou rather, that he should be
heir of thy possessions, or of Heaven? And which didst thou desire, that
he should succeed to the things that perish, which he must have let go
soon after, or to things that remain, and are immoveable? Thou hadst him
not for heir, but God had him instead of thee; he became not joint-heir
with his own brethren, but he became “joint-heir with Christ.”

<span id="iii.XXXI-p67"></span>“But to whom,” saith he, “are we to leave
our garments, to whom our houses, to whom our slaves and our lands?” To
him again, and more securely than if he lived; for there is nothing to
hinder. For if barbarians burn the goods of the departed together with
them, much more were it a righteous thing for thee to send away with the
dead what things he hath: not to be turned to ashes, like those, but to
invest him with more glory; and that if he departed a sinner, it may do
away his sins; <span id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327) but if
righteous, that it may become an increase of reward and recompense.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p69"></span>But dost thou long to see him? Then live
the same life with him, and thou wilt soon obtain that sacred vision.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p70"></span>And herewith consider this also, that
though thou shouldest not hearken to us, thou wilt certainly yield to
time. But no reward then for thee; for the consolation comes of the
number of the days. Whereas if thou art willing now to command thyself,
thou wilt gain two very great points: first, thou wilt deliver thyself
from the intervening ills, next, thou wilt be crowned with the brighter
crown from God. For indeed neither almsgiving nor anything else is
nearly so great as bearing affliction meekly.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p71"></span>Bear in mind, that even the Son of God
died: and He indeed for thee, but thou for thyself. And when He said,
“If it be possible, let the cup pass from me,” <span
id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328) and suffered pain, and was in
agony, nevertheless He shunned not the end, but underwent it, and that
with its whole course of exceeding woe. <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) That is, He did by no means simply
endure death, but the most shameful death; and before His death,
stripes; and before His stripes, upbraidings, and jeers, and revilings;
instructing thee to bear all manfully. And though He died, and put off
His body, He resumed it again in greater glory, herein also holding out
to thee good hopes. If these things be not a fable, lament not. If thou
account these things to be sure, weep not; but if thou dost weep, how
wilt thou be able to persuade the Greek that thou believest?

<span id="iii.XXXI-p74"></span>6. But even so doth the event still
appear intolerable to thee? Well then, for this very cause it is not
meet to lament for him, for he is delivered from many such calamities.
Grudge not therefore against him, neither envy him: for to ask death for
yourself because of his premature end, and to lament for him that he did
not live to endure many such things, is rather the part of one grudging
and envying.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p75"></span>And think not of this, that he will no
more return home: but that thyself also art a little while after to go
to him. Regard not this, that he returns here no more, but that neither
do these things that are seen remain such as they are, but these too are
being transformed. Yea, for heaven, and earth, and sea, and all, are
being put together afresh, <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330)
and then shalt thou recover thy child in greater glory.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p77"></span>And if indeed he departed a sinner, his
wickedness is stayed; for certainly, had God known that he was being
converted, He would not have snatched him away before his repentance:
but if he ended his life righteous, he now possesses all good in safety.
Whence it is manifest that thy tears are not of kindly affection, but of
unreasoning passion. For if thou lovedst the departed, thou shouldest
rejoice and be glad that he is delivered from the present waves.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p78"></span>For what is there more, I pray thee? What
is there fresh and new? Do we not see the same things daily revolving?
Day and night, night and day, winter and summer, summer and winter, and
nothing more. And these indeed are ever the same; but our evils are
fresh, and newer. Wouldest thou then have him every day drawing up more
of these things, and abiding here, and sickening, and mourning, and in
fear and trembling, and enduring some of the ills of life, dreading
others lest he some time endure them? Since assuredly thou canst not say
this, that one sailing over this great sea might possibly be free from
despondency and cares, and from all other such things.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p79"></span>And withal take this also into account,
that thou didst not bring him forth immortal; and that if he had not
died now, he must have endured it soon after. But is it that thou hadst
not thy fill of him? But thou wilt of a <span id="page_205">p.
205</span> <span id="iii.XXXI-Page_205"></span> certainty enjoy him
there. But longest thou to see him here also? And what is there to
hinder thee? For thou art permitted even here, if thou be watchful; for
the hope of the things to come is clearer than sight.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p80"></span>But thou, if he were in some king’s court
wouldest not ever seek to see him, so long as thou heardest of his good
report: and seeing him departed to the things that are far better, art
thou faint-hearted about a little time; and that, when thou hast in his
place one to dwell with thee?

<span id="iii.XXXI-p81"></span>But hast thou no husband? yet hast thou a
consolation, even the Father of the orphans, and Judge of the widows.
Hear even Paul pronouncing this widowhood blessed, and saying, “Now she
that is a widow indeed and desolate, trusteth in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) Because such an one will appear
more approved, evincing as she doth greater patience. Mourn not
therefore for that which is thy crown, that for which thou demandest a
reward.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p83"></span>Since thou hast also restored His
deposit, if thou hast exhibited the very thing entrusted to thee. Be not
in care any more, having laid up the possession in an inviolable
treasure-house.

<span id="iii.XXXI-p84"></span>But if thou wouldest really learn, both
what is our present being, and what our life to come; and that the one
is a spider’s web and a shadow, but the things there, all of them,
immoveable and immortal; thou wouldest not after that want other
arguments. For whereas now thy child is delivered from all change; if he
were here, perhaps he might continue good, perhaps not so. Seest thou
not how many openly cast off <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332)
their own children? how many are constrained to keep them at home,
although worse than the open outcasts?

<span id="iii.XXXI-p86"></span>Let us make account of all these things
and practise self-command; for so shall we at once show regard to the
deceased, and enjoy much praise from men, and receive from God the great
rewards of patience, and attain unto the good things eternal; unto which
may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[200:1296](1100039.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p4"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p4.1"></span>εελθν</span>, “came in,” so Tischendorf, but
the R.V. accepts the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p4.2"></span>ε λθν</span>, “there came one ruler.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[200:1297](1100039.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p7"></span>[Luke viii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#049)<span id="iii.XXXI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[200:1298](1100039.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p9"></span>[2 Kings v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXI-p9.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XXXI-p9.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[200:1299](1100039.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p11"></span>[Mark v.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#037)<span id="iii.XXXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[200:1300](1100039.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p12"></span>[Luke viii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#051)<span id="iii.XXXI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[200:1301](1100039.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p15"></span>[Matt.
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#022)<span id="iii.XXXI-p15.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “border” for “hem;” “do” for “may;” “made whole” for “whole”.\]

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[200:1302](1100039.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p17"></span>[Levit. xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#025)<span id="iii.XXXI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[201:1303](1100039.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p19"></span>Eusebius, E. H., viii. 18, mentions a
tradition that she belonged to Cæsarea Philippi, otherwise called
Paneas, and that certain brazen statues of a man holding out his hand
and a woman kneeling, which were there in his time, were set up at her
expense, that being her native place. He adds, that a certain plant
which grew by the Saviour’s statue, when it came to touch the hem of His
garment, stopped growing and that it was endowed with virtue to cure all
manner of diseases.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[201:1304](1100039.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p23"></span>[Luke viii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#050)<span id="iii.XXXI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[201:1305](1100039.htm#fr_1304) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p25"></span>[Mark
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035), [Luke
8:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#049)<span id="iii.XXXI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[201:1306](1100039.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p26"></span>[John
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#006),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="iii.XXXI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[201:1307](1100039.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p28"></span>[Matt.
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#022),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[201:1308](1100039.htm#fr_1307) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p30"></span>[Luke viii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#045)<span id="iii.XXXI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[201:1309](1100039.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p31"></span>[Luke viii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#046)<span id="iii.XXXI-p31.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “power.”\]

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[202:1310](1100039.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p34"></span>[Luke viii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#047)<span id="iii.XXXI-p34.1"></span>.
\[The English rendering has been modified to indicate more exactly the
words cited.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[202:1311](1100039.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p35"></span>[Luke viii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#048)<span id="iii.XXXI-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[202:1312](1100039.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p37"></span>[Matt.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#024)<span id="iii.XXXI-p37.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “the flute-players, and the crowds making a tumult.”\]

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[202:1313](1100039.htm#fr_1312) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p39"></span>[John xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXI-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[202:1314](1100039.htm#fr_1313) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p41"></span>[Ex. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[202:1315](1100039.htm#fr_1314) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p42"></span>[John
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="iii.XXXI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[202:1316](1100039.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p45"></span>[Matt. ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)<span id="iii.XXXI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[202:1317](1100039.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p46"></span>[John xi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span id="iii.XXXI-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[202:1318](1100039.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p47"></span>[John xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)<span id="iii.XXXI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[203:1319](1100039.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p51"></span>\[Probably “Gentiles” or “heathen” would
be a better reading. The contrast is with “believer.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[203:1320](1100039.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p53"></span>[2 Cor. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="iii.XXXI-p53.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “unbeliever.”\]

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[203:1321](1100039.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p55"></span>[Ps. cxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)<span id="iii.XXXI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[203:1322](1100039.htm#fr_1321) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p57"></span>[Gen.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="iii.XXXI-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[203:1323](1100039.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p58"></span>[John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="iii.XXXI-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[203:1324](1100039.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p60"></span>[Is. xxxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010)<span id="iii.XXXI-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[203:1325](1100039.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p61"></span>[Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="iii.XXXI-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[203:1326](1100039.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p63"></span>Because the feasts and prayers for the
dead being supposed to benefit those only who have fallen asleep in the
Lord, and whose final happiness was therefore sure, it was an
inconsistency in those who celebrated them to sorrow as if they had no
hope. See Bingham, b. xxiii. c. iii. secs. 13, 15.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[203:1327](1100039.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p65"></span>\[Or, “Gentiles.”\]

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[204:1328](1100039.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p68"></span>Not that St. Chrysostom imagined that
anything could be done to change the relative condition of those who
have died in the favor or displeasure of God: see *e.g*., Hom. XXXVI. p.
506, ed. Field. Indeed, the same is implied in the words which
immediately follow. “Dost thou long to see him? Then live the same life
with him,” &c.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[204:1329](1100039.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p72"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="iii.XXXI-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[204:1330](1100039.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p73"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p73.1"></span>μετ πολλ τ τραγδα</span>.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[204:1331](1100039.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p76"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p76.1"></span>μεθαρμζεται</span> .

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[205:1332](1100039.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p82"></span>[1 Tim. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span id="iii.XXXI-p82.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “hath her hope set on God.” Chrysostom reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XXXI-p82.2"></span>κριον</span>, and
Augustin followed the same reading.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[205:1333](1100039.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iii.XXXI-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XXXI-p85"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p85.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XXXI-p85.2"></span>ποκηρττουσι</span> .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXII](1100040)
