[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100074)  [Next](1100076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXVII"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXVII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXX.</span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXVII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XXII.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#015)<span
id="iii.LXVII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p3"></span>“Then went the Pharisees, and took
counsel how they might entangle Him in His talk.”

<span id="iii.LXVII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXVII-p4.1"></span>Then</span>. When? When most of all they
ought to have been moved to compunction, when they should have been
amazed at His love to man, when they should have feared the things to
come, when from the past they ought to have believed touching the future
also. For indeed the things that had been said cried aloud in actual
fulfillment. I mean, that publicans and harlots believed, and prophets
and righteous men were slain, and from these things they ought not to
have gainsaid touching their own destruction, but even to believe and to
be sobered.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p5"></span>But nevertheless not even so do their
wicked acts cease, but travail and proceed further. And forasmuch as
they could not lay hands on Him (for they feared the multitude), they
took another way with the intention of bringing Him into danger, and
making Him guilty of crimes against the state.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p6"></span>For “they sent out unto Him their
disciples with the Herodians saying, Master, we know that thou art true,
and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man;
for thou regardest not the person of men. Tell us therefore, What
thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar or not?” <span
id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p8"></span>For they were now tributaries, their
state having passed under the rule of the Romans. Forasmuch then as they
saw that Theudas and Judas <span id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607)
with their companies for this cause were put to death, as having
prepared for a revolt, they were minded to bring Him too by these words
into such a suspicion. Therefore they sent both their own disciples, and
Herod’s soldiers, digging, as they thought, a precipice on either side,
and in every direction setting the snare, so that, whatever He should
say, they might lay hold of it; and if He should answer in favor of the
Herodians, themselves might find fault with Him, but if in their favor,
the others should accuse Him. And yet He had given the didrachmas, <span
id="fr_2608"></span>[2609](#fn_2608) but they knew not that.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p11"></span>And in either way indeed they expected
to lay hold of Him; but they desired rather that He should say something
against the Herodians. Wherefore they send their disciples also to urge
Him thereto by their presence, that they might deliver Him to the
governor as an usurper. For this Luke also intimates and shows, by
saying, that they asked also in the presence of the multitude, so that
the testimony should be the stronger.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p12"></span>But the result was altogether opposite;
for in a larger body of spectators they afforded the demonstration of
their folly.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p13"></span>And see their flattery, and their hidden
craft. “We know,” their words are, “that Thou art true.” How said ye
then, “He is a deceiver,” and “deceiveth the people,” and “hath a
devil,” and “is not of God?” <span id="fr_2609"></span>[2610](#fn_2609)
how a little while before did ye devise to slay Him?

<span id="iii.LXVII-p15"></span>But they are at everything, whatsoever
their craft against Him may suggest. For since, <span id="page_409">p.
409</span> <span id="iii.LXVII-Page_409"></span> when a little before
they had said in self will, “By what authority doest Thou these
things?” <span id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610) they did not meet
with an answer to the question, they look to puff Him up by their
flattery, and to persuade Him to say something against the established
laws, and opposed to the prevailing government.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p17"></span>Wherefore also they testify the truth
unto Him, confessing what was really so, nevertheless, not with an
upright mind, nor willingly; and add thereto, saying, “Thou carest not
for any man.” See how plainly they are desiring to urge Him to these
sayings, that would make Him both offend Herod, and incur the suspicion
of being an usurper, as standing up against the laws, so that they might
punish Him, as a mover of sedition, and an usurper. For in saying, “Thou
carest not for any man,” and, “Thou regardest not the person of man,”
they were hinting at Herod and Cæsar.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p18"></span>“Tell us therefore, what thinkest Thou?”
Now ye honor Him, and esteem Him a Teacher, having despised and insulted
Him oftentimes, when He was discoursing of the things that concern your
salvation. Whence also they are become confederates.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p19"></span>And see their craftiness. They say not,
Tell us what is good, what is expedient, what is lawful? but, “What
thinkest Thou?” So much did they look to this one object, to betray Him,
and to set Him at enmity with the rulers. And Mark declaring this, and
more plainly discovering their self-will, and their murderous
disposition, affirms them to have said, “Shall we give Cæsar tribute, or
shall we not give?” <span id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611) So that
they were breathing anger, and travailing with a plot against Him, yet
they feigned respect.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p21"></span>What then saith He? “Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites?” Seest thou how He talks with them with more than usual
severity? For since their wickedness was now complete and manifest, He
cuts the deeper, first confounding and silencing them, by publishing
their secret thoughts, and making it manifest to all with what kind of
intent they are coming unto Him.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p22"></span>And these things He did, repulsing their
wickedness, so that they might not suffer hurt in attempting the same
things again. And yet their words were full of much respect, for they
both called Him Master, and bore witness to His truth, and that He was
no respecter of persons; but being God, He was deceived by none of these
things. Wherefore they also ought to have conjectured, that the rebuke
was not the result of conjecture, but a sign of His knowing their secret
thoughts.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p23"></span>2. He stopped not, however, at the
rebuke, although it was enough merely to have convicted them of their
purpose, and to have put them to shame for their wickedness; but He
stoppeth not at this, but in another way closes their mouths; for, “Shew
me,” saith He, “the tribute money.” And when they had shown it, as He
ever doth, by their tongue He brings out the decision, and causes them
to decide, that it is lawful; which was a clear and plain victory. So
that, when He asks, not from ignorance doth He ask, but because it is
His will to cause them to be bound by their own answers. For when, on
being asked, “Whose is the image?” they said, “Cæsar’s;” He saith,
“Render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar’s.” <span
id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612) For this is not to give but to
render, and this He shows both by the image, and by the superscription.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p25"></span>Then that they might not say, Thou art
subjecting us to men, He added, “And unto God the things that are
God’s.” For it is possible both to fulfill to men their claims and to
give unto God the things that are due to God from us. Wherefore Paul
also saith, “Render unto all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear.” <span
id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p27"></span>But thou, when thou hearest, “Render
unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar’s,” know that He is speaking only
of those things, which are no detriment to godliness; since if it be any
such thing as this, such a thing is no longer Cæsar’s tribute, but the
devil’s.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p28"></span>When they heard these things, their
mouths were stopped, and they “marvelled” at His wisdom. Ought they not
then to have believed, ought they not to have been amazed. For indeed,
He gave them proof of His Godhead, by revealing the secrets of their
hearts, and with gentleness did He silence them.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p29"></span>What then? did they believe? By no
means, but they “left Him, and went their way;” and after them, “came to
Him the Sadducees.”

<span id="iii.LXVII-p30"></span>O folly! When the others had been put to
silence, these made the attack, when they ought to have been the more
backward. But such is the nature of rashness, shameless, and
importunate, and attempting things impossible. Therefore the evangelist
also, amazed at their folly, signified this very thing, by saying, “On
that day came to Him.” <span id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614) On
that day. On what day? In which He had convicted their craftiness, and
put them to shame. But who are these? A sect of the Jews dif <span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span id="iii.LXVII-Page_410"></span> ferent
from the Pharisees, and much worse than they, who said, “that there is
no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit.” <span
id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615) For these were some of a grosser
sort, and eager after the things of the body. For there were many sects
even amongst the Jews. Wherefore Paul also saith, “I am a Pharisee, of
the strictest sect amongst us.” <span
id="fr_2616"></span>[2617](#fn_2616)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p34"></span>And they say nothing indeed directly
about a resurrection; but they feign a story, and make up a case, which,
as I suppose, never so much as had an existence; thinking to drive Him
to perplexity, and desiring to overthrow both things, both the existence
of a resurrection, and of such a resurrection.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p35"></span>And again, these too attack Him with a
show of moderation, saying, “Master, Moses said, If a man die, not
having children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed
unto his brother. Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first,
when he had married a wife, deceased; and, having no issue, <span
id="fr_2617"></span>[2618](#fn_2617) left his wife unto his brother.
Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. And last of
all the woman died also. Therefore, in the resurrection, whose wife
shall she be of the seven?” <span id="fr_2618"></span>[2619](#fn_2618)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p38"></span>See Him answering these like a teacher.
For though out of craft they came unto Him, yet was their question
rather one of ignorance. Therefore neither doth He say unto them, “Ye
hypocrites.”

<span id="iii.LXVII-p39"></span>Moreover, in order that He might not
blame, saying, “Wherefore had seven one wife?” they add the authority of
Moses; although, as I have said before, it was a fiction, in my judgment
at least. For the third would not have taken her, when he saw the two
bridegrooms dead; or if the third, yet not the fourth or the fifth; and
if even these, much more the sixth or the seventh would not have come
unto the woman, but have shrunk from her. For such is the nature of the
Jews. For if now many have this feeling, much more then had they; when
at least, even without this, they often avoided marrying in this way,
and that when the law was constraining them. Thus, at any rate, Ruth,
that Moabitish woman, was thrust off to him that was further off from
her kindred; and Tamar too was thus compelled to obtain, by stealth,
seed from her husband’s kinsman.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p40"></span>And wherefore did they not feign two or
three, but seven? In order the more abundantly to bring derision, as
they thought, upon the resurrection. Wherefore they further say, “they
all had her,” as driving Him into some difficulty.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p41"></span>What then saith Christ? He replies unto
both, as taking His stand not against the words, but the purpose, and on
every occasion revealing the secrets of their hearts; and at one time
exposing them, at another time leaving the refutation of them that
question Him to their conscience. See, at any rate here, how He proves
both points, as well that there will be a resurrection, as that it will
not be such a resurrection as they suspect.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p42"></span>For what saith He? “Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.” <span
id="fr_2619"></span>[2620](#fn_2619) For since, as if they knew them,
they put forward Moses and the law, He shows that this question is that
of men very ignorant of the Scriptures. For hence also arose their
tempting Him, from their being ignorant of the Scriptures, and from
their not knowing the power of God as they ought.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p44"></span>“For what marvel then is it,” He saith,
“if ye tempt me, who am as yet unknown to you, when at least ye know not
so much as the power of God, of which ye have had so much experience,
and neither from common sense nor from the Scriptures have become
acquainted with it;” if indeed even common sense causes us to know this,
that to God all things are possible. And in the first place He answers
to the question asked. For since this was the cause for their not
believing a resurrection, that they think the order of things is like
this, He cures the cause, then the symptom also (for thence arose the
disease too), and shows the manner of the resurrection. “For in the
resurrection,” saith He, “they neither marry, nor are given in marriage,
but are as angels of God in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2620"></span>[2621](#fn_2620) But Luke saith, “As Sons of
God.” <span id="fr_2621"></span>[2622](#fn_2621)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p47"></span>If then they marry not, the question is
vain. But not because they do not marry, therefore are they angels, but
because they are as angels, therefore they do not marry. By this He
removed many other difficulties also, all which things Paul intimated by
one word, saying, “For the fashion of this world passeth away.” <span
id="fr_2622"></span>[2623](#fn_2622)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p49"></span>And by these words He declared how great
a thing the resurrection is; and that moreover there is a resurrection,
He proves. And indeed this too was demonstrated at the same time by what
He had said, nevertheless over and above He adds again to His word by
what He saith now. For neither at their question only did He stop, but
at their <span id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="iii.LXVII-Page_411"></span> thought. Thus when they are not dealing
with great craft, but are asking in ignorance, He teaches even over and
above, but when it is of wickedness only, not even to their question
doth He answer.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p50"></span>And again by Moses doth He stop their
mouths, since they too had brought forward Moses; and He saith, “But as
touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God
of the dead, but of the living.” <span
id="fr_2623"></span>[2624](#fn_2623) Not of them that are not His
meaning is, and that are utterly blotted out, and are to rise no more.
For He said not, I was, but, I am; of them that are, and them that live.
For like as Adam, although he lived on the day that he ate of the tree,
died in the sentence: even so also these, although they had died, lived
in the promise of the resurrection.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p52"></span>How then doth He say elsewhere, “That He
might be Lord both of the dead and of the living?” <span
id="fr_2624"></span>[2625](#fn_2624) But this is not contrary to that.
For here He speaks of the dead, who are also themselves to live. And
moreover too, “I am the God of Abraham,” is another thing from, “That He
might be Lord both of the dead and of the living.” He knew of another
death too, concerning which He saith, “Let the dead bury their
dead.” <span id="fr_2625"></span>[2626](#fn_2625)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p55"></span>“And when the multitudes heard this,
they were astonished at His doctrine.” <span
id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626) Yet not even here the Sadducees;
but these go away defeated, while the impartial multitude reap the
benefit.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p57"></span>Since then the resurrection is like
this, come let us do all things, that we may obtain the first honors
there. But, if ye will, let us show you some even before the
resurrection here pursuing and reaping these blessings, again having
made our resort to the deserts. For again will I enter upon the same
discourse, since I see you listening with more pleasure.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p58"></span>Let us behold then to-day also the
spiritual camps, let us behold their pleasure unalloyed with fear. For
not with spears are they encamped like the soldiers, for at this point I
lately ended my discourse, neither with shields and breastplates; but
bare of all these wilt thou see them, yet achieving such things, as not
even with arms do they.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p59"></span>And if thou art able to observe, come
and stretch forth thy hand to me, and let us go unto this war, both of
us, and let us see their battle array. For these too fight every day,
and slay their adversaries, and conquer all the lusts that are plotting
against us; and thou wilt see these cast out on the ground, and not able
so much as to struggle, but proving by very deed that saying of the
apostle, “They that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.” <span id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627)

<span id="iii.LXVII-p61"></span>Seest thou a multitude of dead lying
there, slain by the sword of the Spirit? Therefore in that place is no
drunkenness nor gluttony. And their table proves it, and the trophy that
is set thereon. For drunkenness and gluttony lie dead, put to the rout
by the drinking of water, though this be multiform, and a many-headed
monster. For like as in the fabled Scylla and Hydra, so in drunkenness
may one see many heads, on one side fornication growing up, on another
wrath; on one hand sloth, on another lawless lusts; but all these things
are taken away. And yet all those other armies, though they get the
better in ten thousand wars, are taken captive by these; and neither
arms, nor spears, nor whatever else there may be, is able to stand
against these phalanxes; but the very giants, the heroes, those that do
countless brave deeds, thou wilt find without bonds bound by sleep and
drunkenness, without slaughter or wounds lying like the wounded, or
rather in more grievous case. For those at least struggle; but these do
not even this, but straightway give up.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p62"></span>Seest thou that this host is greater and
more to be admired? For the enemies that got the better of the others it
destroys by its mere will. For they do so weaken the mother of all their
evils, that she cannot even trouble them any more; and the leader being
overthrown, and the head removed, the rest of the body also lies still.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p63"></span>And this victory one may see each of
them, that abide there, achieving. For it is not as in these wars of
ours, where, if any enemy hath received a blow from one, he is no more
grievous to another, having been once overthrown; but it is necessary
for all to smite this monster; and he that hath not smitten and
overthrown her, is surely troubled by her.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p64"></span>Seest thou a glorious victory? For such
a trophy as the hosts in all parts of the world having met together have
not power to erect, this each one of those men erects; and all things
that from the army of drunkenness lie mingled together wounded,
delirious words of frenzy, insane thoughts, unpleasing haughtiness. And
they imitate their own Lord, at whom the Scripture marvelling saith, “He
shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall He lift up the
head.” <span id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628)

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="iii.LXVII-Page_412"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p66"></span>Would ye see also another multitude of
dead? Let us see the lusts that arise from luxurious living, those that
are cherished by the makers of sauces, by the cooks, the furnishers of
feasts, the confectioners. For I am ashamed indeed to speak of all;
however, I will tell of the birds from Phasis, the soups that are mixed
from various things: the moist, the dry dishes, the laws made about
these things. For like as if ordering some city and marshalling hosts,
even so these too make laws, and ordain such a thing first, and such a
thing second, and some bring in first birds roasted on the embers,
filled within with fish; and others make of other material the
beginnings of these unlawful feasts; and there is much rivalry about
these things, about quality, and about order, and about quantity; and
they take a pride in the things, for which they ought to bury themselves
for shame; some saying that they have spent the half of the day, some
all of it, some that they have added the night too. Behold, O wretched
man, the measure of thy belly, and be ashamed of thy unmeasured
earnestness!

<span id="iii.LXVII-p67"></span>But there is nothing like this amongst
those angels; but all these desires also are dead. For their meals are
not unto fullness, and unto luxurious living, but unto necessity. No
bird hunters are there, no fishermen, but bread and water. But this
confusion, and the disturbance, and the turmoils, are all removed from
thence, alike from the house and from the body, and great is the haven,
but amongst these great the tempest.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p68"></span>Burst open now in thought the belly of
them who feed on such things, and thou wilt see the vast refuse, and the
unclean channel, and the whited sepulchre.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p69"></span>But what come after these I am even
ashamed to tell, the disagreeable eructations, the vomitings, the
discharges downwards and upwards.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p70"></span>But go and see even these desires dead
there, and those more violent lusts that spring from these; I mean,
those of impurity. For these too thou wilt see all overthrown, with
their horses, with their beasts of burden. For the beast of burden, and
the weapon, and the horse of a filthy deed, is a filthy word. But thou
wilt see such like horse and rider together, and their weapons thrown
down; but here quite the contrary, and souls cast down dead. But not at
their meal only is the victory of these holy men glorious, but in the
other things also, in money, in glory, in envy, in all diseases of the
soul.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p71"></span>Surely does not this host seem to thee
mightier than that, and the meal better? Nay, who will gainsay it? None,
not even of those persons themselves, though he be very mad. For this
guides us on to Heaven, that drags to hell; this the devil lays out,
that Christ; for this luxury gives laws, and intemperance, for that
self-denial and sobriety, here Christ is present, there the devil. For
where there is drunkenness, the devil is there; where there are filthy
words, where there is surfeiting, there the devils hold their choirs.
Such a table had that rich man, therefore not even of a drop of water
was he master.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p72"></span>But these have not such a table, but
they already practise the ways of the angels. They marry not, they are
not given in marriage, neither do they sleep excessively, nor live
luxuriously, but except a few things they are even bodiless.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p73"></span>Now who is there that so easily
overcomes his enemies as he that sets up a trophy while at his dinner?
Therefore also the prophet saith, “Thou hast prepared a table before me,
in the presence of them that trouble me.” <span
id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629) One could not be wrong in repeating
this oracle about this table. For nothing so troubles a soul as
disorderly concupiscence, and luxury, and drunkenness, and the evils
that spring from these; and this they know full well who have had
experience thereof.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p75"></span>And if thou wast to learn also, whence
this table is procured, and whence that; then thou wouldest see well the
difference between each. Whence then is this procured. From countless
tears, from widows defrauded, from orphans despoiled; but the other from
honest labor. And this table is like to a fair and well-favored woman,
needing nothing external, but having her beauty from nature; but that to
some ugly and ill-favored harlot, wearing much paint, but not able to
disguise her deformity, but the nearer she is, the more convicted. For
this too, when it is nearer to him that is at it, then shows its
ugliness more. For look not I tell thee, at the banqueters, as they come
only, but also as they go away, and then thou wilt see its ugliness. For
that, as being free, suffers them that come unto it to say nothing
shameful; but this nothing seemly, as being a harlot, and dishonored.
This seeks the profit of him that is at it, that the hurt. And one
permits not to offend God, the other permits not but that we must offend
Him.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p76"></span>Let us go away therefore unto those men.
Thence we shall learn with how many bonds we are encompassed. Thence
shall we learn to set before ourselves a table full of countless
blessings, most sweet, without cost, delivered from care, free from envy
and jeal <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="iii.LXVII-Page_413"></span> ousy and every disease, and full of good
hope, and having its many trophies. No turmoil of soul there, no sorrow,
no wrath; all is calm, all is peace.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p77"></span>For tell me not of the silence of them
that serve in the houses of the rich, but of the clamor of them that
dine; I mean, not that which they make one to another (for this too is
worthy of derision), but that within, that in the soul, that brings on
them a great captivity, the tumults of the thoughts, the sleet, the
darkness, the tempest, by which all things are mingled and confused, and
are like to some night battle. But not in the monks’ tents are such
things as these; but great is the calm, great the quietness. And that
table is succeeded by a sleep that is like death, but this by sobriety
and wakefulness; that by punishment, this by the kingdom of heaven, and
the immortal rewards.

<span id="iii.LXVII-p78"></span>This then let us follow, that we may
enjoy also the fruits thereof; unto which God grant we may all attain,
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ to whom be
glory and might world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[408:2607](1100075.htm#fr_2606) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p7"></span>[Matt.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017)<span id="iii.LXVII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[408:2608](1100075.htm#fr_2607) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p9"></span>[Acts
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037)<span id="iii.LXVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2608"></span>[408:2609](1100075.htm#fr_2608) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p10"></span>[Matt.
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025)<span id="iii.LXVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2609"></span>[408:2610](1100075.htm#fr_2609) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p14"></span>[John
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012), [John
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048), [John
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span
id="iii.LXVII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[409:2611](1100075.htm#fr_2610) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p16"></span>[Matt. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[409:2612](1100075.htm#fr_2611) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p20"></span>[Mark xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[409:2613](1100075.htm#fr_2612) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p24"></span>[Matt.
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXVII-p24.1"></span>.
\[Abridged.\]

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[409:2614](1100075.htm#fr_2613) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p26"></span>[Rom. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXVII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[409:2615](1100075.htm#fr_2614) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p31"></span>[Matt.
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXVII-p31.1"></span>.
\[The article may not form part of the citation. It does not occur in
the New Testament passage.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[410:2616](1100075.htm#fr_2615) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p32"></span>[Acts xxiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXVII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2616"></span>[410:2617](1100075.htm#fr_2616) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p33"></span>[Acts
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006), [Acts
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#005)<span
id="iii.LXVII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2617"></span>[410:2618](1100075.htm#fr_2617) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p36"></span>\[R.V., “seed.”\]

<span id="fn_2618"></span>[410:2619](1100075.htm#fr_2618) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p37"></span>[Matt. xxii.
24-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#024)<span
id="iii.LXVII-p37.1"></span>. \[With the trifling variations the Greek
of these verses agrees with the received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2619"></span>[410:2620](1100075.htm#fr_2619) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p43"></span>[Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXVII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2620"></span>[410:2621](1100075.htm#fr_2620) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p45"></span>[Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXVII-p45.1"></span>.
\[The second verb is peculiar, but conveys the same sense as the
received text.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2621"></span>[410:2622](1100075.htm#fr_2621) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p46"></span>[Luke xx.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span id="iii.LXVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2622"></span>[410:2623](1100075.htm#fr_2622) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p48"></span>[1 Cor. vii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="iii.LXVII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2623"></span>[411:2624](1100075.htm#fr_2623) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p51"></span>[Matt.
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span id="iii.LXVII-p51.1"></span>.
\[In the last clause the text differs from the received, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXVII-p51.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXVII-p51.3"></span>θε</span> being omitted
(so Tischendorf). The R.V. follows a slightly different reading: “God is
not the God,” etc.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2624"></span>[411:2625](1100075.htm#fr_2624) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p53"></span>[Rom. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXVII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2625"></span>[411:2626](1100075.htm#fr_2625) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p54"></span>[Matt. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXVII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[411:2627](1100075.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p56"></span>[Matt. xxii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#033)<span id="iii.LXVII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[411:2628](1100075.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p60"></span>[Gal. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)<span id="iii.LXVII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[411:2629](1100075.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p65"></span>[Ps. cx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXVII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[412:2630](1100075.htm#fr_2629) <span
id="iii.LXVII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXVII-p74"></span>[Ps. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXVII-p74.1"></span>.
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXVII-p74.2"></span>LXX</span>.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXVIII](1100076)
