[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100079)  [Next](1100081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.LXXII"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXV.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p2.1"></span>[Matt.
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p3"></span>*“And Jesus went out from the temple, and
departed.* <span id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736) *And His disciples
came to Him to show Him the buildings of the temple. And He answered and
said unto them, See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you,
there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be
thrown down.”*

<span id="iii.LXXII-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p5.1"></span>For</span> inasmuch as He said, “Your house
is left desolate,” and had previously forewarned them of many grievous
things; therefore the disciples having heard these things, as though
marvelling at it, came unto Him, showing the beauty of the temple, and
wondering, if so much beauty was to be destroyed, and materials so
costly, and variety of workmanship past utterance; He no longer
thenceforth talks to them of desolation merely, but foretells an entire
destruction. “See ye not all these things,” saith He, and do ye marvel,
and are ye amazed? “There shall not remain one stone upon another.” How
then did it remain? one may say. But what is this? For neither so hath
the prediction fallen to the ground. For He said these things either
indicating its entire desolation, or at that spot where He was. For
there are parts of it destroyed unto the foundations.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p6"></span>And together with its we would say
another thing also, that from what hath been done, even the most
contentious ought to believe concerning the remains, that they are
utterly to be destroyed.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p7"></span>“And as He sat upon the mount of Olives,
the disciples came unto Him privately, saying, Tell us when shall these
things be? and what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of
the world?” <span id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p9"></span>Therefore did they come unto Him
privately, as it was of such matters they meant to inquire. For they
were in travail to know the day of His coming, because of their eager
desire to behold that glory, which is the cause of countless blessings.
And these two things do they ask him, when shall these things be? that
is, the overthrow of the temple; and, what is the sign of thy coming?
But Luke saith, <span id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) the question
was one concerning Jerusalem, as though they were supposing that then is
His coming. And Mark saith, that neither did all of them ask concerning
the end of Jerusalem, but Peter and John, <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739) as having greater freedom of
speech.

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span id="iii.LXXII-Page_433"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p12"></span>What then saith He? “Take heed that no
man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ,
and shall deceive many. <span id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) And
ye shall hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that ye be not troubled;
for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet.” <span
id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p15"></span>For since they felt as being told of
vengeance falling on others when hearing of that which was to be brought
upon Jerusalem and as though they were to be out of the turmoils, and
were dreaming of good things only, and looked for these to befall them
quite immediately; for this cause He again foretells to them grievous
things, making them earnest, and commanding them on two grounds to
watch, so as neither to be seduced by the deceit of them that would
beguile them, nor to be overpowered by the violence of ills that should
overtake them.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p16"></span>For the war, saith He, shall be twofold
that of the deceivers, and that of the enemies, but the former far more
grievous, as coming upon them in the confusion and turmoils, and when
men were terrified and troubled. For indeed great was the storm then,
when the Roman power was beginning to flourish, and cities were taken,
and camps and weapons were set in motion, and many were readily
believed.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p17"></span>But of wars in Jerusalem is He speaking;
for it is not surely of those without, and everywhere in the world; for
what did they care for these? And besides, He would thus say nothing
new, if He were speaking of the calamities of the world at large, which
are happening always. For before this, were wars, and tumults, and
fightings; but He speaks of the Jewish wars coming upon them at no great
distance, for henceforth the Roman arms were a matter of anxiety. Since
then these things also were sufficient to confound them, He foretells
them all.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p18"></span>Then to show that He Himself also will
assail the Jews with them, and war on them, He speaks not of battles
only, but also of plagues sent from God, famines, and pestilences, and
earthquakes, showing that the wars also He Himself permitted to come
upon them, and that these things do not happen for no purpose according
to what has been before the accustomed course of things amongst men, but
proceed from the wrath on high.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p19"></span>Therefore He saith, they shall come not
by themselves or at once, but with signs. For that the Jews may not say,
that they who then believed were the authors of these evils, therefore
hath He told them also of the cause of their coming upon them. “For
verily I say unto you,” He said before, “all these things shall come
upon this generation,” having made mention of the stain of blood on
them.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p20"></span>Then lest on hearing of the showers of
evils, they should suppose the gospel to be broken through, He added,
“See, <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742) be not troubled, for
all things must come to pass,” *i.e.* which I foretold, and the approach
of the temptations will set aside none of the things which I have said;
but there shall indeed be tumults and confusion, but nothing shall shake
my predictions.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p22"></span>Then since He had said to the Jews, “Ye
shall not see me, till ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the
name of the Lord;” and the disciples supposed that together with the
destruction would be the end also; to set right this secret thought of
theirs, He said, “But the end is not yet.” For that they did suspect
even as I said, you may learn from their question. For, what did they
ask? When shall these things be? *i.e*. when shall Jerusalem be
destroyed? And what is the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the
world?

<span id="iii.LXXII-p23"></span>But He answered nothing directly to this
question, but first speaks of those other things that are urgent, and
which it was needful for them to learn first. For neither concerning
Jerusalem straightway, nor of His own second coming, did He speak, but
touching the ills that were to meet them at the doors. Wherefore also He
makes them earnest in their exertions, by saying, “Take heed that no man
deceive you; <span id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) for many shall
come in my name, saying, I am Christ.”

<span id="iii.LXXII-p25"></span>Afterwards, when He hath roused them to
listen about these things (for, “take heed,” saith He, “that no man
deceive you”); <span id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) and having
made them energetic, and prepared them to be watchful, and hath spoken
first of the false Christs, then He speaks of the ills of Jerusalem,
assuring them ever by the things already past, foolish and contentious
though they were, of those which were yet to come.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p27"></span>2. But by “wars and rumors of wars,” He
meaneth, what I before said, the troubles coming upon them. After this,
because, as I have already said, they supposed after that war the end
would come, see how He warns them, saying, “But the end is not yet. For
nation,” He saith, “shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom.” <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745) Of the <span
id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span id="iii.LXXII-Page_434"></span>
preludes to the ills of the Jews doth He speak. “All these are the
beginning of sorrows,” <span id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746) that
is, of those that befall them. “Then shall they deliver you up to be
afflicted, and shall kill you.” <span
id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p31"></span>In good season did He introduce their
ills, having a consolation from the common miseries; and not in this way
only, but also by His adding, that it is “for my name’s sake. For ye
shall be hated,” He saith, “of all men for my name’s sake. Then shall
many be offended, and shall betray one another, and many false Christs
and false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. And because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; but he that
shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p33"></span>This is the greater evil, when the war
is intestine too, for there were many false brethren. Seest thou the war
to be threefold? from the deceivers, from the enemies, from the false
brethren. See Paul too lamenting over the same things, and saying,
“Without were fightings, within were fears;” <span
id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749) and, “perils among false
brethren,” <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750) and again, “For
such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the apostles of Christ.” <span id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p37"></span>After this again, what is more grievous
than all, they shall not have so much as the consolation from love. Then
indicating, that these things will in no degree harm the noble and the
firm, He saith, Fear not, neither be troubled. For if ye show forth the
patience that becomes you, the dangers will not prevail over you. And it
is a plain proof of this, that the word shall surely be preached
everywhere in the world, so much shall ye be above the things that alarm
you. For, that they may not say, how then shall we live? He said more,
Ye shall both live and preach everywhere. Therefore He added moreover,
“And this gospel shall be preached in the whole world for a witness to
all nations, and then shall the end come,” <span
id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) of the downfall of Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p39"></span>For in proof that He meant this, and
that before the taking of Jerusalem the gospel was preached, hear what
Paul saith, “Their sound went into all the earth;” <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753) and again, “The gospel which was
preached to every creature which is under Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754) And seest thou him running from
Jerusalem unto Spain? And if one took so large a portion, consider what
the rest also wrought. For writing to others also, Paul again saith
concerning the gospel, that “it is bringing forth fruit, and growing up
in every creature which is under Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p43"></span>But what meaneth, “For a witness to all
nations?” Forasmuch as though it was everywhere preached, yet it was not
everywhere believed. It was for a witness, He saith, to them that were
disbelieving, that is, for conviction, for accusation, for a testimony;
for they that believed will bear witness against them that believed not,
and will condemn them. And for this cause, after the gospel is preached
in every part of the world, Jerusalem is destroyed, that they may not
have so much as a shadow of an excuse for their perverseness. For they
that saw His power shine throughout every place, and in an instant take
the world captive, what excuse could they then have for continuing in
the same perverseness? For in proof that it was everywhere preached at
that time, hear what Paul saith, “of the gospel which was preached to
every creature which is under Heaven.” <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p45"></span>Which also is a very great sign of
Christ’s power, that in twenty or at most thirty years the word had
reached the ends of the world. “After this therefore,” saith He, “shall
come the end of Jerusalem.” For that He intimates this was manifested by
what follows.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p46"></span>For He brought in also a prophecy, to
confirm their desolation, saying, “But when ye shall see the abomination
of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy
place, let him that readeth understand.” <span
id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) He referred them to Daniel. And by
“abomination” He meaneth the statue of him who then took the city, which
he who desolated the city and the temple placed within the temple,
wherefore Christ calleth it, “of desolation.” Moreover, in order that
they might learn that these things will be while some of them are alive,
therefore He said, “When ye see the abomination of desolation.”

<span id="iii.LXXII-p48"></span>3. Whence one may most marvel at
Christ’s power, and their courage, for that they preached in such times,
in which most especially the Jewish state was warred against, in which
most especially men regarded them as movers of sedition, when Cæsar
commanded all of them to be driven away. <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758) And the result was the same as if
any one (when the sea was stirred up on every side, and darkness was
filling all the air, and successive shipwrecks taking place, and when
all their <span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="iii.LXXII-Page_435"></span> fellow-sailors were at strife above, and
monsters were rising up from beneath, and with the waves devouring the
mariners, and thunderbolts falling, and their being pirates, and those
in the vessel plotting one against another), were to command men
inexperienced in sailing, and who had not so much as seen the sea to sit
at the rudder, and to guide and fight the vessel, and when an immense
fleet was coming against them with a great array, making use of a single
bark, with her crew in this disturbed state, to sink and subdue the
fleet. For indeed by the heathens they were hated as Jews, and by the
Jews were stoned, as waging war against their laws; and nowhere could
they stand.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p50"></span>Thus were all things, precipices, and
reefs, and rocks, the things in the cities, the things in the fields,
the things in the houses, and every single person was at war with them;
generals and rulers, and private persons, and all nations, and all
people, and a turmoil which cannot be set forth by words. For the Jewish
race was exceedingly detestable to the government of the Romans, as
having occasioned them endless trouble; and not even from this did the
preaching of the word take hurt; but the city was stormed and set on
fire, and involved its inhabitants in countless evils; but the apostles
that came from thence, introducing new laws, prevailed even over the
Romans.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p51"></span>O strange and wonderful facts! Countless
myriads of Jews did the Romans then subdue, and they did not prevail
over twelve men fighting against them naked and unarmed. What language
can set forth this miracle? For they that teach need to have these two
things, to be worthy of credit, and to be beloved by them whom they are
instructing; and together with these, and besides them, that their
sayings should be easy of reception, and the time should be free from
trouble and tumults.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p52"></span>But then were all the contraries to
these. For while they did not seem worthy of credit, they were
withdrawing from such as did seem worthy of it, those who had been
deceived by them. So far from being loved, they were even hated, and
were taking men away from what they loved, both habits, and hereditary
customs, and laws.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p53"></span>Again, their injunctions had great
difficulty; but the things, from which they were withdrawing men, much
pleasure. And many were the perils, many the deaths, both themselves and
they that obeyed them underwent, and together with all this, the time
also occasioned them much difficulty, teeming with wars, tumults,
disturbance, so that, even if there had been none of the things we have
mentioned, it would have quite thrown all things into confusion.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p54"></span>We have good occasion to say, “Who shall
tell the mighty works of the Lord, and make all His praises to be
heard.” <span id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) For if his own people
amid signs hearkened not to Moses, because of the clay only, and the
bricks; who persuaded these that every day were beaten and slain, and
were suffering incurable evils, to leave a quiet life, and to prefer
thereto this which was teeming with blood and death, and that when they
who preached it were strangers to them, and very hostile in every way?
For I say not unto nations and cities and people, but into a small house
let one bring in him that is hated of all that are in the house, and by
him endeavor to bring them away from those whom they love, from father,
and wife, and child, will he not surely be seen torn in pieces, before
he hath opened his mouth? And if there be added moreover a tumult and
strife of husband and wife in the house, will they not stone him to
death before he steps on the threshold? And if he also be one whom they
may readily despise, and who enjoins galling things, and commands them
who are living in luxury to practise self restraint, and together with
this the conflict be against those who are far more in numbers and who
excel him, is it not quite manifest that he will be utterly destroyed?
Yet nevertheless, this, which is impossible to be done in one house,
this hath Christ accomplished in all the world, through precipices and
furnaces, and ravines, and rocks, and land and sea at war with Him,
bringing in the healers of the world.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p56"></span>And if thou art minded to learn these
things more distinctly, I mean, the famines, the pestilences, the
earthquakes, the other calamities, peruse the history about these things
composed by Josephus, and thou wilt know all accurately. Therefore
Himself too said, “Be not troubled, for all must be;” and, “He that
endureth to the end, the same shall be saved;” and, “The gospel shall
surely be preached in all the world.” For when weakened and faint at the
fear of what had been said, He braces them up by saying, Though ten
thousand things be done, the gospel must be preached in every part of
the world, and then shall the end come.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p57"></span>4. Seest thou in what a state things
were then, and how manifold was the war? And this is the beginning, when
each of the things to be effected most required quiet. In what state
then were they? for nothing hinders us <span id="page_436">p. 436</span>
<span id="iii.LXXII-Page_436"></span> from resuming the same things
again. The first war was that of the deceivers; “For there shall come,”
He saith, “false Christs and false prophets:” the second, that of the
Romans, “For ye shall hear,” He saith, “of wars:” the third, that which
bringeth on the “famines:” the fourth, “the pestilences” and “the
earthquakes:” the fifth, “they shall deliver you into afflictions:” the
sixth, “ye shall be hated of all men:” the seventh, “They shall betray
one another, and hate one another” (an intestine war doth He here make
known); then, “false Christs,” and false brethren; then, “the love of
the most <span id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) shall wax cold,”
which is the cause of all the ills.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p59"></span>Seest thou numberless kinds of war, new
and strange? Yet nevertheless in the midst of these things, and much
more (for with the intestine wars was mingled also that of kinsmen), the
gospel prevailed over the whole earth. “For the gospel,” He saith,
“shall be preached in the whole world.”

<span id="iii.LXXII-p60"></span>Where then are they who set up the power
of a nativity and the cycle of times against the doctrines of the
church? For who has ever recorded that another Christ appeared; that
such a thing took place? Although they falsely affirm other things, that
ten myriads of years passed, yet this they cannot even feign. Of what
kind of cycle then would ye speak? For there was never another Sodom,
nor another Gomorrah, nor another flood. How long do ye trifle, talking
of a cycle and nativity?

<span id="iii.LXXII-p61"></span>How then, it is said, do many of the
things they say come to pass? Because thou hast bereaved thyself of the
help God bestows, and didst betray thyself, and didst place thyself
without His providence; therefore doth the evil spirit turn and twist
about thy matters as he will.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p62"></span>But not so among the saints, or rather
not even amongst us sinners, who utterly despise it. For although our
practice is beyond endurance, yet because by God’s grace we cling with
much exactness to the doctrines of the truth, we are above the malice of
the evil spirits.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p63"></span>And altogether, what is a nativity?
nothing else than injustice, and confusion, and that all things are
borne along at random; or rather not at random only; but more than this,
with folly.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p64"></span>“And if there is not any nativity,
whence is such a one rich? whence is such a one poor?”

<span id="iii.LXXII-p65"></span>I know not: for in this way I will for a
time reason with thee, instructing thee not to be curious about all
things; neither in consequence of this to go on at random and rashly.
For neither because thou art ignorant of this, oughtest thou to feign
the things that are not. It is better to be ignorant well, than to learn
ill. For he that knoweth not the cause, will come soon to the right one;
but he who because he does not know the real cause, feigns one that is
untrue, will not be able easily to receive the real; but he needs more
both of labors and toil, in order to take away the former. For indeed on
a tablet, if it have been wiped smooth, any one may easily write what he
will, but when it is written upon, no longer in the same way, for we
must first wipe out what has been ill written. And amongst physicians
again, he that applies nothing, is far better than he that applies
hurtful things; and he who builds unsoundly, is worse than he who doth
not so much as build at all; like as the land is far better that bears
nothing, than that which bears thorns.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p66"></span>Let us not then be impatient to learn
all things, but let us endure to be even ignorant of some things, that
when we have found a teacher, we may not afford him double toil. Or
rather many oftentimes have remained even incurably diseased, by
carelessly entangling themselves in evil opinions. For neither is the
toil the same to pluck up first what hath taken root amiss, and then to
sow, as to plant a clear ground. For in that case, he must overthrow
first, and then put in other things; but in this, the hearing is ready.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p67"></span>Whence then is such a one rich? I will
say, now; many acquire wealth, by God’s gift; and many by His
permission. For this is the short and simple account.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p68"></span>What then? it is said, doth He make the
whoremongers to be rich, and the adulterers, and him that hath abused
himself with mankind, and him that hath made a bad use of his
possessions? He doth not make them, but permits them to be rich; and
great is the difference, and quite infinite between making and
permitting. But wherefore doth He suffer it at all? Because it is not
yet the time for judgment, that every one may receive according to his
merits.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p69"></span>For what more worthless than that rich
man, who giveth not to Lazarus so much as of his crumbs? Nevertheless,
he was more wretched than all, for he came to be possessed not even of a
drop of water, and for this very cause most especially, that being rich
he was cruel. For if there are two <span id="page_437">p. 437</span>
<span id="iii.LXXII-Page_437"></span> wicked men, who have not had the
same portion here, but one in wealth, the other in poverty, they will
not be similarly punished there, but the wealthier more grievously.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p70"></span>5. Dost thou not see at least even this
man, suffering more fearfully because he had “received his good things?”
Do thou also therefore, when thou seest in prosperity one who is become
rich by injustice, groan, weep; for indeed this wealth is to him an
addition of punishment. For like as they who sin much, and are not
minded to repent, treasure up to themselves a treasure of wrath; even so
they, who, besides not being punished, are even enjoying prosperity,
will undergo the greater punishment.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p71"></span>And the proof of this, if thou wilt, I
will show thee, not from the things to come only, but also from the
present life. For the blessed David, when he sinned that sin of
Bathsheba, and was convicted by the prophet, for this cause most of all
was he more severely reproved, that even when he had enjoyed such
security, he was like this. Hear at least God upbraiding him with this
especially. “Did not I anoint thee for a king, and delivered thee from
the hand of Saul, and give thee all that pertained to thy master, and
all the house of Israel and Judah, and if it had been little for thee, I
would have added thus and thus; and wherefore hast thou done that which
was evil in my sight?” <span id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761) For
not for all sins are there the same punishments, but many and diverse,
according to the times, according to the persons, according to their
rank, according to their understanding, according to other things
besides. And that what I say may be more clear, let one sin be set
forth, fornication; and mark how many different punishments I find not
from myself, but from the divine Scriptures. Did any one commit
fornication before the law, he is differently punished; and this Paul
showeth, “For as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish
without law.” <span id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) Did any one
commit fornication after the law? He shall suffer more grievous things.
“For as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the
law.” <span id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) Did any one commit
fornication being a priest, he receives from his dignity a very great
addition to his punishment. So for this cause, whereas the other women
were slain for fornication, the daughters of the priests were burnt; the
lawgiver showing the more amply, how great punishment await the priest
if he commits this sin. For if on the daughter he inflicts a greater
punishment, because of her being a priest’s daughter, much more on the
man himself who bears the priest’s office. Was fornication committed
with any violence? she is even freed from punishment. Did one play the
harlot being rich, and another being poor? Here again also is a
difference. And this is evident from what we have said before concerning
David. Was any one guilty of fornication after Christ’s coming? Should
he depart uninitiated, he will suffer a punishment more sore than all
those. Was any guilty of fornication after the laver? in this case not
even a consolation is left for the sin any more. And this selfsame thing
Paul declared when he said, “He that despised Moses’ law dieth without
mercy, under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment
suppose ye shall he be counted worthy, who hath trodden underfoot the
Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant an unholy thing,
and hath done despite to the grace of the Spirit? <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) Hath any been guilty of
fornication, bearing the priest’s office now? this above all is the
crown of the evil deeds.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p76"></span>Seest thou of one sin how many different
forms? one that before the law, another that after the law, another that
of him who bears the priest’s office; that of the rich woman, and that
of the poor woman, of her that is a catechumen, and of the believing
woman, of the daughter of the priest.

<span id="iii.LXXII-p77"></span>And from the knowledge again great is
the difference; “For he which knew his Lord’s will, and did it not,
shall be beaten with many stripes.” <span
id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765) And to sin after examples bringeth
greater vengeance. Therefore He saith, “But ye, when ye had seen it,
repented not afterwards,” <span id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766)
though ye had had the advantage of much care. Therefore He upbraids
Jerusalem likewise with this saying, “How often would I have gathered
thy children together, and ye would not!” <span
id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p81"></span>And to sin being in luxury, this is
shown by the history of Lazarus. And from the place also the sin becomes
more grievous, which He Himself indicated when He said, “Between the
temple and the altar.” <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p83"></span>And from the equality of the offenses
themselves, “It is not marvellous if one be taken stealing;” <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769) and again, “Thou didst slay thy
sons and thy daughters; this is beyond all thy whoredoms, and thine
abominations.” <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p86"></span>And from the persons again: “If one
<span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span id="iii.LXXII-Page_438"></span>
man sin against another, they shall pray for him; but if he sin against
God, who shall entreat for him?” <span
id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p88"></span>And when any one surpasses in negligence
those who are far inferior; wherewith in Ezekiel He doth charge them,
saying, “Not even according to the judgments of the nations hast thou
done.” <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p90"></span>And when one is not sobered even by the
examples of others, “She saw her sister,” it is said, “and justified
her.” <span id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p92"></span>And when one has had the advantage of
more abundant care; “For if,” He saith, “these mighty works had been
done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago; but it shall
be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for that city.” <span
id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p94"></span>Seest thou perfect exactness, and that
all for the same sins are not paying the same penalty? For moreover when
we have had the benefit of long-suffering, and profit nothing, we shall
endure worse things. And this Paul shows, where he says, “But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up for thyself
wrath.” <span id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775)

<span id="iii.LXXII-p96"></span>Knowing then these things, let us not be
offended, neither let us be confounded at any of the things that happen,
nor bring in upon us the storm of thought, but giving place to God’s
providence, let us give heed to virtue, and flee vice, that we may also
attain to the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom be glory unto the Father
together with the Holy Spirit, now and always, and world without end.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[432:2737](1100080.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p4"></span>\[R.V., “and was going on his way,” to
bring out the force of the imperfect tense.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[432:2738](1100080.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p8"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[432:2739](1100080.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p10"></span>[Luke
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[432:2740](1100080.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p11"></span>See [Mark xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#003)<span id="iii.LXXII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[433:2741](1100080.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p13"></span>\[R.V., “lead you astray,” and “shall
lead many astray.”\]

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[433:2742](1100080.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p14"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004)<span id="iii.LXXII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[433:2743](1100080.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p21"></span>\[The Oxford translator renders “Take
heed,” but <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p21.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p21.2"></span>ρτε</span> is rendered “See” above; so A.V.
and R.V.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[433:2744](1100080.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p24"></span>\[R.V., “lead you astray.”\]

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[433:2745](1100080.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p26"></span>\[R.V., “lead you astray.”\]

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[433:2746](1100080.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p28"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[434:2747](1100080.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p29"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008)<span id="iii.LXXII-p29.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “travail,” birth pangs.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[434:2748](1100080.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p30"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)<span id="iii.LXXII-p30.1"></span>.
\[R.V., “unto tribulation.”\]

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[434:2749](1100080.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p32"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p32.1"></span>. \[In [Matt.
24.9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p32.2"></span>, “all *men*” is substituted for “all the
nations” (<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXII-p32.3"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXII-p32.4"></span>τν θνν</span></span>
omitted); in [Matt. 24.11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p32.5"></span>“many false Christs and” occurs (taken from
[Matt. 24.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p32.6"></span>). The R.V. represents, in other details,
the Greek text of the Homily. In [Matt.
24.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p32.7"></span>, “the many” is the necessary
rendering.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[434:2750](1100080.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p34"></span>[2 Cor. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[434:2751](1100080.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p35"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)<span id="iii.LXXII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[434:2752](1100080.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p36"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013)<span id="iii.LXXII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[434:2753](1100080.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p38"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span id="iii.LXXII-p38.1"></span>.
\[“Of the kingdom” omitted.\]

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[434:2754](1100080.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p40"></span>[Rom. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="iii.LXXII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[434:2755](1100080.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p41"></span>[Col. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXXII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[434:2756](1100080.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p42"></span>[Col.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)<span
id="iii.LXXII-p42.1"></span>\]

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[434:2757](1100080.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p44"></span>[Col. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)<span id="iii.LXXII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[434:2758](1100080.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p47"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)<span id="iii.LXXII-p47.1"></span>.
\[Instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p47.2"></span>ον</span> the particle <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.LXXII-p47.3"></span>δ</span> (as in Mark and
Luke) is found here.\]

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[434:2759](1100080.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p49"></span>[Acts xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXXII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[435:2760](1100080.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p55"></span>[Ps. cvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span id="iii.LXXII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[436:2761](1100080.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p58"></span>\[Only one <span class="c20"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p58.1"></span>ms.</span> inserts <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.LXXII-p58.2"></span>τν πολλν</span> here. Field rejects it. If
accepted, it should be rendered “of the many,” as in the R.V. But
internal reasons are against it. It would naturally be supplied from the
New Testament passage. Moreover, the briefer reading yields a better
sense: “Love shall wax cold, the cause of all these ills.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[437:2762](1100080.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p72"></span>[2 Sam. xii.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[437:2763](1100080.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p73"></span>[Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXXII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[437:2764](1100080.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p74"></span>[Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="iii.LXXII-p74.1"></span>.
\[The article does not occur, either here or in the text of the New
Testament. R.V., “under law” and “by law.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[437:2765](1100080.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p75"></span>[Heb.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span id="iii.LXXII-p75.1"></span>.
\[The last phrase is altered, as indicated in the above rendering.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[437:2766](1100080.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p78"></span>[Luke xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span id="iii.LXXII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[437:2767](1100080.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p79"></span>[Matt. xxi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#032)<span id="iii.LXXII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[437:2768](1100080.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p80"></span>[Luke xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034)<span id="iii.LXXII-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[437:2769](1100080.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p82"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)<span id="iii.LXXII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[437:2770](1100080.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p84"></span>[Prov. vi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030)<span id="iii.LXXII-p84.1"></span>.
\[Most editors supply the remainder of the verse.—R.\]

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[437:2771](1100080.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p85"></span>[Ezek.
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021)<span id="iii.LXXII-p85.1"></span>.
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXII-p85.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[438:2772](1100080.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p87"></span>[1 Sam. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025)<span id="iii.LXXII-p87.1"></span>.
\[<span class="c20"><span id="iii.LXXII-p87.2"></span>LXX</span>. The
Hebrew differs: for the clause “they shall pray for him,” the R.V. has,
“God shall judge him.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[438:2773](1100080.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p89"></span>[Ezek. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007)<span id="iii.LXXII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[438:2774](1100080.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p91"></span>[Ezek. xvi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#051)<span id="iii.LXXII-p91.1"></span>.
\[First half freely cited.\]

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[438:2775](1100080.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p93"></span>[Matt.
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022)<span id="iii.LXXII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[438:2776](1100080.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="iii.LXXII-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.LXXII-p95"></span>[Rom. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="iii.LXXII-p95.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LXXIII](1100081)
