[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1100049)  [Next](1100051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.XLII"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iii.XLII-p1.1"></span>Homily XLII.</span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.XLII-p2.1"></span>[Matt. XII.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#033)<span
id="iii.XLII-p2.2"></span>.</span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p3"></span>“Either make the tree good, and his fruit
good, or else make the tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt; for the tree
is known by his fruit.”

<span id="iii.XLII-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.XLII-p4.1"></span>Again</span> in another way He shames them,
and is not content with His former refutations. But this He doth, not
freeing Himself from accusations, (for what went before was quite
enough), but as wishing to amend them.

<span id="iii.XLII-p5"></span>Now His meaning is like this: none of you
hath either found fault about the persons healed, as not being healed;
nor hath said, that it is an evil thing to deliver one from a devil. For
though they had been ever so shameless, they could not have said this.

<span id="iii.XLII-p6"></span>Since therefore they brought no charge
against the works, but were defaming the Doer of them, He signifies that
this accusation is against both the common modes of reasoning, and the
congruity of the circumstances. A thing of aggravated shamelessness, not
only to interpret maliciously, but also to make up such charges as are
contrary to men’s common notions.

<span id="iii.XLII-p7"></span>And see how free He is from
contentiousness. For He said not, “Make the tree good, forasmuch as the
fruit also is good;” but, most entirely stopping their mouths, and
exhibiting His own considerateness, and their insolence, He saith, Even
if ye are <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span
id="iii.XLII-Page_263"></span> minded to find fault with my works, I
forbid it not at all, only bring not inconsistent and contradictory
charges. For thus were they sure to be most clearly detected, persisting
against what was too palpable. Wherefore to no purpose is your
maliciousness, saith He, and your self-contradictory statements. Because
in truth the distinction of the tree is shown by the fruit, not the
fruit by the tree; but ye do the contrary. For what if the tree be the
origin of the fruit; yet it is the fruit that makes the tree to be
known. And it were consistent, either in blaming us to find fault with
our works too, or praising these, to set us who do them free from these
charges. But now ye do the contrary; for having no fault to find with
the works, which is the fruit, ye pass the opposite judgment upon the
tree, calling me a demoniac; which is utter insanity.

<span id="iii.XLII-p8"></span>Yea, and what He had said before, <span
id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725) this He establishes now also; that
a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor again can the converse
be. So that their charges were against all consistency and nature.

<span id="iii.XLII-p10"></span>Then since He is arguing not for Himself,
but for the Spirit, He hath dealt out His reproof even as a torrent,
saying, “O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good
things?” <span id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726)

<span id="iii.XLII-p12"></span>Now this is at once to accuse, and to
give demonstration of His own sayings from their case. For behold, saith
He, ye being evil trees, cannot bring forth good fruit. I do not then
marvel at your talking thus: for ye were both ill nurtured, being of
wicked ancestors, and ye have acquired a bad mind.

<span id="iii.XLII-p13"></span>And see how carefully, and without any
hold for exception, He hath expressed His accusations: in that He said
not, “How can ye speak good things, being a generation of vipers? (for
this latter is nothing to the former): but, “How can ye, being evil,
speak good things?”

<span id="iii.XLII-p14"></span>But He called them “broods of vipers,”
because they prided themselves on their forefathers. To signify
therefore that they had no advantage thereby, He both casts them out
from their relationship to Abraham, and assigns them forefathers of
kindred disposition, having stripped them of that ground of
illustriousness.

<span id="iii.XLII-p15"></span>“For out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaketh.” Here again He indicates His Godhead, which knew
their secrets: and that not for words only, but also for wicked
thoughts, they shall suffer punishment; and that He knows it all, as
God. And He saith, that it is possible even for men to know these
things; for this is a natural consequence, that when wickedness is
overflowing within, its words should be poured forth through the lips.
So that when thou hearest a man speak wicked words, do not suppose only
so much wickedness to be in him as the words display, but conjecture the
fountain to be much more abundant; for that which is spoken outwardly,
is the superabundance of that which is within.

<span id="iii.XLII-p16"></span>See how vehemently He reprehends them.
For if what they had said is so evil, and is of the very mind of the
devil, consider the root and well-spring of their words, how far that
must reach. And this is naturally the case; for while the tongue through
shame often pours not forth all its wickedness at once, the heart having
no human witness, fearlessly gives birth to whatever evils it will; for
of God it hath not much regard. <span
id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727) Since then men’s sayings come to
examination and are set before all, but the heart is concealed;
therefore the evils of the former grow less, while those of the latter
increase. But when that within is multiplied, all that hath been awhile
hidden comes forth with a violent gushing. And as persons vomiting
strive at first to keep down the humors that force their way out, but,
when they are overcome, cast forth much abomination; so do they that
devise evil things, and speak ill of their neighbors.

<span id="iii.XLII-p18"></span>“A good man out of his good treasure,”
saith He, “bringeth forth good things, and an evil man out of his evil
treasure bringeth forth evil things.” <span
id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728)

<span id="iii.XLII-p20"></span>For think not by any means, saith He,
that it is so in respect of wickedness only, for in goodness also the
same occurs: for there too the virtue within is more than the words
without. By which He signified, that both they were to be accounted more
wicked than their words indicated, and Himself more perfectly good than
His sayings declared. And He calls it “a treasure,” indicating its
abundance.

<span id="iii.XLII-p21"></span>Then again He fences them in with great
terror. For think not at all, saith He, that the thing stops at this,
that is, at the condemnation of the multitude; nay, for all that do
wickedly in such things shall suffer the utmost punishment. And He said
not, “ye,” partly in order to instruct our whole race, partly to make
His saying the less burdensome.

<span id="iii.XLII-p22"></span>“But I say unto you,” this is His word,
<span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="iii.XLII-Page_264"></span>
“that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment.” <span
id="fr_1729"></span>[1730](#fn_1729)

<span id="iii.XLII-p24"></span>And that is idle, which is not according
to the fact, which is false, which hath in it unjust accusation; and
some say, that which is vain also, for instance, provoking inordinate
laughter, or what is filthy, and immodest, and coarse.

<span id="iii.XLII-p25"></span>“For by thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” <span
id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730)

<span id="iii.XLII-p27"></span>Seest thou how far the tribunal is from
invidiousness? how favorable the account required? For not upon what
another hath said of thee, but from what thou hast thyself spoken, will
the Judge give His sentence; which is of all things the very fairest:
since surely with thee it rests, either to speak, or not to speak.

<span id="iii.XLII-p28"></span>2. Wherefore not those that are
slandered, but the slanderers, have need to be anxious and to tremble.
For the former are not constrained to answer for themselves touching the
evil things which are said of them, but the latter will, for the evil
they have spoken; and over these impends the whole danger. So that the
persons censured should be without anxiety, not being to give account of
the evil that others have said; but the censurers have cause to be in
anxiety, and to tremble, as being themselves to be dragged before the
judgment-seat in that behalf. For this is indeed a diabolical snare, and
a sin having in it no pleasure, but harm only. Yea, and such an one is
laying up an evil treasure in his soul. And if he that hath an evil
humor in him doth himself first reap the fruits of the malady, much more
he that is treasuring up in himself what is more bitter than any bile, I
mean, wickedness, will suffer the utmost evils, gathering unto himself a
grievous disease. And it is evident from the things that He vomits out.
For if they pain others so much, far more the soul that gives them
birth.

<span id="iii.XLII-p29"></span>Thus the plotter destroys himself first;
just as he that treads <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) on
fire burns up himself, and he that smites adamant spites himself, and he
that kicks against the pricks draws blood from himself. For somewhat of
this kind is he that knows how to suffer wrong, and to bear it manfully;
he is adamant, and the pricks, and fire; but he that hath used himself
to do wrong is feebler than any clay.

<span id="iii.XLII-p31"></span>Not therefore to suffer wrong is evil,
but to do it, and not to know how to bear being wronged. For instance,
how great wrongs did David endure! How great wrongs <span
id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732) did Saul commit! Which then was the
stronger and happier? which the more wretched and miserable? was it not
he that did wrong? And mark it. Saul had promised, if David should slay
the Philistine, to take him for his son-in law, and to give him his
daughter with great favor. He slew the Philistine; the other broke his
engagements, and so far from bestowing her, did even go about to slay
him. Which then became the more glorious? Was not the one choking with
despair and the evil demon, while the other shone brighter than the sun
with his trophies, and his loyalty to God? Again, before the choir of
the women, was not the one suffocated with envy, while the other
enduring all in silence, won all men, and bound them unto himself? And
when he had even gotten him into his hands, and spared him, which again
was happy? and which wretched? which was the weaker? which the more
powerful? Was it not this man, who did not avenge himself even justly?
And very naturally. For the one had armed soldiers, but the other,
righteousness, that is more mighty than ten thousand armies, for his
ally and helper. And for this reason, though unjustly conspired against,
he endured not to slay him even justly. For he knew by what had taken
place before, that not to do evil, but to suffer evil, this is what
makes men more powerful. So it is with bodies also, so also with trees.

<span id="iii.XLII-p33"></span>And what did Jacob? Was he not injured by
Laban, and suffered evil? Which then was the stronger? he that had
gotten the other into his hands, and durst not touch him, but was afraid
and trembling; <span id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) or he whom we
see without arms and soldiers proving more terrible to him than
innumerable kings?

<span id="iii.XLII-p35"></span>But that I may give you another
demonstration of what I have said, greater than this, let us again in
the instance of David himself try the reasoning on the opposite side.
For this man who being injured was so strong, afterwards upon committing
an injury became on the contrary the weaker party. At least, when he had
wronged Uriah, his position was changed again, and the weakness passed
to the wrong doer, and the might to the injured; for he being dead laid
waste the other’s house. And the one being a king, and alive, could do
nothing, but the other, being but a soldier, and slain, turned upside
down all that pertained to his adversary.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span id="iii.XLII-Page_265"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p36"></span>Would ye that in another way also I
should make what I say plainer? Let us look into their case, who avenge
themselves even justly. For as to the wrong doers, that they are the
most worthless of all men, warring against their own soul; this is
surely plain to every one.

<span id="iii.XLII-p37"></span>But who avenged himself justly, yet
kindled innumerable ills, and pierced himself through with many
calamities and sorrows? The captain of David’s host. For he both stirred
up a grievous war, and suffered unnumbered evils; not one whereof would
have happened, had he but known how to command himself. <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734)

<span id="iii.XLII-p39"></span>Let us flee therefore from this sin, and
neither in words nor deeds do our neighbors wrong. For He said not, If
thou slander, and summon a court of justice, but simply, If thou speak
evil, though within thyself, even so shalt thou suffer the utmost
punishment. Though it be true which thou hast said, though thou have
spoken upon conviction, even so shall vengeance come upon thee. For not
according to what the other hath done, but according to what thou hast
spoken, will God pass sentence; “for by thy words thou shalt be
condemned,” saith He. Art thou not told that the Pharisee also spake the
truth, and affirmed what was manifest to all men, without discovering
what was hidden? Nevertheless, he paid the utmost penalty.

<span id="iii.XLII-p40"></span>But if we ought not to accuse men of
things which are acknowledged, much less of those which are disputed;
nay, for the offender hath a judge. Do not now, I warn thee, seize upon
the privilege of the Only Begotten. For Him is the throne of judgment
reserved.

<span id="iii.XLII-p41"></span>3. Wouldest thou however be a judge? Thou
hast a court of judgment which hath great profit, and bears no blame.
Make consideration, as judge, to sit down upon thy conscience, and bring
before it all thy transgressions, search out the sins of thy soul, and
exact with strictness the account thereof, and say, “wherefore didst
thou dare to do this and that?” And if she shun these, and be searching
into other men’s matters, say to her, “Not about these am I judging
thee, not for these art thou come here to plead. For what, if such a one
be a wicked man? Thou, why didst thou commit this and that offense?
Answer for thyself, not to accuse; look to thine own matters, do not
those of others.” And be thou continually urging her to this anxious
trial. Then, if she have nothing to say, but shrink back, wear her out
with the scourge, like some restless and unchaste handmaid. And this
tribunal do thou cause to sit every day, and picture the river of fire,
the venomous worm, the rest of the torments.

<span id="iii.XLII-p42"></span>And permit her not to be with the devil
any more, nor bear with her shameless sayings, “he comes to me, he plots
against me, he tempts me;” but tell her, “If thou wert not willing, all
that would be to no purpose.” And if she say again, “I am entangled with
a body, I am clothed with flesh, I dwell in the world, I abide on
earth;” tell her, “All these are excuses and pretexts. For such an one
too was encompassed with flesh, and such another dwelling in the world,
and abiding on earth, is approved; and thou thyself too, when thou doest
well, doest it encompassed with flesh.” And if she be pained at hearing
this, take not off thine hand; for she will not die, if thou smite her,
but thou wilt save her from death. And if she say again, “Such an one
provoked me,” tell her, “But it is in thy power not to be provoked;
often at least thou hast restrained thine anger.” And if she say, “The
beauty of such a woman moved me;” tell her, “Yet wast thou able to have
mastered thyself.” Bring forward those that have got the better, bring
forward the first woman, who said, “The serpent beguiled me,” <span
id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735) and yet was not acquitted of the
blame.

<span id="iii.XLII-p44"></span>And when thou art searching out these
things, let no man be present, let no man disturb thee; but as the
judges sit under curtains to judge, so do thou too, instead of curtains,
seek a time and place of quiet. And when after thy supper thou art risen
up, and art about to lie down, then hold this thy judgment; this is the
time convenient for thee, and the place, thy bed, and thy chamber. This
the prophet likewise commanded, saying, “For the things which ye say in
your hearts, be ye moved to compunction upon your beds.” <span
id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736) And for small offenses require
great satisfaction, that unto the great thou mayest never even approach.
If thou do this every day, thou wilt with confidence stand at that
fearful judgment-seat.

<span id="iii.XLII-p46"></span>In this way Paul became clean; therefore
also he said, “For if we judged ourselves, we should not be
judged.” <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) Thus did Job cleanse
his sons. <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) For he that offered
sacrifices for secret sins, much more did he require an account of such
as were manifest.

<span id="iii.XLII-p49"></span>4. But we do not so, but altogether the
contrary. For as soon as we are laid down to rest, we rather think over
all our worldly matters; and some introduce unclean thoughts, some
usuries, and contracts, and temporal cares.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span id="iii.XLII-Page_266"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p50"></span>And if we have a daughter, a virgin, we
watch her strictly; but that which is more precious to us than a
daughter, our soul, her we suffer to play the harlot and defile herself,
introducing to her innumerable wicked thoughts. And whether it be the
love of covetousness, or that of luxury, or that of fair persons, or
that of wrath, or be it what you will else that is minded to come in, we
throw open the doors, and attract and invite it, and help it to defile
our soul at its leisure. And what can be more barbarous than this, to
overlook our soul that is more precious than all, abused by so many
adulterers, and so long companying with them, even until they are sated?
which will never be. So it is, therefore, that when sleep overtakes us,
then only do they depart from her; or rather not even then, for our
dreams and imaginations furnish her with the same images. Whence also,
when day is come, the soul stored with such images often falls away to
the actual performance of those fancies.

<span id="iii.XLII-p51"></span>And thou, while into the apple of thine
eye thou sufferest not so much as a grain of dust to enter, dost thou
pass unnoticed thy soul, gathering to itself a heap of so great evils?
When shall we then be able to clear out this filth, which we are daily
laying up within us? when to cut up the thorns? when to sow the seed?
Knowest thou not that henceforth the time of harvest is at hand? But we
have not yet so much as ploughed our fields. If then the husbandman
should come and find fault, what shall we say? and what answer shall we
make? That no man gave us the seed? Nay, this is sown daily. That no
man, then, hath cut up the thorns? Nay, every day we are sharpening the
sickle. But do the necessary engagements of life distract thee? And why
hast thou not crucified thyself to the world? For if he that repays that
only, which is given him, is wicked, because he did not double it; he
that hath wasted even this, what will be said to him? If that person was
bound, and cast out where is gnashing of teeth, what shall we have to
suffer, who, when numberless motives are drawing us toward virtue,
shrink back and are unwilling?

<span id="iii.XLII-p52"></span>For what is there, that hath not enough
in it to persuade thee? Seest thou not the vileness of the world, the
uncertainty of life, the toil, the sweat, for things present? What? is
it the case that virtue must be toiled for, but may vice be had without
toil? If then both in the one and in the other there is toil, why didst
thou not choose this, which hath so great profit?

<span id="iii.XLII-p53"></span>Or rather, there are some parts of
virtue, which are free even from toil. For what kind of toil is it, not
to calumniate, not to lie, not to swear, to lay aside our anger against
our neighbor? Nay, on the contrary, to do these things is toilsome, and
brings much anxiety.

<span id="iii.XLII-p54"></span>What plea then shall we have, what
excuse, not doing right even in these matters? For hereby it is plain,
that out of remissness and sloth the more toilsome duties also
altogether escape us.

<span id="iii.XLII-p55"></span>All these things let us consider; let us
flee vice, let us choose virtue, that we may attain both unto the good
things that are present, and unto those that are to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[263:1726](1100050.htm#fr_1725) <span
id="iii.XLII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p9"></span>[Matt. vii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span id="iii.XLII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[263:1727](1100050.htm#fr_1726) <span
id="iii.XLII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p11"></span>[Matt. xii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span id="iii.XLII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[263:1728](1100050.htm#fr_1727) <span
id="iii.XLII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p17"></span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p17.1"></span>ο πολ λγο ατ</span>, “it takes not much
account.”—R.\]

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[263:1729](1100050.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="iii.XLII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p19"></span>[Matt. xii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035)<span id="iii.XLII-p19.1"></span>.
\[R.V, “The good man…the evil man,” etc.\]

<span id="fn_1729"></span>[264:1730](1100050.htm#fr_1729) <span
id="iii.XLII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p23"></span>[Matt. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span id="iii.XLII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[264:1731](1100050.htm#fr_1730) <span
id="iii.XLII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p26"></span>[Matt. xii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037)<span id="iii.XLII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[264:1732](1100050.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="iii.XLII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p30"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p30.1"></span>πατν</span>. Bened. from <span
class="c20"><span id="iii.XLII-p30.2"></span>mss</span>. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLII-p30.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.XLII-p30.4"></span>νπτων</span>, “he that
kindles:” which seems to agree with the tenor of the sentence better.
\[There are other various readings: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p30.5"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p30.6"></span>πτων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p30.7"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p30.8"></span>πτων</span>. All can be more readily
accounted for, if <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.XLII-p30.9"></span>πατν</span> is accepted as the original
form.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[264:1733](1100050.htm#fr_1732) <span
id="iii.XLII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p32"></span>\[Oxford Version: “things;” probably a
misprint, the Greek being the same as before.—R.\]

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[264:1734](1100050.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="iii.XLII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p34"></span>[Gen. xxxi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#029)<span id="iii.XLII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[265:1735](1100050.htm#fr_1734) <span
id="iii.XLII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p38"></span>See [2 Sam.
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#023), [2 Sam.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#010), [1 Kings
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.XLII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[265:1736](1100050.htm#fr_1735) <span
id="iii.XLII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p43"></span>[Gen. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#013)<span id="iii.XLII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[265:1737](1100050.htm#fr_1736) <span
id="iii.XLII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p45"></span>[Ps. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span id="iii.XLII-p45.1"></span>,
<span class="c20"><span id="iii.XLII-p45.2"></span>LXX</span>.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[265:1738](1100050.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="iii.XLII-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p47"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span id="iii.XLII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[265:1739](1100050.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="iii.XLII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.XLII-p48"></span>[Job. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005)<span id="iii.XLII-p48.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLIII](1100051)
