[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl05)  [Next](irl07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### The Princess Vanue

We found the typical welcome that all the great ones accord to visitors.
Our party was courteously received by the attendants, and we were
directed to the administrative offices with swift efficiency.

For me, this first visit to a world people by other than Atlans or
Titans was one of the most interesting of my life; but I did not find it
half as exciting as my first glimpse of Tean City had been. The men from
sunless Nor were of an amazing blondness, for no light but of their own
making had ever struck their skins. Their size, as did that of Titans
and Atlans, varied with their age and with the age of the parent. Thus,
a son of a man of a hundred years age would be three times the size of a
son of a man of thirty. <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

Further, the race from Nor, who are called Nortans, are a straight race
of men. There had been no intermingling

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

of races of other forms, not because it was forbidden, but because their
technicons had not made the variform technique of breeding available to
the public and without it all such intercourse is sterile. Perhaps they
are right, although I see much beauty in variforms—especially in my own
lovely and completely desirable Arl with her beautiful, expressive furry
tail and her dainty, clicking hooves; certainly their race is beautiful
and vital enough to please anyone.

All about the city of the Nortans it was evidenced by many wholly
unfamiliar devices that the science of Nor had forged ahead of our own;
and as I looked about, I knew why. Here was none of the fear that had
pervaded Tean City; nor was there any of the sun-poison to be a
detriment to constructive thinking in even the slight degree that
evidently has long deterred the technicons of Mu from full scientific
advancement.

The thought of the fear brought the need for haste once more home to me
as we walked through the city toward the administrative buildings. It
was better to continue our flight than to remain long even here, I knew.
So, to improve time, I kept running over in my mind the desperate plight
of center Mu; the delaying of the migration to a newborn sun; the fear
of pursuit that was still with us; for I knew that in that
administrative building toward which we were headed some watchful Elder
of Nor was most certainly taking thought record of our minds, to see if
there were harm in us.

So, when we reached our destination, it instantly became evident that we
would have little explaining left to do. And at the same time, another
thing became evident to me that filled me with terror. Fear, again, in
the one place where I had thought I would not find it!

A young lady of the snowskinned Nortan race glided toward me, her hand
outstretched in greeting, her voice a soft bell of welcome for all of
us.

"We have read your thoughts and understand what

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

brings you here. Follow me now to the Princess Vanue, chief Elder, for
an oral check; and forget your fear, for soon you will be going to where
fear is not. Your message spells danger to us, as well as to your poor,
helpless fellows in Mu." <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

It had been the words "Princess [Vanue](errata.htm#6), chief Elder" that
had struck a new kind of fear into me. The chief Elders had been
described to me in Tean City. They are the oldest  of the race, and are
given official power, according to the yalue of their achievements to
the race. They are of both sexes, and have learned all there is to know
of the secrets of growth; how to manufacture their own life-supporting
essences, nutrients and beneficial vibrants. And on their ability to
improve upon the standard nutrients of the people often depends their
success. Thus, when a simple ro like myself comes near one of these
Elders, his will becomes their will automatically; for it is overcome by
the great, all-pervading force of the life within them. One hardly
notices this when the Elder is of the same sex, but when that life force
is of the opposite sex the attraction is so great as to be irresistible.
So true is this that seldom is a ro of one sex allowed too near an Elder
of the opposite sex; for never again would the poor ro free himself of
love for the Elder.

My spirit trembled when I knew the Elder to which we were being taken
was a woman; a woman who for unknown centuries had absorbed all the
essences of growth-promoting substances. And too, Nor was a place where
growth science must be far, far ahead of our own sun-baked

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

sciencon's achievements. Never would I be able to free myself of the
spell that: woman-force would cast upon me!

I looked desperately at Arl's sweet face. Never again would I love her
if this thing were true. In Arl's eyes I read the same fear, and I know
then that she surely loved me and I was torn by the approaching loss.
However, I dimly understood that it must be necessary—for no man near an
Elder woman can deny her the truth of love for her.

We left the building and presently were ascending a long, transparent
boarding tube into the side of a space liner that lay like a sleeping
monster in the launching cradles. This was one ship that could land
directly on a planet! But then, Quanto was small. We passed through a
series of airlocks, reached the inside of the ship.

It was a long way into the center of the ship. As we progressed, I noted
that all the ro who passed were maidens; beautiful white Nor maidens
with glittering white-yellow hair that floated about their heads in a
cloud, so fine was it that it was air-borne.

Soon I became aware of an aura of complementary forces that I knew came
from the Nor Chief Elder, Vanue, whom we were undoubtedly now nearing.
Her force scent grew stronger as we approached a mighty door set across
a corridor. In glowing letters of hammered metal above this door was the
legend:

VANUE  
Elder Princess Of Van Of Nor  
Chief Of Nor On Quanto

The great door, I discovered, was an airlock; to hold in the ionized and
nutrient-saturated air of the chamber. These chambers the Elders seldom
leave, since all evil is restrained from entering.

As we passed through the lock, the terrific stimulation of this
conductive electrified medium seized us in a mighty ecstasy. We were
drawn as by a powerful magnet toward

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

a huge figure which was an intense concentration of all the vitally
stimulating qualities that make beauty the sought-for thing that it is.

Within me I could feel the compass of my being swinging toward its new
center of attraction. I was no longer myself. I was a part of that
mighty being before me. My thought was her thought; I was her ro until
she chose to release me.

Could she release me? I could not even wish it, nor ever would. Within
me I knew that, and I felt no resentment, no regret—only joy.

All of eighty feet tall she must have been. She towered over our heads
as she arose to greet us, a vast cloud of the glittering hair of the Nor
women floating about her head, the sex aura a visible iridescence
flashing about her form.

I yearned toward that vast beauty which was not hidden for in Nor it is
considered impolite to conceal the body greatly, being an offense
against art and friendship to take beauty out of life. I was impelled
madly toward her until I fell on my knees before her, my hands
outstretched to touch the gleaming, ultra-living flesh of her feet.

Beside me the other youths from center Mu were in the same condition of
ecstatic desire.

As our hands touched her flesh, a terrific charge of body electric
flowed into us. We fell face downward in unbearable pleasure on the
floor.

She picked us up one by one and placed us on the desk before her.
Waist-high now were our burning eyes. She bent to meet our gaze; and the
mighty beauty of the eyes of the Elder princess of Nor flashed a
question into our minds. As one man we chorused:

"Yes, it is true! Evil has the upper hand in center Mu; in Tean City
itself!"

It was then that I realized how far ahead of Mother Mu's Titan and Atlan
technicons were the Nortans and,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I supposed, all
other great ones of the dark worlds. For Vanue wasted no more time on
us, but bending toward the banks of instruments before her throne,
pulled a lever and through all the ship was heard the warning signal of
departure. As if they were my own, I knew her thoughts! Quanto was to be
evacuated.

The Nortans were certainly not the sun-spoiled sleepyheads our own race
had proved to be. She understood the awful danger that could threaten a
planet's multitudes’ under the thumb of the dero madness.

At her willed command we all ran to seats that circled the throne. They
were mounted on acceleration absorbers. The grand hand pressed the bar
that lifted the now weightless ship up the force beam flowing out of the
cavern.

Even through the thick walls of the ship we heard the huge airlocks
scream shut behind us. Then we were out in space headed toward Nor, the
vast cold planet where this Elder Goddess’ daughter had been born
centuries before. I realized that our precipitate departure was sure
evidence that our news had meant much more than nothing to Vanue. She
had enough Elder God sense in her to know that flight was imperative.
There were misgivings in my breast as I wondered if any Atlan Elders or
rodite had knowledge of mighty Vanue's presence in Quanto. It might make
a great difference if they did!

As the acceleration lessened toward the midpoint of our takeoff, freeing
us from our seats, the whelming voice of the great woman-being swept us.

"You children will remain with me until your future is settled. I will
thus be sure that you are fully rewarded for bringing us such vital
information."

The soft, singing voice of the gray maid from Mars questioned her, and
in its notes was gray also.

"Will you . . . can you . . . then give us back the love of our dear
ones, which has cleaved to you?" There was a powerful pleading in her
voice that penetrated even

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

through the blanketing ecstasy that held me.

Infinite tenderness and compassion seemed to flow from the eyes of the
great one.

"There is a way to do that," the master voice answered; and she bent
swiftly toward the Mars maid, her great eyes flashing a strange thought
I could not wholly read; a tender woman-language into the eyes of the
Mars maid.

That simple Martian magic had made another friend, this time a great one
indeed.

It was a strange passage. Most of it seemed more a dream than reality.
Such things as the tremendous gait we built up—far more than light
speed—and the great distances we traveled were the realities, but I
barely noticed them. More real was the unreality of the thin, lovely
forms of the Nor maids moving about their mighty princess, the soft
fires of their floating hair like seedling flames from the vast fire of
Vanue's god-life crowned by its floating cloud of yellow; our own eyes
burning like the spotted wings of moths against the screen of her will;
the sad faces of our own maids beside us, gazing first at the fierce
white flame of her body and then at our own bemused selves; the vaulting
of the vast ship walls about us; the unfamiliar instruments blinking and
whirring.

It was a very real dream to me—a dream I knew I would never stop
dreaming. Strange passage. . . . Ever the whisper of the feet of the Nor
maids on some swift errand; the soft rumble of the voice of their living
Goddess and the answering bright song of her worshipping maidens. Yes,
it was a strange passage, and every mile of it brought home a
fascinating realization.

I had embarked on the most amazing voyage of my whole life. The very
thought of what now certainly lay before me was enough to stun my mind
into an apathy of thinking that was hard to overcome; yet my mind was so
full of excitement that it did strive to think, to add to the
realization of what the future would hold. A new life was

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

at hand; opening to wonders that staggered me to think of them—and awed
me into all-engulfing reverence.

To live to become what this Nor princess had become; to have the love of
people as she had the love of these Nor maids—that is the real dream. I
knew that I must gain the key to the door of a way of living that would
lead to the full value of the Nortan life.

So it was, sitting in the thrall of that too-strong beauty of
woman-life, we noted so little. How much time passed? I will never know.
It was as if all body functions ceased, as though food and drink were
not needed—as long as we were in the presence of Vanue of Nor. But I did
know that she was in continual communication with the planet Nor over
the space telescreens. Face after face appeared before her, murmured
briefly and intensely, and vanished; only to be replaced by others. I
knew vaguely that she was calling for a conference on the strength of
our information; and sensed also that we would attend that conference at
her side.

The thought dawned on me slowly. Here was an honor few ro ever attain in
the first century of their growth. By old Mother Mu! To see those Elders
of Nor, the whole lot of them, male and female, all at once . . .! That
would be more than one could well stand. An overpowering, devastating
ecstasy. . . .

Well, it would be an interesting death. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[50:23](irl06.htm#fr_22) Proportionately this
would not be true. A man of a hundred considering he did not stop
growing at the usual age, would certainly not be three times as large as
at thirty. A baby doubles its weight in six months, doubles it again in
eighteen. Thus the rate decreases in proportion to total mass, although
the actual poundage increase is the same for a similar period of time.
Later, however, this poundage begins to lessen until maturity is
reached, where growth ceases altogether. In the time of Mutan Mion,
however, growth was a constant thing, ended only by death. And the rate
of growth could even be increased, if desired. This is what Arl was
referring to when she mentioned that it would be necessary to "grow" to
be able better to perform their mission. The reader will see the methods
of this stimulated growth demonstrated further on in this
manuscript.—Ed.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[52:24](irl06.htm#fr_23) The Nortans, as did the
Atlans and Titans, spoke the universal language of space; a language
originated by a Titan Elder of the far past. The name of the language is
Mantong. The original individual language of each race has fallen into
disuse as the three racés have intermingled through all space. This is
the same language of which the alphabetical key was published in the
January 1944 issue of Amazing Stories, and also as an appendix to this
book.—Ed.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[58:25](irl06.htm#fr_24) This reference to death
from mere association with the Elders is singularly intriguing.
According to Mr. Shaver, the Titans, Atlans and Nortans had the ability
to bestow beneficial forces upon less favored mortals, such as Mu-tan
Mion (a ro), and also radiated a perpetual flow of life energy which was
beyond their control to cut off from any ro who visited them. Hence, the
animal magnetism of Vanue was such as to cause Mutan Mion's whole being
to be drawn to her body with a force so great that it superseded any
other love he might have had. Her attraction commanded all of his
maleness, his ability and capacity for love of the opposite sex.

Now we find him referring to the possibilty of dying from too much of
this animal magnetism. Obviously in his mind a superstition has been
built up which has enhanced his imagination of the effects <span
id="page_58">p. 58</span> of meeting the Elders in a great group. He
refers to meeting the Elders as being "a great honor" for ro less than a
century old. Therefore we can discount his belief that it will be fatal
to him; because it is sometimes done to ro younger than a century as an
"honor" and without fatal result. The truly interesting factor here is
when we consider Mr. Shaver's constant insistence that dark space is
full of Titans, Atlans and Nor-tans, and that they do not visit our
world because it is plagued by the sun's poisonous radioactives and is a
cause of death. They shun their ancient home, Mu. We, says Shaver, are a
quarantined people under an evil sun. We have no value to them. In their
language we are errant (detrimental energy animals: E—energy;
R—dangerous dis force; AN—animal; T—force of growth. Literally errants
are animals whose force of growth is directed by a dangerous dis energy
and is therefore evil). Can we assume that he is incorrect in his
assumption that these super beings never visit the earth, and that such
instances as the biblical references to angels, Christ, and other things
are actual records of such visits? Perhaps it is significant that the
reference to these things always seem to include effusion of an energy
of some sort; i. e. the radiance of the angel who drove Adam and Eve
from the Garden; the brilliant light that blinded Saul as he rode to
destroy Christians; the radiance amidst which Elija, and Christ himself,
ascended into Heaven; the light that came from the burning bush and the
voice that spoke to Abraham.—Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Conclave of the Elders](irl07)
