[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl08)  [Next](irl10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### Return to Mu

It had been but a short month since our arrival on Nor. Many had been
the preparations, most of them unknown to me. Only now as I went to the
launching cradles did I see the full extent of those preparations. I
found a fleet of mighty space vessels lifting from the frozen face of
Nor, leaving to gather at a rendezvous in space.

Vanue's own vast vessel was not the least among the fleet, nor I and Arl
the last aboard. On her viewscreens we watched countless other ships
lifting on reverse gravity beams with what seemed to be almost utter
ponderance until they reached a point in space where they could take up
normal flight. New-built ships these were, wonderful in their
engineering and armament.

We watched, also, many Nortans, mostly Nor war-maidens and Nor warro,
embark on our own ship. Vanue herself was already aboard, together with
several other Elders of minor stature. They brought with them vast
quantities of material of unguessable use. Observing it I understood
that their purpose was not wholly to save the people of my race from
their sad plight, but to nip in the bud the growing power of Evil forces
so near their own stead in space. That they were wholly confident of
their ability to do this, I knew, but I knew also of the mighty
armaments and endless warrens of the Atlan armies. I had seen their
tremendous vessels maneuvering around Mu on the viewscreens and the news
teles. I hoped the Nortans were not overconfident.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

But as we proceeded into space toward Mu at greater speed. I found that
I did not really know the Nortans. I had underestimated them. They
understood concept, and I came to realize that concept had become a
frozen thing on Mu by comparison. The Nortans used the truth, for it was
the right conceptual attack. Evil has no concept; it is a mad robot to
detrimental force. When Evil has power and men must obey or die, then
only is it to be feared. But sometimes men fight for Evil unknowingly.

As we passed an Atlan space station a Nortan ship would land and
presently take off again, followed by all the ships of the station. They
had just told them the truth. The Nortans had an ancient reputation that
forbade any doubt of their words. It was as simple, and as powerful, as
that.

This went on so often, that as we neared Mu the Atlan fleet with us was
nearly as large as our own. The truth can be a mighty friend and these
space warriors knew the Nor-men and trusted them.

So impressed was I by the ships of this vast battle fleet that I was
tempted to go to my quarters and describe them as part of my message to
future man; but I abandoned the idea. I reasoned that if my message were
a needful one when it was found, its finders would have little use for,
or need of, such technical information as the construction of space
weapons.

Perhaps when they learned again to fight the aging power of the sun and
the evil her disintegrant force can bring to life, they could again
learn such other things as they would need by searching space for
friendly peoples. There was an idea—I would put down the information
necessary to direct such a search. It would be a simple thing—for the
great ones would never be found near or under the rays of a sun as old
as this one will be by then. Aging suns would always be a space horror
to be shunned by all men. Only the action of the derodite on

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mu had kept our
own Atlans so long under its rays. Only on or near dark worlds and new
suns would the great ones be found.

It was while I stood at Arl's side watching still more Atlan ships join
us that a thought came to me.

"How can the Nortans so quickly trust the ships of the Atlans as to
allow a number of them near their own fleet?

"Silly," chided Arl, flirting her tail at my question, "they don't trust
them. It is not a question of trust. They just place a very large female
Elder aboard each ship as it joins our fleet and there is no further
question of trust or obedience. Supposedly she goes aboard 'to advise
the commander as to our plans and to interpret our ways to him,' but you
know the real reason—"

"Of course!" I interrupted her with a rueful grin. "I should certainly
understand from my own recent experience with Vanue!"

Atlan warriors are all male. Those commanders and their men would be
unable to do anything else but obey, with complete loyalty. They could
not do otherwise, for they could not find the will or wish to do it. Not
even the commanders of space ships are Elders by any means. Under the
spell of that vast woman-life, they would be helpless to her will in
their ecstatic love for her.

There were maneuvers as we neared Mu, but I saw little of them. Most of
the time I was busy with my telonion plates, inscribing further
knowledge or duplicating them so that they might be deposited in Mu in
many places.

Another job I had which took up much of my attention was the task of
making thought-record from the heads of men in Atlan vessels nearby, in
an attempt to learn what had happened in Mu since our flight. They knew
little, for the telenews had evidently been as uncommunicative of
Atlans’ true troubles as before. Some whispers they had picked up, but
nothing of great value.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

I kept on, but it was of little use. They knew just enough to make them
ready to join us, but no more. There was nothing that would help us in
the coming battle. All we knew was that we were enroute to war upon an
enemy who was undeniably powerful, but whose identity we would have no
way of knowing—until he struck first! And that first blow might be a
terrible one . . .

Noting some agitation in the ship I was watching, I focused on the
commander's quarters just in time to hear the last of a general message
from surface Atlan:

"—and since we hold the population under our war rays; and since the
safety of that very population we know to be your objective; let me warn
you that the very first sign of an attack on your part will be the
signal for a general slaughter of the people on our part. They are only
in our way anyway. You may kill us in time, but you will never attain
your objective!"

The horrible import of the message stung me into inactivity for a
moment, then I recovered and with haste swung my ray to hear Vanue's
reaction to this problem-posing message. What would she reply? Or had
she a reply to this development? Death for the very people we had come
to save rested in her hands . . .

Then came Vanue's voice; and it held a world of bafflement in it, a note
of defeat that opened my eyes wide in disbelief.

"Return to Nor," was what she said!

Return to Nor! Abandon our mission? No! It could not be. There must be a
ruse in Vanue's mind. Vanue was not the kind to give up, even though the
odds seemed great. Then what—

Vanue's voice in my mind said a single word: "Come."

I switched off my thought recorder ray and bounded down the corridor
toward the great doors of hammered metal, a wild joy in my heart that at
last she had need of me, and that certainly this was a ruse.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

Even before I reached the great doors I knew one thing: Vanue's ship was
not retreating toward Nor as the others seemed to be. Under cover of the
swarm of retreating ships, our own vessel had slipped into the moon's
shadow as we passed her and had come to a halt hanging there invisibly
in the moon's earth lee.

Once I arrived before that vast flame of beauty I sank to my knees, but
she reached out a great hand and raised me to my feet. From her desk she
took a tiny box and showed me its one projection—a tiny stud; a switch.

"Take this and put it in your clothes. It looks like a pocket reading
machine, and it will not be noticed with suspicion. In the locks an
Atlan ship and pilot is waiting for you. He has been directed to take
you to surface Atlan.

"Once there you will mask your thoughts in any way you please, for I
know your ability in that respect. Then go to your old home in Sub
Atlan. There turn on your telenews and wait beside it until you hear
three clicks from it, repeated at uneven intervals. Then take out this
box and press the metal stud full in. It will tell you what to do next.
That is all."

I bowed low, kissed her foot's radiant flesh, and ran from her quarters.

The Atlan ship was waiting for me, the pilot ready and silent. He
pointed out my old Atlan student's outfit, which was already aboard, and
indicated that I was to wear it. I jettisoned my Nortan uniform and in a
moment was once more Muton Mion, life-culture student of center Mu.

When I had completed my transformation I found that the ship was already
rocketing down the regular passenger lane from moon to Mu. The pilot, an
Atlan, spoke a few words of explanation and lapsed into silence.

"I am a taxi driver and you're a passenger. Mind that—and luck!"

It was all so simple. I could hardly believe it would work. But it did.
The ship settled on the public field. I

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

jostled my way into the tubes, and soon was roaring along toward my
home—a student returning from an outing.

I switched on the seat telenews but apparently nothing was happening.

It recited the most inane occurences: a taxi motor failure had plunged
two fares and the driver into the sea, and they had escaped with a
ducking; a snakeman had caught his tail in a subway door, but would
live; our adored chief Elder was having a birthday, may he have many
more . . . I switched the telenews off. Anything could happen—and to
Atlans nothing out of the way would even be whispered. Of the vast Nor
fleet that had been so lately above, not the slightest hint. Great was
the control of the derodite in Mu!

Not easy would be the task of the Nortan invaders!

Reaching Sub Atlan, I made my way to my own home, threw my hat at the
old place on the hat rack, embraced my mother and kissed the tears from
her dear face, slapped Foster Dad on the back and answered his grunted
"Where in the whirling world of woolheads have you been wandering?" with
"Just sewing a wild oat. I'll tell you about it at dinner," and bounded
up the stairs to my old room where I switched on the telenews and lay
upon my bed, carefully masking my thoughts by thinking what tale I would
make up to explain my outing to Dad.

Three sharp clicks from the telenews startled me. I had not expected the
signal so soon. Vanue must have been watching. I leaped erect, drew the
box from my pocket and pressed the switch. A voice came from the box.

"Put this box on your head and put your hat on tightly to keep the box
in place. Do not take your hat off for any reason from then on. Go
outside and walk around the block. Soon you will notice a strange thing;
after which you will get more directions."

I did as directed, promising to return soon when I dashed past my
astonished mother and father. I stopped only long

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

enough to retrieve my hat.

Outside a strange drowsiness came over me. It was hard to move. The
lights of Sub Atlan flooded the ways, but I ignored them and walked
slowly around the block. I noticed the girl at the food tablet stand
lolling fast asleep over her open cash drawer. How very careless of her,
to sleep so. But then I found the service ro at the rollat stand also
deep in slumber; and several of his customers sprawled in slumber on the
seats with the doors open, the hood up.

The voice in my hat explained the mystery.

"By now everyone in Sub Atlan but yourself and certain others is asleep.
So will you be if you remove your hat and the box, which gives off
stimulating vibrants.

"Go at once to the administration center and switch off the auto watch
and general attack alarms. Bind the chief Elder and anyone else who
seems able to frustrate a landing. Then, wheneverything seems safe, put
a communication beam on our position and guide us in"

The Administration building in Sub Atlan is a great tower which reaches
not only to the roof of the cavern that houses Sub Atlan but through
that roof and on up to surface Atlan, where it looms as the tallest
building on the surface also. Great rollat ways connected the surface
building with the sub building.

I activated a rollat at the curb stand, dialed the administration
center's number, and drove the rollat by hand directly into the great
hall and up to the doors of the council chamber. As I arrived I was
surprised to see four of my comrades, Atlans from Vanue's ship, racing
into the hall behind me from rollats at the curb.

I nudged the great doors with the rollat bumper. They held. Turning the
thing I drove across the hall and came back at full speed, crashing into
the great valves and at last they gave. I plunged into the hall, brakes
squealing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Abandondero](irl10.md)
