[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl04)  [Next](irl06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### Escape Into Space

Accustomed as I had become to variform life, we presented a strange,
almost fearsome appearing company to my eyes as we made our way toward
the shuttle ship station. There was young Halftan, of Venusian blood,
long-legged, web-footed and fingered, his eyes huge and faceted; his
mate, a girl of Mu except that some forebear had given the line four
arms, probably under the stimulus of mutation rays because the family
pursuit of making instruments was one where twice the number of fingers
could well be used; Horton, a young fellow of mixed bloods, older than
the rest of us, quiet, but long-eared and sharp-nosed—a listening fox;
his girl, a thin, gray, transparent-skinned maid of Mars, fragile and
lovely, her large, leaf-green eyes lighting devoted friendship wherever
they rested; two young Titan sisters, their horns just sprouting from
under their curls, their great bodies new-budding into womanhood; their
two escorts, of the Elder's special creation, large-headed youths of
tremendous intelligence, their hands double-length, their necks and
shoulders by far stronger than normal to carry their great heads easily,
and finally a young Titan male, accompanied by his friend who was a
distant cousin of my own Arl and whose sprightly, colorful femininity
hinted that Arl's family must be especially noted for their beauty.

Together we made up a company of twelve life-forms of great diversity;
and yet all of us citizens of Atlan; citizens apparently on an outing,
now bound for a gay adventure to end a holiday's festivities in the
supreme thrill, a sightseeing trip into space.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

We dared not think of our true purpose; and I knew that at least the two
Elder escorts were aware of what had brewed in my mind and would back me
up when the time came. We thought only of our coming adventure, and
tried to feel the delight of it so that even our emotions would register
true to any spying teleray that sought us out to check on our motives.

The shuttle ship we boarded was a small, bullet-shaped plane containing
little but a cabin, air-making equipment and a small fuel compartment in
the rear. This plane was not a space ship, but only a sort of bullet to
be shot from the surface of Mu to the large station ship of great weight
which circled in its own orbit, just as the moon circles the earth
forever.

To get the shuttle ship on its way gravity was neutralized by an upward
beam of semi-penetrative force traveling at light speed which was turned
on gradually until the car just floated in its cradle under the effect
of the reverse friction to gravity of the force blast passing through
the car. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

When the weight of the car was thus reduced to less than a pound, I
turned on the rocket blasts very gradually and traveled up the reverse
gravity beam by instrument. In thirty minutes we were circling the huge
station ship as though we were in our turn its satellite just as it was
a satellite of earth. With vernier rocket blasts, about the size of toy
pistol explosions, the nearly weightless plane approached a landing.
Above us spread the world we had just left, making an imposing sight as
we settled into a cradle atop the space station.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

When we stepped from the shuttle ship at the edge of the oval landing
area, we saw several globe-bodied moon-men bustling about their own type
of shuttle plane, a long, wingless splinter constructed of a very
fragile and glass-like substance. Although I feared to think upon it,
the moon was my next destination. One thing that all of us knew was that
we never intended to return to earth. The blackened face of that son of
the Titans, the noblest blood in Tean City, as he lay dying on the dance
floor rose before me to tell me flight was not only best, but the only
course for us.

In spite of myself my eyes roved over the black dome of space, searching
for the lights that might indicate a pursuing craft. It seemed almost
impossible that we were fooling the mad rodite and their spying telepath
rays. In spite of all self-imposed mental guards, my mind seemed intent
on shrieking "Escape! Escape!" through every possible loophole in my
concentration.

I engaged the gnome-like moon-men in conversation in an attempt to still
further blanket my turbulent mind. Arl caught my eye and wagged her tail
in cheerful encouragement, seeming to divine what was on my mind. How
expressive that beautiful tail of hers was; how much it could say; and
with no dangerous thought waves to betray its meaning to those who must
not receive on their sensitive instruments. With that tail, no language,
no thought-transference was needed!

But even if pursuit developed, I had one trick up my sleeve. I dared not
think of it, or some watching rodite informer might advise any pursuers
of my plans and a way to circumvent them would be devised.

It struck me that not all of the rodite might know of recent conditions
and developments in Tean City. Nothing had been announced on the
tele-screen news. Thus, while we were escaping, others ought to know the
truth, and certainly not all the rodite were dis-infected. They would

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

not report what they read in my mind, and the rodite who knew would not
attach special significance to others who knew; and the very fact that
it was thought about in an unguarded way might cause them to dismiss us
as of immediate danger, and thus blanket our intent to escape.

I thought of the dance, of the sudden striking of the black death on the
dance floor, of my puzzlement as to what it might mean. I thought of the
disappearance of our tutor technicon, wondered if he too were murdered.
Any sub-rodite, getting a register of my thoughts, would certainly
ponder the meaning of the unbelievable existence in center Mu of murder;
murder whose actuality he could not doubt, because it would come to him
as the unguarded and therefore true thought of a ro such as I was.

In double-quick time, still acting out our enthusiasm for an unexpected
holiday, we chartered a fast space ship for an hour's time. An attendant
led us to a cradle on the landing stage; and we entered the ship gaily.

The speedster rose slowly up the lifter beam under my control and when
it was clear of the station ship I sent it hurtling outward.

When we were well out of sight of the station ship and picking up speed
toward the moon I gave up thinking of our trip as a sight-seeing outing
which was to proceed only a little way into space and then return, but
began to think of the moon as our destination, meanwhile setting the
autopilot destination needle on Venus. Then I pulled the throttle back
to full on.

If what we had heard of the black death were true, it might well be that
no space ships were allowed to leave the vicinity of Mu at all. Just the
mere fact that we were hurtling straight away might have placed even
more suspicion on our purpose if we maintained our original
thought-fabrication. With the moon now our revealed destination, our
true purpose was still veiled.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

I switched on the electrically magnifying scope screen to the rear to
look for possible pursuit. The scope had a screen of microscopic
photo-cells which turned the tiniest light ray into an electrical
impulse which was greatly augmented by vacuum tubes and the resulting
impulse made a much larger cell on a viewplate glow strongly, giving a
vivid image in half-tone.

Far behind us a craft sped along. Was it in pursuit? I watched it for
long minutes, but there was no way of telling. It maintained its
distance and its course. In a very short time their instruments could
check our course, and if they were pursuing us, they would be unable to
correlate it with my mental image of the moon as our destination; and
they would be after us instantly. If they were merely harmless travelers
to Venus, there would be no questioning of our own course.

I gave them time to check us with instruments, then I set the course
pointer on Mercury, a planet almost never visited, and watched closely.
The strange craft veered.

"They are on our trail," I said. The words broke a silence that had
become almost intense.

Arl's cousin looked shocked. "Then we can't escape," she said. "They
have a mechanical advantage over us."

One of the big-heads was eyeing me shrewdly "You have a plan," he said.
It was a plain statement of fact, not a question. It was as though he
did not ask what was my plan, but expected me to put one into operation
now that the crucial moment had come.

"Yes," I agreed. "Now is the time to play my one card. I hope that it
will be an ace."

"We have not asked nor even wondered about your plan once we observed
that you had one," said the other big-head. "But now the time for
secrecy is at an end. It is unnecessary. If we cannot escape, our intent
to do so will be useless to hide; if we can escape, our intent will not
need to be hidden."

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

"True enough. And I will be more than glad to relieve my mind of the
strain of withholding what is in it," I said. "I am but a ro youth, and
the task has been hard."

"But one that you have done well," observed the young Titan gravely.

I accepted the compliment with a thrill of pride. Praise from a Titan
was something to which I was not accustomed—indeed, old Artan Gro had
many times given me exactly the opposite.

"It is a matter of mechanics," I explained. "And the one thing I will be
forced to blank out of your mind as I do it. I warn you all not to think
on the matter when you see it performed. As to my plan of escape—I have
an even greater one. I will explain fully in a very short while—we will
go to one of the sunless Elder stations on a cold planet. The nearest of
these is Quanto, on the very rim of this solar system."

"A good choice," approved the big-heads. "But one that rouses our
curiosity in your 'mechanical trick' to a high pitch. Obviously you know
that Quanto is seventeen and one-third billion miles away." <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

I could almost read their minds. "Yes. Weeks away at the speed of this
ship—and we have no food."

Even Arl's tail stopped wagging at that—but only momentarily. In her
eyes I read that confidence I knew she had in me; a confidence that she
herself felt was justified.

"Your plan!" she reminded me. "Now we know you have a definite one, for
if you are aware of the fact that we have no food you must also be aware
of a way to reach Quanto without it."

"Such great faith must be well placed," murmured one

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

of the Titan maids. "I, too, can have no fear now that you have a plan."

I proceeded now about the thing I had in mind, taking care not to think
of what I was doing, but think, rather of the appearance of my hands as
they worked, of the movements of my knuckles, of the muscles that caused
those movements, of the nerves that carried the message to the muscles.
. . .

It was a good thing for me now that I had listened so worshipfully to
space pilots when I was younger; some of their adventures were going to
stand me in good use. Autopilot mechanisms on these space ships were
adjusted to a fool-proof speed, so that no speed-mad citizen could wreck
a shipload of people. There was a stiff spring on the throttle, just a
little stronger than a man's arm, which held the fuel flow to a safe
maximum.

I found the case of the auto pilot locked and the key was naturally not
aboard the ship, but kept by the attendant back at the satellite ship.
But I found a way around that. I took the belts from several of my
companions in spite of their puzzled faces and fastened them into one
strong line. One end went around the throttle bar and with another I
took a turn around a seat arm.

A dozen strong Atlan arms pulled the belt line taut at my bidding, and I
took in all the slack at the seat arm. Back came the throttle bar. The
acceleration of the ship spilled them all in a heap at the rear, but I
held fast to the line and the bar stayed back.

Now our safety depended on whether the pursuing crew knew this simple
trick—for many of the pleasure craft. which our pursuer plainly was,
were as well powered as the police craft, although their autopilots
restricted them to a much lower speed. If the pursuing craft's pilot did
not think of adding other men's power to the strength of kis own hand on
the throttle bar, he would never overtake me. Even police craft were set
to less than maximum motive

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

power, as the tubes burned out too quickly at full blast.

I watched the dark speck on the rear screen anxiously and slowly it grew
smaller and smaller. When it had vanished the youthful Titan pounded me
on the back until my ears rang and my knees buckled.

"You're a sly fellow, and your whole plan of escape is right. It's high
time we ran away from the black death. I've worried and waited for it to
strike me long enough. The Elder station on the cold planet are the best
natured men you can find in space. Haven't been near a sun in centuries,
and don't know the meaning of the word evil!"

He turned to the others and continued speaking eagerly. "They'll take us
in, give us entrance cards to any government in space  Personally I
would choose some civilization that warms its cities with its own fires,
and shuns all suns entirely. I've had enough worry waiting for Atlan's
rulers to get wise to the danger and move. I want no more of these
sun-bitten zany dero around me!"

The gray Martian maid spoke, her sensitive green eyes shining with
admiration, her voice the slow singing speech of Mars

"The best thing you did was not to tell us what you had in mind, for
someone would have read our minds as surely as Venus loves us. We have
lived in dread and indecision for many moons. The black death has struck
day after day and no official word of it. No one can tell who is dead;
there is no way to tell if anything is being done about the danger or
not, for anyone who made the slightest effort to do so disappeared at
once just as our loved teacher did. We all know that he was not ill; and
we also all know that the day he made that announcement to us he had
signed his own death warrant—but he had evidently decided he must, as no
one else seemed to move. It has been terrible, and if you had planned
this flight with us we would never have gotten away. We have been very
lucky to get this far. Now, if you will take my advice,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

you will go at once far beyond any influence from Mother Mu's rodite,
under another space-group of planets, and there we will learn how to
live where such things as the black death do not exist."

The smile she bestowed on me was Martian magic.

It must have been the look on my face that prevented any further remarks
by my companions, and caused them to look at me in new curiosity. If so,
my next words fanned the flame of that curiosity.

"I spoke of a greater plan, a few moments ago," I said. "And I am afraid
it does not call for such conclusions as you two have made. I am sorry,
but neither of you have given me any advice that I like, as sound as it
may seem."

"Speak on," prodded one of the big-heads, his eyes alight with interest.

I checked our course briefly to make sure we were headed for Quanto
correctly before I answered him. Then I made myself comfortable in a
cushioned seat and faced them.

"What is it that we have been fleeing?" I asked.

"Basically, an aging sun," said the young Titan reflectively. "The black
death is merely a result of detrimental action on certain rodite who
have become dero and even ray. We have fled from them, but the real
cause of our flight is the sun."

"Do we flee as cowards, deserting our comrades?" I asked softly. "Or do
we flee only that we may be able to make a new plan to take the place of
the one that has been interrupted by the rodite dero?"

There was a wry smile on the face of the big-head. "The day has come,"
he said, "when I have seen a ro put a Titan to shame! Of course, Mutan,
we do not flee for cowardice, but to gain time and life to put up a
fight. It is only that we have not thought it out as you have Nor has
inspiration as yet given us such a plan."

"Then listen to mine," I said, "Just as it is with you,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

my first thoughts at realization of the fear that lay in Tean City were
those of escape to a place where there was no fear. It is a natural
reaction, especially if that possibility suddenly presents itself.

"Let us analyze the fear. First, the top unit of the force behind the
black death must be a man in a very strong position, to stall off the
whole migration as has obviously been done, and to control things so
that no news leaks out about the terror that is otherwise so plain for
many to see. So high and powerful must this man be that to fight against
him on Mu itself must be to invite certain defeat. Perhaps even if we
were to muster all clean-minded Atlans to the battle, we could meet only
the same frustration as the migration plan has suffered—for is it not
true that all Atlans who are aware of the danger of the sun's evil have
made utmost effort to bring about the migration?"

"True enough," said a Titan maid. "No Titan has been unaware of the
danger, and lately, even such ro as you have been brought into the plan.
Perhaps it is fitting that the salvation of that plan come from the mind
of a ro."

"Then here is the only salvation I can see," I said. "We must go to the
Elders of Quanto. Through them we must contact the mightiest of the
Titans and from them get advice and assistance. This thing may well
become a space war before we are through—and as I see it, it must be so,
or all the Atlans of Mu will be lost!"

I looked at Arl, to see if she listened, and she wagged her tail
roguishly. Not only was she listening; she was thinking in tempo with
me. At my glance her voice chimed in, doing things to my spine.

"Yes, and we ourselves must devote ourselves to the task, and go to a
place where the growth rate is unlimited by law, so that we can become
more equal to the job. It will take great power to displace the mad
rodite. On Quanto we must find some mighty and old and wise technicon to
go along and assure us of a hearing; otherwise the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

power will not be given us. We need the very mightiest power the Elders
of space can give us to save the people of Mu."

"If you but wag that tail of yours at them, Arl, they will give it to
us!" I laughed because I could see in all those around me the same
conviction and devotion to my plan that was in her. The youthful company
laughed too. "Of that there can be no doubt," they agreed, whereupon Arl
swished her tail before them and pirouetted about on her clicking
hooves.

In that instant the fear was gone from our minds. Instead we were filled
with gaiety and hope, and great determination to do all that lay in our
power to end all fear.

We circled Mercury, straightening out on a direct path for Quanto,
constantly accelerating until it was unnecessary to explain why lack of
food did not worry me. The young Titan remarked: "We will be at Quanto
within twenty-four hours. Already our speed is approaching that of
light. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

air locks. At last we were in the home of the kindly men from sunless
Nor!

I leaned back with a sigh of thankfulness, feeling that I had saved at
least some of the good life seed of ancient Atlan from the madness that
was overtaking all of its races under the aging sun. To save still more
would be a collossal effort; but as Arl's arms drew about my shoulders,
I knew that such effort was worthwhile.

The purpose of life was plainer now. Such beauty and tenderness did not
live in words or in paintings. Only in understanding and caring for the
life seed, the bearers of future race growth, could a man find the true
meaning of life. And in the mighty job that lay ahead in enlisting aid
for the saving of our people from the black death of the mad rodite I
knew I would become a man or die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[38:19](irl05.htm#fr_18) Mutan Mion explains
that gravity is the friction of condensing exd, ex-disentegrance,
falling through matter into earth. By using a beam of similarly
condensing particles of ex-disintegrance a harmless beam of upward
gravity is obtained which can levitate matter slowly or drive it upward
at immense speed. All space is filled with the ash from disintegrance of
the suns of the universe. This, condensing again into matter, is
integrance or gravity.—Ed.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[42:20](irl05.htm#fr_19) Mutan Mion says this is
the eleventh and last planet of the solar system. The tenth (and yet
undiscovered, though predicted by astronomers) is two billion miles
beyond Pluto, which is itself nearly four billion miles from the
sun.—Ed.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[47:21](irl05.htm#fr_20) Mutan Mion, apparently,
holds no brief for the 'limit velocity" of light; or that the speed of
light is the ultimate speed. According to Mr. Shaver's letters on the
subject: "Light speed is due to 'escape velocity' on the sun, which is
not large. This speed is a constant to our measurement because the
friction of exd, which fills all space, holds down any increase unless
there is more impetus. The escape velocity of light from a vaster sun
than ours is higher, but once again exd slows the light speed down to
its constant by friction, so that when it reaches the vicinity of our
sun, no appreciable difference is to be noted. A body can travel at many
times the exd constant, under additional impetus, such as rocket
explosions. A ship whose weight is reduced to a very little by reverse
gravity beam can attain a great speed with a very small rocket. Once
beyond the limits of matter gravity ceases and the ship becomes
weightless. Speeds over that of exd constant must be under constant
impetus, for the friction slows them down quickly again, especially so
in the case of solids. Sound, as an example, travels through air at a
constant speed—and yet the impetus is obviously different in each case!
The only conclusion is that the air itself is the governing factor in
the speed of sound, which always remains appreciably the same. So it is
with light. Both depend for their velocity on an initial impetus. Both
remain constant because below a cerfain speed, friction disappears."

Your editors have been constantly amazed at the interchangeability <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> of Mr. Shaver's (Mutan Mion's?) physical
phenomena, or rather, their adaptability to one great physical law which
we have as yet hardly begun to comprehend in its entirety. However, at
this point a brief definition might aid the reader in understanding many
things he has already read and will read in the following pages.

Matter in all the cosmos is constantly disintegrating and integrating.
There is the natural parallel as to whether the hen or the egg came
first—did the integration come first, or the disintegration? But that is
the one and only unanswerable question in the whole theory. Exd is the
ash (matter so finely divided as to become energy rather than matter) of
disintegrating suns. It spreads out and fills all space. Then, perhaps
because of the presence of an actual bit of matter (as in the case of
the salt grain in the salt solution that commences precipitation which
does not end until all the salt is once more in its original form), or
under the influence of a magnetic field which draws the exd

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

On Quanto, we knew, a group of Elder technicons from sunless Nor, a
group of sunless planets 0.16 light years away, had lately established
an observatory for the study of our planetary system. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) It was these Elders I wished to contact
in my effort to enlist aid for our cause.

Our trip to Quanto consumed slightly over twenty-four hours, the hunger
of which we could easily endure; and on the landing station we switched
to a shuttle ship.

As we settled into the cradles of the great cavern's entrance on Tiny
Quanto, liquid air glistened over the view panes. The ship rocked as the
cradle connected with its conveyor and was drawn by it into the cave
through the together, integration commences and the exd once more
becomes matter. This fall of exd and its condensation is what causes
gravity. When Newton was hit on the head by an apple, it was by an apple
that was pushed down upon his head, rather than pulled down; since
gravity is the friction caused by the fall through matter already
existent of condensing exd. Obviously a condensation is a falling
together of a finely divided element into a grosser state.

There are many finer points, staggering in their implications,
concerning this theory which are not necessary to the reader's
understanding of this manuscript; but they are being prepared in a
monograph which is to be submitted to scientific circles.—Ed.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[48:22](irl05.htm#fr_21) Quanto lies beyond the
jurisdiction of Mu's government, which holds sway over all the planets
of the solar system except this tiny world. Quanto is on the rim of Nor
influence and is used by them as an observation station. Because of its
small size, it is unimportant to the government of Mu.—Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V, The Princess Vanue](irl06)
