[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl14)  [Next](irl16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### Back on Mother Mu

The great sensitive needles of the ionic-trail-indicator <span
id="fr_42"></span>[6](#fn_42.md) became still and fell back against the pin
marked 'O'—no more trail.

In the split second that the needle stopped, I leaped to my feet,
stabbing the button opening the ship communicator.

"All hands! Attention! Reverse drivers! View screen open! Gun crews
stand by!"

The great dreadnor braked to a tortured halt from full velocity. I could
hear Tyron taking over control, alerting the crew for battle—action that
might start immediately. Barked orders maneuvered the ship's immense
bulk into the exact center of the "zone of weightlessness".

"—we might have to move fast."

"Where are we?" I asked myself, as soon as I had made sure that the
enemy wasn't in the neighborhood.

"This constellation looks familiar," I mused. "Can it be . . . still . .
. it is!"

Opening the communicator, I called, "Arl! Do you recognize that planet
in your view screen? It's Mu!" Nostalgia gripped me. A homesickness I
didn't think I

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

could still feel smothered me at the sight of the familiar seas and
green, white-topped mountains of my abandoned homeland of almost two
thousand years ago.

Taking over the controls from the pilot who didn't even suspect that the
planet under us was my former home, I tooled the mighty Darkome to a
landing on Mu's satellite. For all of her tremendous mass, she slid
gently to a stop in the glistening, liquid-air snow sheltered by the
black shadow of one of the moon's mountains.

I ordered the tender broken out, then called to the control room.

"I am going to take Lady Arl to the surface of this satellite's planet.
While I am scouting down there, keep the crew alerted."

Tyron saluted, looking a bit envious—envy, I guess, at the thought that
he wasn't going to see his desired action. "Yes, sir," was all he said.

"Observe standard precautions for operation in enemy territory. Avoid
using equipment as much as possible to cut down the chances for
detection."

"Yes, sir," he nodded.

"I don't know where the Sathanas’ ship or ships have gone, but I doubt
if they would be apt to be close by and still be undetected by our mech.
But, until you hear from me, take no chances. That's an order!"

Returning his salute, the Lady Arl, who had come to the control room,
and I boarded the tender and took off. And not too comfortably, either.
A tender is a small spacer for short flights—lifeboats for the crew, and
on the Darkome the tenders were big, but two thousand years of Vanue's
wizardy of growth had increased our height till we were well over fifty
feet.

Both Arl and I felt the old excitement we'd experienced as youths using
the small spacers for picnics from Mu to the Moon—felt excitement as I
drove the little craft to the surface of the doomed planet for the first
visit in a score

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

of centuries.

Our excitement soon turned to sadness. This wasn't the same planet we'd
left—no darting ships—no shining towers—no signs of civilized life.

"Oh, Mion," spoke the lovely Arl beside me, "this is all so sad and
unreal. I feel like—Mion! Look! What's that over there?"

"It looks like . . . it is a city, Arl!" Her enthusiasm was contagious.
"Shall we go over there?"

"Oh, yes, Mion. Let's see what man has done in all these years."

"All right, Arl, but remember we are not allowed to stay here long."

She nodded, silent.

We of the Nor are not allowed to stay long on a sunlit planet, for one's
character soon becomes twisted—not necessarily into evil, but certainly
into err—which can be worse. One in err is stupidly convinced of his
correctness, of his own brilliance. All of our food and drink must be
brought from our ship, for the radioactives in the water and meat of
Earth may not be eaten by Nor men by law. That err, that mental
polarization, is the thing men of Earth must fight most fiercely, for
err will live in their thinking, an illogic that will make them think
black is white till they are forced to check the question with a
colorimeter.

We would pay for my stay on this sad planet with many boring hours
before the medicos finish the mental tests to make sure that we have not
been seriously affected by the sun's hard light. Sometimes I believed
they feared evil and its cause too much to fight it effectively. The old
medicos can be tiresome themselves, to the point of evil. I would like
to give some of them a few tests myself—of my own devising. Yes! They
are too close to some dense metals—err magnets of another kind—and have
become polarized by the dullest and heaviest metal to be found on a
thousand master-size planets, that I know.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

I expected to stay but the few hours allowed me and then away. Nearly
two thousand years of the destructive magnetic field sweep of the sun
had passed over old Mu. The difference between this little planet third
from the Sun and the dark planets is immense. There, time is a growth,
never a loss. Here, time is a sorrow, a slow destruction, a completely
OPPOSITE QUANTITY. Here, the proud towers of Old Atlantis are crumbling
stones, eroded by the blowing sands of the encroaching deserts that did
not exist under Atlan science. There, the fecund growth of man has
multiplied the beauty and pleasure, the power and the glory of Nor,
many, many times in these two thousand years.

Having seen death in many forms, I like to fight death's burning face
wherever I find it. Surely, death's face is burning brighter on Mother
Mu than on any other globe these feet have trod, feet that sink further
into the dis-softened stones <span id="fr_43"></span>[7](#fn_43.md) of this
planet than any other I know. Many have been the globes trod since I
last left old Mu to voyage through the dark voids where no light but the
light of wisdom can be found. Dull it is, to one who has tasted war and
death, and swift-tiding battles, to speed on some mission in which the
element of danger has been reduced to the undetectable minimum. I am a
warrior, trained through many centuries of supremely difficult schooling
to the rigors of battle and war, and there are few indeed, for Nor men
to fight who even dare to think of braving our slightest displeasure.

Nearly two thousand years had passed since I distributed the records of
the Atlan migration to dark space to guide the men who should come after
us on Mu.

As I guided the craft in a hovering flight over the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

scarred face of old Mu, I marveled at the green growth over everything,
for it is hard to realize that though everything dies of the Sun
poisons, life goes on, renewed forever. After first coming upon such
worlds of death, one cannot accustom oneself to the idea that all this
life that looks so vibrant and virile is so short-lived.

I know that since I had left Mu, cities probably had grown and died upon
her surface, and cities under her surface must have been peopled and
have again lost their peoples in the wars that always rage on the
sun-burned planets.

Arl and I glided over the glittering golden roofs of the city, and,
settling to Earth some miles distant, entered a cavern whose ancient
shafts still gaped, unfilled by the rubble that now choked most of the
openings to the Elder world. We were anxious to see what life had taken
root within the caverns, for there lay the tools of the ancient wisdom,
waiting for a wise man-child's learning. Arl opened the great air lock
at the bottom of the shaft and I floated the tender in to the floor of
the cavern.

We fell to rummaging about in the ruins of the great mansions, as one
will in these old places. I activated one of the penetray view rays and
took a look at the shining city on the surface not far away. A one man
flyer of an antique make rose from the city and came toward us. I
augmented the passengers' mind, saw that his name was Tyr, that he was
of the Aesir, as the people of the city evidently called themselves. He
had seen our ship and was coming to investigate. He seemed excited, as
though something about our appearance had revealed to him that we were
the uncommon "visitors from the stars" mentioned in the legends and
folk-tales of his people.

"Arl," I called to my lovely lady who was busy satisfying her curiosity
about some of the old mechanisms at the far wall of this big room. "Arl,
come here and watch this flier—he seems to be heading this way!"

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

With the quick, cat-like change of interest of women, Arl pranced gaily
over to where I sat at the controls of the tele-thought augmentor. With
a pleased little laugh, she wagged that ever-charming tail of hers and
took her place beside me.

As we sat at the screen watching the approaching flier, we could see his
mind was a maelstrom of conflicting sentiments—I couldn't repress my
laughter at the fear I saw there. But there are times when Arl saves me
from unrequired cruelty, and when I laughed, she chided me.

"Oh Mion, don't laugh at that poor little man! Remember, it has been
almost twenty centuries since they have had a visit from any of the
Elder Races."

"Lovely Arl," I agreed, "I had forgotten. I should have remembered that
fear goes with sun-infection."

"He is a brave man, Mion," Arl pointed out. "He is afraid, yet his will
to investigate makes him overcome his fear. If he is representative of
mankind . . .

I nodded, knowing what Arl meant. As long as there are brave men on
Earth who can conquer their fear and dread with their own wills, there
is hope that mankind can, in time, defeat the "de" curse of the Sun.

"Look, Mion, he's dropping down the shaft as though he has done it many
times before."

It was true. The pilot of the little flier expertly dropped down the
shaft and came to rest beside the Darkome's tender. There was a moment
of indecision—Arl and I knew from reading his mind that it was all he
could do to restrain a wild, nearly uncontrollable impulse to flee. He
took heart, however, stepped from his machine, and came toward us. He
was large for the race of Earthmen, being about twelve feet high.

Finally, eyes bulging, he stood in awe before us where we sat at the
ancient mech.

I greeted him by name: "Ho, Tyr, what brings you to us who are strangers
to you?"

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

At that he flung himself prostrate before us. Our lack of enmity loosed
his tongue and he protested: "Of course you know me, O Gods from the
Stars. I have heard the old men speak of your kind, and have read
something of you in the ancient writings, but many of us no longer
believe in the greater Gods. Of course, you understand all mysteries,
and you have read my thoughts over the ancient mechanisms I see you
toying with. I am of the Aesir race, and that is our city you see in the
distance. I am one of the few who understand the great significance of
your coming here. Odin, our all-father, in his palace invites your
presence. We have great need of your wisdom, Mighty Ones."

I finally assented to Tyr's importuning and the invitation of Odin
himself over the great ray called Odin's Eye, and we entered the tender
and took off for the palace of Gladsheim <span
id="fr_44"></span>[8](#fn_44.md) dominating the shining, gilded-roofed city
of Asgard in the distance.

We spiralled down toward the great courtyard of the palace, reading a
dozen minds on my telaug on the way down.

It is habitual for a Nor to be careful. There was nothing but curiosity
and awe in their minds; this was no trap, I knew. As I landed the ship,
several brawny, armored warriors came up to us. Axes were slung on their
belts beside the antique dis-ray pistols, pistols of a type that the
science of the high gods has not surpassed to this day. They spoke the
ancient universal tongue called Mantong, but time had so changed the
pronunciation that it was difficult to understand it at once. We used
small portable

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

telaugs to tell what was in the minds about us anyway. We easily carried
them in our hands. But Arl and I soon began fully to understand the
speech, for the basic sounds were all the same as our own, and not by
any means are we mentally slow.

To our way of thinking, these Aesir were little fellows. They were not
more than ten or twelve feet in height. The largest showed the graying
hair of age, the sign dreaded most of all plagues, in all space, caused
from over exposure to the poisonous emanations of a deadly Sun. In space
flight, sometimes it happens that some poorly plotted course flashes a
ship close into the terrible heat and deadly particles of the field
surrounding some dense sun. Also, sometimes, in the little time of their
passing such a sun at light speed, their hair grows white, and they die
in a few weeks. Such is impregnation by radio-active particles—sure
death. Old Sol, the Earth's sun, is not that bad, but it, too, is sure
death. A great pity arose in me that these fine men did not know what
caused their age, or how to avoid it if they did know. This pity of mine
is one reason some man will sometime find this record I leave, and know
how to shun the terrible plague of space, the deadly, dense particles
from heavy suns that get into the flesh and stay, burning away good life
force and leaving a shrivelled corpse.

Do you remember the lovely Arl? She is still Arl, but grown so big now
that the Mutan who loved her then would worship at her feet as once he
worshipped at Vanue's huge beauty . . . for that matter I still do
anyway. She is here beside me now, toying with the ancient stim rays;
the stim ray that is forbidden as its effects can be most evil if the
metal is too far gone in slow disintegrance. But Arl carries with her a
meter of my devising containing a dial which reveals the most minute
flows of "de" force dangerous to man.

She must know if this one is dangerous stim or not. It seems to be still
usable, for a vastly pleasurable viray is

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

flowing over my form even now from her hands, and her soft lips are
multiplied a laughing million of times all over me. I am forever
startled by the endlessly varied stim augments that Arl's infinite wit
finds in any mech of the kind. I have had a billion tiny Arls lift me in
my sleep and carry me to Elysia, their forms growing more and more about
me, till all the world was soft, gleaming, rosy Arl, the flowers her
faces, the breeze from her lips, and the stim rays looks from her eyes,
loving me, while her hair became a vast forest of titanic, curling
beauty sheltering me in its scented shade.

There are no words or images to tell you what a girl of imagination can
do with stim augments of her thought. I still think of Arl as a girl,
and she looks like a girl, too, except her size is as great as my own,
and that is too much to think about. For soon we must leave our loved
home on Nor and move on to the heavier planets <span
id="fr_45"></span>[9](#fn_45.md) of the Elder cities, and that is a hard
time for adjustment, as it takes years to accustom oneself to the great
gravity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[122:6](irl15.htm#fr_42.md) GAS IONS: While the
driver flow is a kind of reverse gravity formed by the disintegration of
a certain metalloy, during the expansion under the dis-current, much gas
is formed exclusive of the integrative snapback flow of exd which is the
frictional flow forming the drive. The dissociating sub-atoms of the
driver plates pass through a gaseous stage where they leave a trail that
is detectable. This ionizing trail is an unavoidable product of this
form of drive.—Author.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[125:7](irl15.htm#fr_43.md) One of the most
repeated legends of the Gods coming again to Earth is the detail that
their heavy feet sank ankle deep into solid rock—a very interesting
legend—heavy-planet races denoted.—Author.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[128:8](irl15.htm#fr_44.md) Note that this city of
Asgard and this Gladsheim are not the city or people mentioned in the
story "Thought Records of Lemuria," but is a city which takes its name
from the site of one of the first cities built by the Atlans. These
Aesir are the latter gods who take many of their names from the elder
gods; cities are named in the same manner.—Author.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[130:9](irl15.htm#fr_45.md) HEAVIER PLANETS: At a
certain point in their development, the Normen must leave home and go to
the heavier planets for development. They do not return from these heavy
planets to the lighter ones except as rulers or teachers. The princess
Vanue and the other very tall characters appearing in these stories have
returned to the children races as teachers, rulers, or judges. All the
Elders are of this class of returned people.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Pact with the Aesir](irl16.md)
