[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl10)  [Next](irl12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### Into the Tunnels of the Dero

Far out in Mu's nightshadow lay the silent fleet, dark and still as any
lonesome rock drifting through space. We reached it and boarded Vanue's
ship. Once aboard Vanue called a conference of fleet commanders, but we
ro were excluded from it. Very obviously something very special was
being planned that demanded no loopholes for a leak be left open. Not
that we would consciously allow such a thing to escape our minds—but
after all, we were only ro and far below the mental caliber of the
Elders.

When Vanue came from the conference, her cheeks were flushed, she was
beaming triumphantly, and her aura was pulsing madly. She went
immediately into the tech laboratory of the ship and ordered two of the
hideous abandondero brought in for examination.

They were placed in a telaug <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) and
examined exhaustively for details of the lost caverns’ entrances and
exits and the location of the renegade Elder's power plants. Also we got
a more or less clear history of what had been happening on Mu for many
years; although the picture was about as clear as mud to the abandondero
themselves. They had minds like rabbits—like mean rabbits now suddenly
discouraged in their meanness.

For many years, most of their short lives, they had been stealing youths
and maidens for torture and tormenting thousands of the Atlans with rays
right in the streets.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

When any Atlan had tried to do anything about it, it had only resulted
in his death by one means or another.

How this idiotic dominance of theirs had been kept a secret for so long
a time, while it grew stronger and stronger, was comprehensible only
when we understood that the centralizing of all power by the rodite
method of government had allowed complete control once the central
rodite synchronizer was taken over. It had meant the sudden and complete
end of Atlan government without even a suspicion that such a turnover
had taken place.

When the center had gone bad no one had known. Even the abandondero
couldn't tell us, except that they knew it had been long ago. Little by
little, after the important coup, normal Atlans in charge of minor
branches of the rodite government had been replaced by abandondero. The
secret police had been killed off! By their strangle hold on the
telenews centers all knowledge of such deaths and disappearances was
kept from the Atlans. By continually checking over people's minds for
any who were becoming suspicious, any trouble could be checked before it
started.

For Venus knows how long they had been picking off the best brains of
Atlan, the very flower of our race; doing them to death day by day, and
no one was ever the wiser.

Much of all this we had to guess, for the abandondero actually knew
little of the master organization beyond their own vicious experiences;
but they knew their ancient warrens well and we could deduce
approximately, from the ugly, half-formed images in their minds, where
our objectives lay.

With this information in our possession, we went into action. In a very
short time a host of tiny winged planes were dropping silently toward
the vast culture forests where the hidden degenerates had made tunnels
to the surface to gather fruit.

These planes were sealed-cabin helicopters, equipped

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

for short flights in space by auxiliary gas jets, silent and flareless.

Our primary objectives were certain tunnels which held cables running to
Tean City as well as other tunnels which held cables connecting the
depths with the surface.

I kissed Arl lingeringly before I stepped into one of the planes and
took off for Mu's forest-covered surface and became just one of many
dropping motes that looked harmless enough but which carried more might
than had ever before been gathered into such compactness.

We landed and made our way into the tunnel nearby. It led down steeply,
and was a very ancient thing once we had gotten beyond the area
constructed by the dero. It led soon into vast caverns housing
long.-abandoned cities.

These ancient ruins in the lost caverns were impressively eerie things.
They had been built, I knew, in the early days of Mu, when under the new
sun all growth had been furious and undying, with a fecundity scarcely
to be imagined in present-day Mu. Most of the people who had once lived
here had long ago become too big to stay in Mu; had gone to larger
planets under other suns, or to huge, cold, planet-cities that drift in
dark space. From what they had left behind I became more and more
convinced that Mu's youth was too much in the past to have any more
future. The planet should have been abandoned long ago. Just the
contemplation of these mighty, long-gone glories in comparison with the
lesser marvels of the best of modern Tean City was enough to tell the
story to even the most thoughtless of Atlans.

Our lights played over the deserted, awful, death-like glory of the
ancient mansions and even the hue of them gave off melancholy. However,
to the warro and war maids accompanying me, such thoughts as those were
not in order. Instead they kept sharp eyes and minds open for danger.
What weapons lay unused in these tremendous fortresses from Mu's wild
youth only the oldest of Elders

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

could guess. And which of them might suddenly prove to be manned by
warriors of the renegade Elder was something we could not know. But from
the portent of their presence we realized that our enemy might be a
tougher nut to crack than we dreamed.

As we marched down the silent, dust-laden ways, sleep rays and
augmentative detectors of several kinds played miles ahead of us. Now
and then we came upon a modern rollat, wrecked against the wall of a
building, a dero asleep in its seat. They had crashed because the auto
drive would not work here—check rays at corners and building entrances
not being activated.

It was not many hours before our communications beams told us that the
enemy cables had been cut; and so far as could be determined all dero
communication beams had been tapped with false answer equipment and ro
placed in attendance. So far our march into the depths had been
accompanied by signal success. Next would come the actual locating of
and the attempt to reduce the cavern stronghold of the renegade dero
Elder. Rolling behind us as we advanced came an endless line of burden
rollats, bearing war rays whose potency was incomprehensible to me. But
I could guess from their complex construction that here were things that
could loose terror itself. Before many hours I expected to see them go
into action, loosing terror upon the author of the fear that had ridden
hag-like upon the back of Tean City and all Mu's Atlans for many years.

It was then that I got a shock—for a big carry-all came riding by and in
it, among the warrior maids bearing the crest of Vanue, was Arl . . .
lovely, smiling, brave Arl of the cloven hoofs and defiantly flirting
tail!

She flashed her teeth at me gaily as though she were on a picnic!

What is there about danger that accentuates the man-life in a man? As
that smile played on me, the whole cosmos

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

whirled in my head. I felt even more powerfully than I had in the
duo-incubator the sensations of one-ness that existed between us. Comets
buzzed in my head and I felt the urge for battle surge up in me; battle
to preserve for myself and all others happiness such as was Arl's and
mine.

Then, as we skirted a vast city bowl lit vaguely by a kind of marsh
light that glimmers in these old warrens, action came! A dis ray raved
out at us suddenly from a dark pile in the bowl several miles away. It
cut great gashes in our columns before the swift, silent answer from the
ray rollats had reduced the whole pile to silence.

Gray dust rose in a cloud over the bowl city as we swarmed into that
huge old city-center building; and the horror that we found inside cured
me forever of all sun lit planets. These devilish abandondero had a meat
market in the lower floors, filled with human flesh; and a pile of
choice cuts I saw was composed mainly of Atlan girl breasts! These dero
things were cannibals and lived off immortal Atlan flesh!

So much for our illusion of benevolent government! How long had it been
composed of hidden, grimming cannibals, the whole of our race unaware of
its ultimate fate? I realized now that it takes more than patriotism and
fine words over a telescreen from a ro face to make a state a safe place
in which to live.

Because of a degenerating sun, all our apparent tremendous scientific
advance had been set at naught by a few madmen . . . with these dero
creatures eager to do anything the madmen said in return for a little
fresh human meat. I saw now the fatal weakness in centralized
government. One silent grab at that neck of power lines had resulted in
death for the whole cream of the race. The awful power in telaug rodite
methods of rule had only served to place the total wealth of the planet
in mad criminal hands.

Yes, Halftan is right! There is "no thing so careless

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

as a swelled head." To see sweet Atlan girl breasts displayed as a
butcher's merchandise set a fury to raging within me that will not cease
so long as de makes dero!

Thousands of the ragged, filthy abandondero lay about the huge building,
unconscious from our rays, and we put them rapidly under telaugs to get
a complete picture of their strength and the location of their other
forces. Once we had gained our information they did not live long! We
could not think of them as human things, these slaves to the
disintegrant impulse to destroy that courses through all matter under an
aging sun; and perhaps we, too, in this moment of horror, felt within us
the effects of the sun poisons.

The children of the abandondero lay about naked or with a few rags
draped on them, usually with a human bone they had been gnawing upon or
playing with clutched in their hands. Vanue had all of the children
gathered up and sent back to the ship "to treat them and use them to
people a small planet as an experiment."

"Let that planet be far away!" was my thought.

We had learned from our searching of the minds of the abandondero that
the old Exile's stronghold lay far in, nearly at center Mu. Yes, the rot
had progressed far in Mother Mu. Always in my mind the most amazing fact
of this rot will be the extent of its influence on the pattern of Mu's
life-supporting energy flows. This dictating pattern had been so
effective that their plight was not known nor hardly whispered of by any
of the Atlans. Yet they were slaughtered indiscriminately, sold as meat
to the abandondero, and the gods know what else they had put up with for
how many years with the sickening realization that to appeal to
higher-ups for help would spell death. All these years . . . without
managing to make their plight public knowledge!

The telaug records told us that many of the dero had been torturing and
tormenting Atlans all their life, and

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

eating them too. Yet the news systems had managed to
[ignore](errata.htm#7.md) all such tales, partly from individual fear of
consequences, and partly from a dread of being considered mad for
harboring such suspicions. There is no cloak for corruption like the
average citizen's supreme faith that all is well as long as the paper is
delivered, the telenews functions without saying anything alarming, and
the dignitaries strut their pompous fronts regularly as upholders of
righteousness.

I could see what had made them so supremely blind now. It was the
effects from which the migration had been intended to save them. Yes,
that migration had been delayed too long by a few centuries, it
appeared.

It was another thing for me to stress in my message to future man; to
inscribe on my timeless plates of telonion. Those who will people this
planet again with children from the seed of the few we will not be able
to find and rescue must be warned that there can be no peace nor beauty
in life under this sun, except that they build special chambers which
exclude detrimental forces as well as the radioactives that cause age.

Just so long as Mother Mu spins under this sun, just so long will her
energy fields induct disintegrant charges from her destructive force,
and these charges will work out into neutralization of man-matter growth
through destructive will in the units of the life pattern. Without
extraordinary precautions these detrimental forces will result in
continual war and complete stalling of all real racial, social and
individual growth.

If one of future man's really healthy men creates a machine of value to
his people, one of the destructive men will take the same machine and
destroy that same gain with it. l3isintegrant energy must be neutralized
by an equal amount of healthy integrant energy. If it is not, this
disintegrant energy will work out in continual social troubles, famines,
diseases and death—if it does not actually take the form

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

of a war.

This need not be the fate of future man! The life which grows in
integrative source material concentrating chambers can be safe, immortal
life—but all life outside such chambers will be destructive, if not by
actual fierce blows, then by stupid interference and destructive
disapproval.

These are the truths I, Mutan Mion, culture-man of Mu, realizing even
more forcibly now, must pass on to future man, written on tablets that
will be deposited in likely places so that they may be found in some
future time. These truths—in addition to a history of the great war I am
now observing; a war which wishes to save all future men, but which
cannot, because of those lost ones of the forest whom we will never be
able to search out—must reach future man! <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[90:31](irl11.htm#fr_30.md) Telaug—a machine which
augmented and strengthened telepathic signals so that even the most
secret thoughts could be read.—Ed.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[97:32](irl11.htm#fr_31.md) Judging from the
information recorded by Plato, as received from Solon, it would seem
that these metal plates so often mentioned by Mutan Mion (which this
manuscript definitely states were deposited in many places both inside
and upon the surface of this planet) were deposited about 12,000 years
ago. Since such vast upheavals of nature as the sinking of Atlantis, the
smashing down of the gates of the Pillars of Hercules and thus forming
the Mediterranean Sea, have occurred, it would seem that the hiding
places of these plates more than likely have been destroyed and rendered
impossible of discovery. At least, science has no record of any such
plates having been unearthed; nor is there any such record in legend or
history beyond the possibility of the plates of the Ten Commandments
given (found?) by Moses upon the mount. However this seems unlikely,
since they are described as being of stone, which seems true since they
were smashed by Moses in his anger. Apparently the message over which
Mutan Mion labored so mightily has never been found.—Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Battle to the Death](irl12.md)
