[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl18)  [Next](irl20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### A Valuable Chunk of Meat

The awe-struck Aesir with me didn't guess that the voluptuous, desirable
women around Sathanas were poor mindless creatures; machine-made to
appeal to base masculine senses of some members of the immortal Elder
Races. They didn't know that what they gazed upon was false and inhuman.
They knew only that they saw here women beautiful and desirable beyond
their wildest dreams—the fevered dreams of the Earthmen that they were.
Here were dream creatures smiling at them through half-lidded eyes . . .
sending their blood racing. And mirroring the gaze of Sathanas’ women,
the eyes of the young Aesir were pinwheels of hungry fire.

Although it takes several moments to tell, I knew instantly what these
women were—and a quick look at my new friend from fair Mu confirmed the
fact that the agents and mech controllers of Sathanas had done their
work well—the Aesir had lost their senses to the lure of the devil's
women.

I looked at Arl. She, too, knew what lay behind all this unholy scenery
and her little nose was raised, proudly disdainful. Her eyes stared past
Sathanas and all the false finery around him.

"My lovely Arl is just going to ignore all this. Good girl!" I chuckled
to myself. But the chuckle died in my throat as I came to a halt in
front of Sathanas—the hidden, deadly evil, ill-concealed in those smoky
eyes didn't promise much of enjoyment for us captives standing before
him.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

He glanced up from the snowy throat he'd been kissing, and our eyes
locked. At first, there was just that evil stare. Then . . .
recognition! With that, he became alive and casually tossed the
attentive female from his lap, as a normal man would dispose of a puppy
when other business called. With a displeased frown the poor creature
glared at me for interrupting her pleasure, but she scurried to one
side, followed by the hungry eyes of the Aesir, for she was about the
same size as they. Evidently she was a new acquisition. After dismissing
her, Sathanas had placed both hands on the arms of his "stim" chair and
looked at us from under his dark brows.

Finally the dog deigned to speak.

"Ah, my dear Mutan Mion," the words were like the treacherous hiss of a
deadly snake, and the smile that went with it was equally reptilian.
"Ah, yes, and his lovely wife, the beautiful Arl."

When he mentioned her name, I would have strangled him had I been free
to move . . . his using her name was profane. He had bowed as he spoke
it.

"You know, Fair Lady, the tales that are told do not do justice to the
beauty that you do have. I am honored by this visit from such a famous
pair. I have many times read the record of your progress in the past
centuries. I am grieved that I must welcome you in such poor
surroundings as my little craft provides."

I said nothing. In fact, I tried desperately not to think of anything
that his thought-readers might find of value.

"Oh, come, Mion, surely you haven't lost that oratorical tongue that we
have heard of so much? Can't you speak?"

"The less I say, the better, O mighty Sathanas. I am not numbered among
your admirers."

At that he frowned. There was no use to hide the truth or crawl to his
ego. I knew that a dozen telaugs were

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

playing over us and certainly some of them transferred our thoughts to
him. I didn't care for him or any of his kind.

Sathanas had looked like he was going to lose his temper, but he
recovered his front of suavity. Just as he was ready to speak again, he
was interrupted.

The Aesir, Tyr, was more accustomed to lacing such characters than I and
he had immediately adopted the best possible attitude for the moment.

"Your majesty!" said Tyr, "the Arch-Angel of the heavens, the one mighty
man of blood and war that I have always wanted to meet! Oh! Mighty One,
that black flag of yours is the banner and desire of every warrior who
reiishes true freedom!"

Even with the information that his "spy" rays were undoubtedly sending
him, this spontaneous flattery from Tyr caught Sathanas momentarily off
his guard, and he frowned darkly . . . puzzled.

"Why the gloomy frown?" asked Tyr. "Is the mighty Sathanas displeased at
the offer of service from such fighters as these?" Tyr indicated the
others. "Why only today, My Lord, we put the mighty Jotun to flight
outside our city of Asgard . . . what better recommendation could a
warrior bring you?"

Tyr was doing a valiant job of bluffing, but he couldn't know that the
only "war" that Sathanas ever had any contact with was drunken
space-men's brawls, or violent kidnapings and perhaps in arranging the
monetary details of warfare on some of the other "der" planets. The
Aesir tried, but his bluff failed.

At the mention of the battle outside the walls of Asgard, Sathanas
blackened and shot to his feet. Some trinket or other that he had in his
hand went violently to the floor.

"So! . . . so!" The huge fiend was raging but not saying much. I could
see his lips quivering with self-indulgent

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

anger. "So! It was you, Mion, who pierced the hull of my best and newest
battle ship! You . . . you are the upstart who is poking his nose into
my affairs here in my refuge!"

He had bunched his fist and stood shaking it under my nose while I stood
still, not moving a muscle.

"You insolent . . . you uncultured freak. It will not be you that
carries the tale of my doings back to Nor! You can take the word of the
Lord Sathanas for that!"

The miserable cur emphasized his last remark with a slap on the face
that would have earned him death had I not been held in the grip of a
watching control-ray. I kept silent. There was nothing for me to say.
Sathanas ranted on.

"Centuries ago, you came to the Council Chambers on Nor and received
more honors and recognition than all my labors have ever brought me. You
rose steadily in power in the so-called government of Nor. And, as the
final insult, you approach, no, you even eclipse the power of men three
times your age!"

He was being carried away by his own thwarted ambitions. The more he
raved, the more he became flecked with foam, like a stallion raced too
hard. He was stomping back and forth in front of us. Every eye in the
room was watching him, and it was only our little group that wasn't
cowering at the sight and sound of his anger.

"But, my dear MUTAN MION! Your . . . luck . . . has . . . ended! You are
in my power now—I, who am now the open enemy of all the base servants of
the Nor Empire, and I will see that you die . . . slowly, painfully!" He
threw back his head and laughed like a man gone mad. "Haw! and those so
dainty hounds of our so high God-head—that thrice cursed Nor Patrol—will
receive the complete sensation record of your death, with my
compliments!"

That must have pleased him for he calmed down and smiled. "Ah ha, THAT
should keep them somewhat less

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

hot on my trail, knowing the painful fate of the great Mu-tan Mion who
unluckily caught up with me. Me . . . Sathanas!"

And he didn't mean to miss any nuance of sadistic pleasure. He pranced
over to where Arl was standing, his black cloven hooves making the only
sound in the room. She still was staring past him as he stroked the
little black beard he affected.

His fevered eyes gazed up and down the glorious body of my beloved Arl
and I swore to myself that if I were ever free I would tear those
insulting eyes out with my own bare hands.

"Beautiful!" He nodded. “Mion, your Arl is a very valuable looking chunk
of meat <span id="fr_54"></span>[18](#fn_54.md).

“At least, she will be valuable when my colleagues get finished with a
few slight mental operations on her. No doubt you are familiar with the
slight adjustments that we make on these lovely women's minds to enhance
their value? No? That's a pity. And she is big, too. I'm sure there are
some among the Nor men that will pay a pretty price to have such a
sturdy plaything to take with them to the heavy planets. Perhaps I shall
keep her here for my own use . . . for a little while, anyway. And,
then, maybe I can reward one of the Jotun chiefs with her for certain
favors that they have done me in the past.”

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Mustering his courage, he reached up, and stripped Arl of the few
garments that she wore, the better to inspect his new property.

"They say that Mion's Arl is one of the most expert manipulators of the
'stim' machines. Mmmm, I believe I know where such a woman of her size
and ability with 'stim' would bring a fortune, and the size of a Ruler's
ransom, too."

Evidently he was tired of merely taunting his captives without them
saying anything, for he suddenly ordered, "Take them away!"

Obeying his command, the heavy ray that had held us captive was released
and some of the ship's crew with small hand rays shackled us with them.

They didn't have them turned up to full power—they couldn't have,
because all I could feel was a slight drag. As soon as I realized what
was up—that I was free—I raced for the throat of the fiend now returning
to his couch, hurling his sycophants and dancing girls to the right and
left like a farmer sowing grain. Just as my fingers were about to clench
about his neck, a beam from one of the ever watchful servitors struck me
down at his feet, a contorted bundle of agony. The epilepto-ray <span
id="fr_55"></span>[19](#fn_55.md) that they used was the most painful known
to Nor science—forbidden except for experimental laboratory work to
discover a counter for it.

I rolled in tortured convulsions on the floor. Just as my last grip on
consciousness slipped from my grasp, I saw my lady Arl folding like a
wounded bird and something that she had tried to use as a weapon fell
from her grasp . . . or was that blood!

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[165:18](irl19.htm#fr_54.md) MEAT: Cannibalisim has
been practiced for centuries in the now almost sterile caverns—dero
eating tero, perhaps tero eating dero; both, it is suspected, capturing
by means of the ancient "mech" (mechanism) surface people for food. They
consider surface people merely a higher species of food-animal.
Throughout the caverns, we of the surface are referred to, not as
"surface" people, but "meat" people.

No doubt the European dero ate heartily beneath the concentration camps.
We suspect that it was they who activated the Nazis guarding the camps
to the abysmal depths of depravity to which they descended. For
centuries, the dero have been doing the same things—and worse—though on
a smaller scale.

The Jotuns were, no doubt, dealers in "meat" delicacies.—R. S. Shaver.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[166:19](irl19.htm#fr_55.md) EPILEPTO RAYS: The
epilepto ray was originally intended for the use of the Elder Race's
Police. By means of it, primitive tribes, wild animals, and even rioting
or uncontrollable members of the race itself could be broughtunder
control, harmlessly. However, as with all the ancient mechanisms, the
Elder scientists continually improved them, and at times these
improvements called for regulation by the Ruling Council to limit their
use to <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> insure the general safety of
the entire race.

Some of the epilepto ray projectors are still extant in the caverns here
an Earth, and their use by the dero (degenerate humans) cause torment
and paralysis to a lot of the surface people.

The ray itself, in action, contorts every muscle of the victim's body by
means of an alternating current of synthetic pain-ray electric, the
pulsations resulting in that spasmodic jerking so apparent in one
suffering a so-called "epileptic" fit.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Under The Pain Ray](irl20.md)
