[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl15)  [Next](irl17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### Pact with the Aesir

Odin welcomed us himself, leading us into the great hall of Gladsheim.
The walls were covered with the gleaming shields of his followers; he
sat us upon his own throne and the throne of his queen beside it. They
were the only seats that could begin to hold us, for they were relics
from the old time and must have been too great for their present users.
So we took them, and indeed, Arl and I are used to great honor wherever
we go, for we are much loved and respected. "A friend is the best gold,"
is my motto, and can be a mighty power when he is needed.

As he stood before us, Odin was nearly half our height. But age was
showing on him. His beard was snow white, his ruby-red Santa Claus face
lined with the progress of the dreaded sun-blight.

Odin stood on the steps of the throne dais and made a short speech to
his followers.

"These are the high Gods who live among the far stars. You have heard of
them from our wise men, and now they are here for you to see. They come
at a time when we need them most. If they approve of us, our struggles
with the Jotuns will go well, so hold your evil natures in check, and
let the High Gods see the gold that we, your friends and I your ruler,
know lies underneath the rude flesh." Then Odin turned to us, saying:

"We know much of your ancient race from writings found in the caves—the
plates of imperishable metal left by Mutan Mion have been translated by
some of our wise

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

men, and I have read their writings. Also, we have learned to use some
of the ancient magic from the hot depths of the greater caverns where a
man can no longer live for the heat. There we have found great things
and brought them to the surface for use here in Gladsheim. We would like
to have you explain many things about that science that produced such
things, but just now we are getting ready for a seige. The Jotuns are
preparing for an attack on Asgard. Even now their hosts gather in the
misty depths of the dark land beyond. What are your names that I may
properly present you to our brave warriors?"

With a bow toward Arl, I said, "This is the Lady Arl and I am called
Mion."

Arl smiled at them with the graciousness of a true queen.

"My Lord is too modest," she said in that lovely voice. "He is the Lord
Mutan Mion, the Lord Mion to whom even the Elder Titans and Atlans owe
their lives."

The Aesirs' eyes popped with surprise and joy when they heard that we
were the same Mutan Mion and Arl mentioned on the ancient plates.

"So many lives . . . and still living," were their excited comments, "so
long . . . and so young to look upon. So fair, and yet so ancient of
days. Yea, they are the Gods . . . come again to Earth as in the old
days that some swear were true things."

But Odin had little time for much formality, though he seemed to think
we merited a great deal of it.

"Oh Great Ones from Beyond, if you will not help us against the Jotuns,
we must leave you for awhile and get to our work, preparing to meet the
coming attack, but, Oh Mighty Ones, if you will help us, we are yours.
Command us what we must do to beat off the fierce Jotuns."

As he spoke a messenger raced into the hall. With some urgency he
approached the dais that held the throne and spoke privately into Odin's
ear. The worthy human's face fell. As he turned again to us, I could
detect a note of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

sadness in his voice.

"The messenger brings bad news, My Lords. Another great ship from the
stars—infinitely larger than the one in which you arrived—has come to
Earth in the encampment of the Jotuns. That is not the whole of this ill
news. Mighty men of a size as your own have come out of this huge vessel
and are siding with the Jotuns in their preparation for the coming
struggle with us. What means that to you, O Great Beings?"

Now, I knew that there was but one Nor ship in this immediate solar
system, and that another space ship as large as the Darkome probably was
the fugitive that we were seeking—one of the ships of the infamous fleet
we were pledged to return to the Courts of the Rulers of Nor. I
explained to these Earthmen that these were fugitives from the justice
of the Gods, and that I could summon power to crush them utterly, as
soon as I contacted my ship, the Darkome.

"Are the Jotuns and these strangers in view ray range?" I asked the
white-bearded Odin.

"They smugly think they are not," was his answer as he led me to the
instrument called "Odin's Eye." <span id="fr_46"></span>[10](#fn_46.md) It

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

was really a vast space telescope with a tri-dimensional screen, a big
box of luminous mist in which three dimensional pictures of the objects
in focus could be seen. Within it we saw the gathering place of the
Jotuns, and monsters they were, recently having come to Earth from some
huge, colder planet. There, their size had been naturally determined by
the conditions of the planet. They were three times the size of the
Aesir, <span id="fr_47"></span>[11](#fn_47.md) of a greater size than Odin

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

himself, and infinitely uglier than any others I have ever seen. I had
heard of the Jotuns, an evil race shunned by all wise men. They had a
custom of following up Atlan and Titan migrations and occupying their
abandoned cities for the pleasure instruments which were always to be
found in the abandoned pleasure palaces and mansions of the immortals.
They were, consequently, not entirely unaccustomed to handling ray
equipment, and would prove mean antagonists for the Aesir. The Aesir had
had many a brush with them since their arrival a century ago, and had
come off a too close first in most of them.

Obviously, the Aesir were not relishing the contemplation of a war to
the last ditch between the two races, for the Jotuns were not only more
numerous, but they had occupied and used more of the ray
equipment-filled caves than the Aesir. The Aesir ignorantly chose to
build their cities on the surface in the cheerful sunlight, and they did
not understand what the Sun did to them. A few of their wise men had
warned them of the writings left by the Gods which told them that the
Sun caused old age, but they scoffed at this as old men's garrulous
fear. The only ray the Aesir had was portable equipment they had
laboriously brought to the surface for their use.

When I saw the huge, dark figure of Sathanas himself among them, I knew
several things by swift deduction. First, I knew his presence here was
no accident. Second, I knew that here was the rendezvous of the fleeing
ships the patrol had pursued to all the points of the compass, for it
was not likely that Sathanas would have had time to mix into the
quarrels of the Jotuns unless he was waiting here for that rendezvous.
And last, I knew that Sathanas had had dealings with these gigantic and
hideous Jotuns before to know them so well. Such dealings were forbidden
expressly by law. The Elder Race literally 'fathered' the human race and
they made strict laws protecting the lives of their children. The Jotuns
were well known

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

as slave dealers, <span id="fr_48"></span>[12](#fn_48.md) and what was
worse, they were known for their modifications on the ancient mechanisms
they salvaged from abandoned caverns—modifications which made the mech
potent tools for the changing of good human character to evil ends.

Putting a telaug beam on Sathanas’ head in the tridimensional screen, I
heard his thought and from it I gathered a general impression
corroborating my deductions. For centuries, he had traded and had been
in communication with these Jotuns. This was also forbidden by the Nor
laws. For a long time he sold them Nor maids for slaves, and in return,
he received much illegal equipment which the Jotuns manufactured from
the ancient pleasure mech. It was evident that he had long ago promised
them aid against the Aesir in return for some favor. That his flight
from the Nor wrath was unknown to the Jotuns was clear, for he was
striving with all his mighty brain to keep the

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

knowledge of his trouble from escaping to their minds over the telaug
over which the conference was being conducted. Evidently he did not
intend to risk his ship in the coming battle, but was seated at a great
table in the gloomy ruined home which was their meeting place, going
over their battle plans with the leaders. These leaders were a fearful
lot to look upon. Though somewhat lacking in logical mental powers, they
seemed to make up for this by fierceness of physique and ruthlessness of
intent.

Gathered in the vast cave that stretched its murky depths into the
hidden distance were the sons of Loki and Sigyn, the wife of Loki. How
he ever came to marry her was too much for me, for she was many times
his size and as evil visaged as hell itself. The witch, Hela, who was
not Loki's daughter, and who had no regard for him, was a very tall
giantess of a hideous whiteness like frost, or dead bones. Evil lived in
her eyes and on her face, and on her face twisted a shadow of death.
Like most devotees of the spirit of evil, she was obviously mad and
possessed of a mad-woman's peculiar appetites, augmented and exaggerated
as they so easily can be by the use of the beneficial and stim. Also,
there were many leaders of the Jotuns, hairy, gray beast-men, thirty
feet high, knotted muscles, and armed with every kind of weapon known to
two civilizations—stone clubs hung side by side with flame swords of a
make superior to any made now, for the art is a lost one. This horde
knew ray work, and they were blood-thirsty fighting men proved in a
thousand brawls and dozens of wars. The Aesir had cause to worry, for
these were professional warriors brought from space for the express
purpose of getting the powerful Aesir out of the way for their commerce
in souls, slaves and perverting mech. Evidently this was the reason
Sathanas was here, as this commerce of the Jotuns was his greatest
single source of income. The Aesir had a bad habit of raiding the
Jotun's strongholds and releasing the poor

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

human beasts.

But the Einheriar, <span id="fr_49"></span>[13](#fn_49.md) the chosen, the
warriors of Odin, were no match in size or in experience for this bunch
of mad dogs from the pleasure dens of a dozen planets.

I doubted that this affair would ever come to hand to hand combat. I
looked down into Odin's great "eye" for a chance to find out just what
range weapons were available to the Horde, what they planned to use
immediately. Sathanas was talking.

"All this array of armed force is of no use. One long range ray brings
the whole army to naught. We must have a spy, someone who can tell us
just what range weapons they have to use against us."

Loki pushed his comparatively small form to the foreground, shouting,
"The Aesir have no weapons worth worrying about. I knew every ray in
Asgard. They cannot touch us. You can sweep the whole place clean of
life with one ray from your mighty ship."

I turned to Odin, "Just what is the range of your weapons?" I asked him.

"I can't reach him," answered Odin.

"I can see him, but I can't hit him."

"You don't know much about these tri-dimensional screens, I am afraid, O
All-Father. Let me show you

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

something."

Pulling a side arm from my belt, I directed its epileptoray pencil at
Sathanas’ head in the cube-screen, Sathanas immediately curled up into
an agonized, crumpled heap of writhing, shrieking, slobbering flesh. The
table, surrounded by the gigantic Jotuns, and a few of the really
gigantic cohorts of Sathanas, leaped to their feet, mouths gaping in
astonishment.

"See, Father, the beam of this particular view ray is constructed to
transmit energy complete, and is, consequently, a most efficient and
adaptable weapon, ready to carry any energy to any point it reaches, and
it has tremendous penetrative range, as you can see. Some of this type
of ray will even dislodge furniture, or transmit the energy of a push.
Watch!" I seized a war club from the wall. It was very small for me,
like a child's toy hammer in my hands, and I tapped one of the heads of
the Sathanists. <span id="fr_50"></span>[14](#fn_50.md) He promptly dropped
unconscious or dead to the floor. "You see, you didn't know what there
was in this beam. It is a very fine example of the best work of that
particular time."

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

Odin waited for no prompting from me, but seized a club from the wall
and started bopping every head in the ray screen. Regularly I moved the
beam a little to keep a good bunch of the enemy within its slightly
reduced vision, reduced from life size, and pencilled my own
epileptic-ray at everyone of the misfits of life that I could reach.
Odin was enjoying himself immensely, and we had nearly cleared the
cavern of its hundred or so big-shots of the Jotuns when a huge black
shorter-ray swung out of Sathanas’ vast ship from dark space and
grounded Odin's Eye. Odin's fun was over for the time, his beam shorted
to the ground by the black conductor ray. His troubles with the super
science Sathanas had brought from his Nor-governed home had just begun.
So had all Earthmen's troubles with Sathanas.

I figured that Odin's bopping of Jotun pates would have the effect of
holding off the attack until I had time to make ready for it, because
they hadn't known that they could be reached. I radioed the Darkome for
certain supplies and for certain technicians I would need. Why didn't I
tell them to radio a Nor base and tell them of the whereabouts of
Sathanas? Because I had an idea that I could take Sathanas apart with a
device I was planning to construct, and that I could bring him in
single-handed, which would be quite a feather in my cap. Such is a man's
thought when near a sun. Always wrong. It was foolish to do without the
help I could have acquired so quickly, but I thought it a splendid idea,
and so original. I had never had such a wonderful idea before. Err is
very deluding when it appears in a mind unaccustomed to it.

First I asked the Aesir for a list of every available ray

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

device within the city. When I got the list, I checked off the types of
ray I wanted—those with a good long beam that would carry the greatest
amount of superimposed power, and those with the most potent destructive
qualities, regardless of the range. The latter would be aided in
carrying power by the former in the huge device I was planning for the
downfall of Sathanas. Why didn't I call the Darkome to me? I had another
err—the less equipment I used to capture Sathanas, the greater would be
my glory. Such errs I might have corrected if I had been used to their
presence in my mind, but in the clean magnetic fields of Nor planets
one's thought is naturally correct and I was unprepared for the sudden
flood of distorted ideas the Sun was releasing in my mind.

On the list of ray equipment brought me, there were all kinds of
pleasure rays and healing rays, but few weapon rays. The pleasure and
healing rays were tricky stuff, well built, some of it, but of little
use in a battle except for observation, inspiring the fighters, or for
healing the wounded. I knew that Sathanas’ black cruiser was loaded to
its capacity with the heaviest war-ray available which was, as I know
now, a power unsurveyed by any law-abiding eyes. So, it was hard to say
just what he might have up his sleeve in the way of fighting ray.
Whether his fleet would rendezvous with him here on Earth, or whether he
was to meet them elsewhere, I could not make sure, for his trained mind
had felt my probing thought and doubled the answer—saying that both were
true. I suspected that the first was the truth and that we would have
hundreds of outlaw ships flaming down upon us at any moment. Sathanas
seemed committed to supporting the Jotuns in return for their
cooperation in his own plans. Sathanas’ crew on his ship kept the black
shorterbeam on our view-beam, and Odin's Eye was the only ray of master
size in the city. We had no way of knowing now what they were up to.
Principally, I was anxious to know whether any of the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

other ships of Sathanas had joined him or not.

This life on Earth is distorted and fading, a once brilliant picture
that long ago fell on the water of life, and is now melting away. There
is little left of the old God picture of life. The soft rounded chins of
the Aesir young, the honest, beautiful truth in the undis-affected eyes
of a child, the turned, beautiful perfection of some young limbs, these
are the only true images left from the God era. The rest is distorted by
an ill wind across the mirroring pool of life force. And thus it was
that I saw those monstrous forms across the deep of Jotunheim, the life
force distorted by some evil willed wind from Elvidnir—from the Hall of
Hela in Niflheim—distorted and dying into the mental err of evil life.

While we waited for the supplies from the Darkome or for the arrival of
the patrol ships from space, I put the Aesir at the construction of a
cumbrous device I had seen put to good use on the field of battle. It
was most effective, but slow to handle. It was a monstrous turntable,
the axis of which was a universal joint. Throwing this piece of
equipment together with the odds and ends available took two days of
hard labor. Then we piled on it every ray device of destructiveness or
ionizing power (to make the air a conductor for the other beams) that
could be obtained in the whole city. The rays were then carefully
aligned to throw a multi-beam of immense, irresistible power. Nothing of
a portable nature could be possessed by the enemy to equal its vast
power. The turntable took up the whole courtyard of the palace of
Gladsheim, about the size of two city blocks. On the turntable, piled
two and three deep, were rays of every type developed by the past Atlan
and Titan life on Earth. I did not think that the Jotuns would have
anything of the kind. In the center of this motley assemblage of
destruction, I placed a small but very powerful dissociator of modern
make I had brought from the Darkome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[133:10](irl16.htm#fr_46.md) ODIN'S EYE: Was this
the origin of the legends regarding 'Odin's Eye'? Norse folk-tales
recounted it as an all seeing 'eye,' or all-seeing god-like power. This
just might have been the result, or the USE of just such ancient
mechanism or equipment as in this story—the view ray. The view ray,
which the authors claim still exist in the ancient, God-built caverns,
probably operated on a principle similar to a combination of present day
radar and television. The television part of the ancient 'mech'
operates, in any event, without the need for a transmitting station. The
same way, for instance, that your radio might pick up a conversation a
few miles away without the need of a radio station 'sending.'

It is amazing when you consider that right beneath our feet this present
day, and for untold centuries of the past, such equipment has lain idle
and unused—except by a few degenerate tribes that somehow have lived
there for all those years. It is the claim of the authors that the use
of this marvelous equipment by these degenerates, or 'dero,' their
'tampering' with the lives of surface people, is the cause of most of
our ill's and 'bad luck.'—Editor.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[134:11](irl16.htm#fr_47.md) Again referring to the
books of Charles Fort:

He quotes from the JOURNAL OF AMERICAN FOLK LORE, 17-203. viz, "Certain
stone hatchets are said to have fallen from the heavens."

The authors pose the question: Are these stone axes that have been
reported as having fallen from the heavens perhaps the crude 'side arms'
of an uncultured race of 'esoteric ones' who have learned to fly the
ancient cave-contained space craft, making inter-planetary flights, yet,
of themselves. incapable of making any more mechanically advanced war
weapons than crude stone hatchets that they have within historical times
dropped from their flying space craft? The reference above is the report
of South American Indians.

As to the possible 'size' of members of uncultured ones, read further in
Fort's THE BOOK OF THE DAMNED:

(From NATURE, 30-300:)

May, 1884, the 27th, at Tysnas, Norway, a meteorite had fallen; that the
turf was torn up at the spot where the object had been supposed to have
fallen: two days later "a very peculiar stone" was found nearby. The
description is—"in shape and size very like the fourth part of a large
Stilton cheese." See the story for a description of the size of the
Jotunds and then compute how large the stone heads of their war axes
would have to be.

In the same work, Fort quotes from The Proc. Soc. of Antiq. of Scotland,
1-1-121:

That in a lump of coal from a mine in Scotland an "iron instrument" had
been found.

Is this another indication of the extreme age of the human race?

Again from Fort: Notice of a stone axe, 17 inches long, 9 inches across
broad end. (Proc. Soc. of Ants. of Scotland, 1-9-184.)

American ANTIQUARIAN, 18 -60:

Copper axe from an Ohio mound; 22 inches; weight 38 pounds.

AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST, n.s., 8-299.

Stone axe found at Birchwood. Wisconsin: 28 inches long, 14 inches wide,
11 inches thick, weight 300 pounds.

HUMAN FOOTPRINTS FOUND IN SANDSTONE, Near CARSON, NEVADA—EACH PRINT 18
to 20 inches LONG. (Amer. Jour. Sci., 3-26139)—Editor.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[136:12](irl16.htm#fr_48.md)
DISAPPEARANCES—SLAVERY: The authors are convinced that there have been
many writers in the past and the present who either knew or suspected
the existence of the caverns beneath the surface of the Earth, or that
there was a power or a force or a race that was influencing the human
race, usually for evil. The numerous legends of evil spirits, and good
ones, too, tales of strange happenings, and strange disappearances.
Charles Fort was one of those who came closest to guessing, or knowing
the mysteries contained in the artificial cave world beneath this
Earth's surface. He thought that we were 'fished for,' or that the
possibility existed that we were fished for. For what purpose? Our facts
are still too intangible on this count to say for certain whether we are
really fished for at the present day. But if in the centuries past,
there were races such as the Jotuns, trading in living humans—as slaves
(or food?)—might they not still be extant? Before the reader dismisses
this question with "ridiculous!" let him read any of the daily papers of
the past few years, or the books of Charles Fort for literally thousands
of unexplained 'disappearances.' People seen one moment and never
again—even in the larger cities that are presumably well guarded.

If the reader lives near any of the country's large cities, he might
call the Missing Persons’ Bureau, if any, and get the LOCAL statistics
on the annual number of disappearances that are not accounted for, or
the number undetected. Then, figure out how many large cities there are
in the whole nation.—Author.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[138:13](irl16.htm#fr_49.md) EINHERIAR: This
persistent legend of raising the dead for purposes of acquiring
soldiers, slaves, etc. seems to come from the extreme potency of the
antique beneficial ray. I, myself, have seen a boy of eight killed by a
fiend from a distance with detrimental ray, raised again by his mother
with beneficial ray at full strength. The fiend killed the boy three
times in a period of four days, each time his mother revived or raised
him again within a few minutes. There are many accounts of the potency
of these rays. Even the thuggee of India believe that their unseen
backers can raise them from the dead if they are killed. It is very
probably true that they are revived after a short time of death by this
means. The Hindu ascetics who slit open their stomachs and let out their
intestines with a knife, then push them back in to have the wound heal
at once are the same kind of phenomena.—R. S. Shaver.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[139:14](irl16.htm#fr_50.md) PRECISE ACCURACY OF
ANCIENT WEAPONS: These ancient weapons were so accurate and so built for
durability that perhaps they are the means by which certain phenomena
have been actuated. Charles Fort, in his book, WILD TALENTS, says this:

"In the London newspapers, last orMarch, 1908, was told a story, which,
when starting off, was called "what the coroner for South Northumberland
described as the most extraordinary case that he had ever investigated."
The story was of a woman, at Whitley Bay, near Blyth, England, who
according to her statement, had foundher sister, burned to death on an
unscorched bed. This was the equivalence of the old stories of
'spontaneous combustion of human bodies."

(I don't know what significance, if any, is in the spelling of
"extraordin-RAY," but that is the precise way it is spelled on page 909,
THE BOOKS of CHARLES FORT, WILD TALENTS, published for the Fortean
Society by HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY, New York, 1941.)

ST. LOUIS GLOBE-DEMOCRAT, Dec. 16, 1889.—"In some mysterious way, a fire
started in the mahogany desk in the center of the office of the
Secretary of War, at Washington, D. C. Several official papers were
destroyed, but it was said that they were of no especial value, and
could be replaced. Secretary Proctor cannot understand how the fire
originated, as he does not smoke, and keeps no matches about his desk."
Taken from the BOOKS OF CHARLES FORT—WILD TALENTS—Page 911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. War Against the Jotuns](irl17.md)
