[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl09)  [Next](irl11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### The Abandondero

Instead of finding the old chief Elder and his aides about the room,
there was nothing. We raced through the place toward the telemechro
center where the rodite mechs of the whole city were supervised by a
concentration of screens which controlled them all when necessary. Upon
these screens the whole city was watched, and could at any time be
wholly robotized in an emergency from this point. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) And here we found them, the controllers
of the city; but they were not the giant elders I had expected to find.
I broke into laughter at the sight of them.

Clothed in rags and dirt, hung all over with hand weapons, their hair
long and matted, were the strangest, most disgusting creatures I had
ever seen in my life. They were dwarfs, some of them white-haired, from
the Gods know what hidden hole in Mu's endless warren of caverns.

"What in the name of mother Mu are these things?" I asked Halftan, who
had been one of the Atlans arriving immediately behind me, and who now
helped me in the task of binding the hideous dwarfs in turn after turn
of the heavy drapes from the walls.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

"You already know of them," he said. "They come from the abandoned caves
and cities of Mu. When the machinery became defective from age, many
centuries ago, a vast number of caverns were sealed up. Fugitives hid in
them, used the defective pleasure stimulators, <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) and as a result, their children were
these things.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

"They die of age, are stupid, cannot even read or write, but they must
have a vicious, cunning leader who has learned to use them. They are
called 'abandondero' by the techs, who have captured some of them for
study.

"If you had been in Tean City years ago, you would have heard them
talked about on the telenews. The ones shown then were so stupid no one
paid any attention. There is nothing so careless as a swelled head, I
guess. Those supremely intelligent Elders of ours who should be tending
this center will probably be found in ashes in the incinerator!"

His words wiped the laughter from my lips. No laughing matter now, these
ugly dwarfs! They were dero, children of dero, enslaved in some manner
by the derodite master who sought the death of all Mu! And the very fact
of it brought home to me the greatness of the menace we were beginning
to fight. For the first time I felt some misgiving as to the outcome.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

We finished tying the filthy brutes and then turned our attention to the
immense central synchronizing screen where a multiplex view of every
station in the city could be seen. At each screen slumped the particular
wizened dwarf who had been operating it, and who was now fast asleep and
secured by our makeshift bonds on his limbs.

We activated the big space communicator, swung the beam toward the
approximate position of Vanue's ship, sounded the 'ware' signal.

Instantly Vanue's face appeared on our screens—and we flashed the view
beam on each of the bound dwarfs and on the big multiplex screen,
showing the sleeping dwarfs who had replaced the original Atlan Elder's
rodite. She nodded comprehension, not speaking. Then she switched off
her communicator. We waited; it was up to her from now on. Meanwhile it
was up to us to hold the fort here in the telemechro center.

"Thank Venus," said Halftan, his eyes aglitter with excitement, "these
creatures are stupid, or we would not have overcome them so easily, nor
would our job holding out here be as easy. Smarter operators would have
managed to flash some signal when they sensed they were going to sleep."

I was inclined to agree that his analysis was correct. But I also added
mentally that when no checking signals went out in the next tew minutes,
an investigation might be made from Tean City, or wherever the central
control was located.

"Do you suppose our enemies never heard of a sleeper ray?" I asked
Halftan.

"Did you, before you met Vanue and the Nortans?" countered Halftan.
"Besides, these dwarfs are sub-dero, not thinkers! I remember from the
old tech report on them in the news. I wondered then why no one made a
move to clean them out, but concluded that it was because they could not
think coherently enough to be a menace. I

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

realize now, however, that our corrupt big-heads were using them even
then by some means that they had discovered."

"I was not talking of these dwarfs," I said. "I am wondering about the
rodite and the big-heads themselves."

Halftan's face grew thoughtful, and he began a watchful survey of the
multiplex screens with a new tenseness evident in his body.

Both of us saw it coming at the same instant, and a shock of real
surprise swept through us. The dark bulk of Vanue's great Nor ship
showed on the screens shadowed over the great surface tower of the
administration center. The lightless ship had drifted down the
communicator beam! What power Vanue must have, not to need the lifter
ray for landing! What unknown science to use a communicator beam as a
pilot beam!

It hovered for a brief time, then the roar of its great jets became a
maddening thing; and the ship lifted again into the night sky. Why had
it come, and what had it done? Had it done anything?

Our wonder lasted only a brief time, for soon we saw Vanue coming into
the center, dwarfing it, stooping low to clear the ceiling fittings.
Swiftly after her came her Nor maids, a hundred or more of them; and a
dizzying activity sprang into life about us.

A tender from the Nor ship was lying before the doors of the hall, and
in and out we Atlans and Nor maids sped, trundling trucks of apparatus.
Once emptied the tender returned to the surface. Under Vanue's eye the
dwarfs were unbound and placed in their former positions, while a rodite
beam was set up behind each screen. Now they were held in a ro beam from
a Nor maid's mind, the slaves of her augmented will.

The hangings were replaced; the space communicator switched off; even
the marks of binding were chafed from the dirt-encrusted wrists of the
abandonero. Then we

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

hid. To the view screens all was as before our entrance.

Vanue gave a signal, and somewhere in space the sleep ray switched off.
The city came to life. That sleep had not lasted more than thirty
minutes. Would the freaks from the lost cavern realize what had
happened? On that question depended the lives of millions of people, all
over Mu. Vanue had no doubt but that the derodite would carry out their
murderous threat to kill the people if we attacked. Well, we had
attacked, but in a way Vanue hoped would not be realized.

The telescreen from Tean City began sounding a constant call. The
nearest dwarf, a hideous old woman, reached over and threw the circuit
open. On the screen was the furious face of a fat Atlan. He was one whom
I knew well from his appearance on telenews screens as a high official
in construction.

"Where have you been?" he screamed at her. "Don't you know how tough a
spot we're in? Your orders are to stay on duty until relieved."

The hag's hoarse voice answered, a groveling fear on her dirty old face.

"We had a li’l trouble. One stray Elder came in with a private key,
nearly bumped us all before we did away with him. Everything is all
right, else. Nothing to worry about. He didn't know what was doing—been
away for a year. He's dead meat man now."

"Might have upset everything," the fat Atlan growled. But he seemed
appeased by the news. "The overgrown fools. There aren't many of them
left alive in Mu. Let me know at once if anything else turns up."

Behind him, on the rodite screen, before he turned off the beam, we
could see a scene of mad revelry. In the background were the tremendous
figures of some of the great ones of Atlan writhing in horrible torment
while about their bodies crackled the blue flames of some paingening
electric. Drunken renegades from Atlan's army

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

reeled across the screen, dragging protesting girls after them. It was
evident that they were celebrating the frustration of the Nor fleet in a
manner deemed to be appropriate!

Then the Tean City screen went blank as the beam was switched off, and
the old hag, her face a toothless grin at what she also had seen,
reached out and broke the contact on the screen.

On the various units of the multiplex screen from the sub-rodite
stations of surface Atlan and Sub Atlan cities much the same
conversation took place. Each abandonero explained apologetically that
he had fallen asleep and begged not to be reported. Each was reproved by
the ro at the "plex" control.

We knew that they would never realize that all had fallen asleep. Many
even denied their sleep, claiming they had had no signals. All reported
everything all right.

"All right indeed!" I could hear mighty Vanue's thought in her furious
mind. She waved her hand—and from somewhere in space that big sleep beam
went on again.

On the multiplex screen at the center we could see Normen entering
everywhere, setting up control apparatus without awakening the dwarfs.
All over the sleeping city Nor-men were active, setting up hidden
controls, ships landing and taking off—the armies of Nor gathering and
entering the caverns. . .

Could they do it? Could they take the planet without setting off the
alarm which would bring death down on the helpless people? As I looked
at the sleeping, hideous things whose forebears had once been men, I
felt they could. And when they did, I would not have wanted to be in the
shoes of the Atlan or Titan who had trained and turned these things
loose on the people of a whole planet! There would be a grim reckoning
when the Nortans caught him.

"Vanue—Vanue!" called a Nor maid to her mistress.

"I have it! I have been reading the mind of this thing in

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

its sleep. The center of this whole mess is not in Tean City nor any
city, but in the abandoned caverns. Some ancient Elder, exiled long ago,
returned secretly to Mu and entered those sealed cities. He has been
chief of the abandonero for all their life. All their orders come from
him. They do everything he says—nothing without his word. If we took the
whole planet, we would still have his high and mighty madness to reckon
with, together with a horde of these creatures who do his bidding—with
Venus herself knows what kind of antique junk to do it. Some of those
old war mech builders were not fools, and their methods were lost in
wars when they were killed. You know, like the one time we ran into
antique war mech on Helbal, when the deros of those old burrows used
that stuff on us. No one knew what it was. We had to blow it all to
Hades to get them."

Vanue picked her up with delight and kissed her. It was becoming
increasingly plain to me that this was not the first time these warrior
maids had seen action. They worked too smoothly. With the hand weapons
and war weapon harness they wore, they were formidable looking Amazons.
Their strength was unbelievable, and I knew it came from the inner
growth of the incubator which increased the solidity of the flesh. My
own period in the incubator had demonstrated that on my own body.

With the new knowledge the Nor maid had picked up, a new plan of action
came into being. Vanue relinquished her authority in the telemechro
center to one of the many space officers who had been going in and out
on errands mysterious to me. Then the hundred Nor maids and ourselves
accompanied Vanue to the tender and we were soon flashing skyward up the
rollat tunnel and out into space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[82:29](irl10.htm#fr_28) The telemechro center
was in itself under outside control, the communications mechanics being
ro to the central control which was ro to the master control in its
turn. Thus, all the rodite supervising the city could be placed under
one master control through the screens in the telemechro center. By this
means, the whole city's inhabitants could be placed under hypnotic
condition, even including the rodite themselves. From this it can be
seen the telemechro center is a vital spot in the dero control which had
been thrown over all Mu.—Ed.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[83:30](irl10.htm#fr_29) Entirely aside from our
questioning of Mr. Shaver, we received a letter from him in which he
describes the pleasure stimulator mentioned here. Or rather, he
describes the sensations concurrent with its use in a very peculiar
manner—since his words seem to indicate that he himself went through the
experience. Whether or not the following words are those of Mr. Shaver,
or of Mutan Mion, your editors have as yet been unable to determine.
Certainly some of them are Mr. Shaver's (which only makes them more
startling in their implications) and certainly some of them are not. In
either case, they give us something to ponder upon.

"They played stim on me, a powerful augmentation of woman-love; to a
hundred powers of natural love. There are no words to describe what this
apparatus did for life. There were hundreds of rays about, always
pleasant, their messages like conversation as though a thousand
Scheherazades were telling tales at once. It augmented every cell
impulse to a power untold. It seemed that every tree carried a beautiful
face; every breeze was like a bath in elixir; every sensation having the
value of a thousand nights of love. Little bells and visions of
indescribable beauty mantled my closed lids to waft me into a sleep
ofdreams beyond anything mortal mind could devise." (Note the difference
between the foregoing paragraph and the following.—(Ed.)

“These mechs—rays—stim—have been used always as the forbidden fruit of
life, the last treasure in the temple of secrecy which has consumed the
ancient science. The orgies which the uses of such stimulants inspire
have been going on secretly since the earliest times—beneath the temples
and in the secret pleasure palaces of the world. (Shaver here seems to
be talking of our modern world, not of ancient Mu.—Ed.) These orgies
still go on, and are more deadly than before—more filled with de
accumulated in the apparatus, the stim itself concealing the deadly rays
whose effect is explained as the sad results of overindulgence; which is
untrue—the stim is a beneficial of great virtue and leaves one stronger
and wiser after use.

“The legend of the sirens is an example of ancient mechs which no one
could resist—in the hands of evil degenerates it became a deadly
attraction—drawing shiploads of men to death and the ships to looting.

“The course of history, the battles, the decisions of tyrants and
kings—was almost invariably decided by interfering control from <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> the caverns and their hidden apparatus. This
interference, this use of the apparatus in a prankish, evil, destructive
way, is the source of god worship, the thrill of divinity, the sensing
of the invisible, the prostration of the will before the stronger will
of the ray gen (ridden and unknown as it was)

“The remarkable part of it all is that it still goes on today. Emotional
and mental stim—unsuspected by such as you and the average citizen—used
in mad prankishness, all come from the ancient apparatus. If you will
remember your stage fright in the school play, the many other times when
your emotions seem to have gone awry without sufficient reason—were
these natural?

“The dero of the caves are the greatest menace to our happiness and
progress; the cause of many mad things that happen to us, even so far as
murder. Many people know something of it, but they say they do not. They
are lying. They fear to be called mad, or to be held up to ridicule.
Examine your own memory carefully. You will find many evidences of
outside stim, some good, some evil—but mostly evil.”

Mr. Shaver gives this information in all seriousness. In the deserted
(and not so completely sealed!) caverns of Mu, the dero descendants of
the abandondero still exist, idiotically tampering with our lives by
senseless use of the ancient stim mechanisms which actually were created
to enhance man's life and not to plague it, but now are detrimental
through an accumulation of radioactives which impair their action.—Ed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Into the Tunnels of the Dero](irl11)
