[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl20)  [Next](irl22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### Seizing the Satana

As one will, under the 'der' influence of a sun that burns heavy metals
and makes men's minds function in evil error, I had spent my time
waiting for—what? Some silly pap to my vanity—a feather in my cap that
would be mine had I captured this fellow Sathanas single-handed. And
what had the 'der' sun led me to? Capture—and worse, torture for myself
and my four valiant companions . . . and . . . the Gods of Space only
know what horrible fate for my lovely Arl. True, I had some idea that
Sathanas was not going to kill me—that would have been too merciful for
his evil dero soul. No, he meant to prolong my torment to its last
groan, preferably, hoping that it would take years for me to groan my
last.

"That was small consolation, knowing that he wasn't going to kill me.
But, a human body can stand only so much. My companions had fainted long
ago. I must have fainted several times myself. I was aware of several
periods of consciousness. Perhaps that fiend was merely reviving me in
order to see my huge frame collapse again in an effeminate faint that
would have given him great pleasure, no doubt.

But, as I say, I revived the last time. And, from somewhere within me
came rage—rage that lent my tortured body strength . . . strength that
Vanue's marvelous

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

nutrients <span id="fr_58"></span>[22](#fn_58.md) had given me, over and
above my natural inheritance.

Had Sathanas known all that Vanue knew about nutrient and beneficial
rays, he probably would not have become what he was, but instead he
would have grown into a wise and noble man. As it was, his men had
failed fully to realize the tremendous power that had been grown into my
limbs. I didn't know it myself until that final moment when my agonized
body could take no more and with supreme rage and pain, a mighty roar
issued from my straining throat and I heaved on the chains that held me
strapped to the floor—heaved until I could feel the warm blood from my
lacerated wrists.

There was a sight—a mighty fifty-foot God-man flat on his back, his head
thrown hard against the floor, his back arched with the massive, bowed
muscles that quivered with the last supreme, flayed effort for a futile
final flail against its bonds. Suddenly, my cry of rage turned to one of
joy—sheer animal joy. One of the chains had pulled loose from the
moorings in the floor! A catlike smile lighted my face as I grasped the
chain on my other arm and pulled with savage joy on that mere chain with
both my massive

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

arms. It came free!

With both arms unchained, it was the work of a moment to loose myself of
the chains binding my feet and I stood up. Free! Free, for the first
time in hours . . . or was it days? Released from my bonds, but not
entirely free as I learned after a moment's thought. I still had to get
out of this cell—but I was standing, and on my feet. I could fight now.

I stepped from under the vari-pain beam, and, at once, I disposed of
that with one vicious swipe of my balled fist. Then, 1 set about freeing
my unconscious companions. That was done in a moment.

The five of us were released from our bonds. The only thing between us
and complete freedom was a metal door and the crew of this war vessel of
Sathanas’ fleet, perhaps some three or four hundred men of the
approximate size of myself. Quite a formidable obstacle under normal
circumstances, but, just out of my bonds as I was, it didn't seem
unconquerable. There was something in being able to move one's limbs
that make other difficulties seem of less importance and of no
consequence.

After making certain that my four Aesir were still living and would soon
snap out of their stupor, I tried the metal door. It seemed strong
enough. Then I really put my strength to the handle and with an oath to
the unknown gods of spacemen, I braced my legs against the wall and
pulled. The sweat stood out on my brow, my muscles ached with the
tremendous load, the calves of my legs were quivering with the awful
strain—then, with a shriek of tortured metal, the lock tore out and the
door flew open, flinging me to the floor with the sudden reaction. I
sprawled on the deck, a very much surprised and bruised God.

When breath finally came back to me, I mumbled something about "Our
friend Sathanas must have been too unwise in some of his remarks to our
Nortan engineers for such a weak bit of equipment to be installed in a
warship

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> . . . ha! Serves
him right!"

It was true. There are no [finer](errata.htm#8.md)
[craftsmen](errata.htm#9.md) anywhere in all the known cosmos, yet they are
sometimes prone to strike back, thusly, for some slight insult—letting
inferior work pass as O.K. Then, one day, the one that insulted will
find his mech failing when he needs it most. It pays to be courteous and
considerate with everyone, I have found in twenty centuries of ruling.
It pays.

Where this monster ship was heading, I had no idea. I did have the idea
that I didn't wish to go wherever it was going—it no doubt wouldn't have
been healthy.

My reverie was interrupted by a moan. I looked to the Aesir who were
beginning to stir themselves. Tyr was the first to come to, and with his
help we soon had the other three on their feet and spoiling for a fight,
We all wanted vengeance for that period under the vari-pain machine, and
we meant to get it.

Out the door I went, the four Aesir stalking behind me, an eager light
in their eyes and a look of supreme faith in my judgment and ability on
their faces.

We rounded a curve in the companionway and nearly barged into a ray-post
unannounced. At the controls of the huge space gun sat a big Angle in
the uniform of Sathanas’ service, on watch for some sign of the Nor
Patrol.

"Let's take ’im!" I yelled, bounding forward at the same time, seizing
the man's arms and twisting them back and up. The Aesir needed no second
urging. They swarmed over the huge fellow, one of them standing on his
lap and stuffing part of his coat in the Angle's mouth to smother any
outcry.

"Get his weapons, Tyr!" I ordered.

Tyr was tugging at the warrior's weapon belt and it came free. I
couldn't help laughing, even in so crucial a moment, at the startled
look on the fellow's face. Evidently he had never expected this. The
fellow's dis gun Tyr gave to Vol, then he pulled out his flame sword and
finding it

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

too big, asked if I wanted it. I shook my head, "No, Tyr, it too small
for me." He flung it aside.

"Come with me, my evil friend," I said to the fellow whose arms must
have been hurting him for the way I had them twisted behind him. With my
invitation, I pulled the big guy to his feet and propelled him along in
front of me down the corridor.

Adjacent to the cargo compartment where we had lain I had noticed
another empty cell. I hurled our captive into it and locked the door.

Vi, one of the Aesir, shot a penetrative ray through the door and we
could see the big one struggling to his feet. "Give him the
epilepto-ray, Vi," I ordered.

Flicking a little lever on the barrel of the gun he held, the ray
changed color slightly and we could see the poor dupe in the cell fall,
writhing in pain, to the floor. Well, we had had a lot worse at their
hands. When he stopped moving, we knew he was paralyzed for the next few
hours.

I began to like these Aesir more and more. There is something in the way
a fighting man operates that gladdens the heart of another warrior, and
these Aesir had jumped to action with alacrity that would have done
credit to the noblest of the Nor. And Tyr was the best of the four.
There is nothing that can replace experience in battle, and they all had
that and more. Tyr, though, was a companion that I would find myself
reluctant to give up . . . quiet, but quick . . . reflective and slow of
speech, but fast as a snake when necessity called. There are few like
him, yet, according to the Nor medicoes, such men as Tyr are hopelessly
infected with the evil of the sun and are not fit to bear the sons of
future Nor citizens. Bah! Those medics are soft from easy living, say I.
The Gods have their ailments, and an easy, too well provided life, with
too little danger, is one of them. For myself, I am determined to go my
own way in this question of retrieving the sons of man from the
Sun-evil.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

I looked about for a second, deciding what to do next—not so Tyr. When
he had locked the Angle in the cell safely, he had sprung back to our
captive's ray-post and had swung the weapon around so as to cover the
inside of the ship, rendering the whole craft visible to the screens
within the post.

Before it had occurred to my reputedly superior mind to do so, Tyr had
activated the sleeper ray—one ray which he knew was invisible—and had
put half the ship's crew to sleep with it. Then, I took Tyr's place at
the ray's controls, which was probably unwise, and swept the ship clean
of conscious life.

I returned the view beam to its former position, angling slightly ahead
to watch for other ships, when I saw a black shape cruising beside our
own.

Scanning three hundred sixty degrees around the ship, I counted fifty of
Sathanas’ ships which had joined him since we had been captured.

"Oh-oh! This is a different problem entirely." I spoke to no one in
particular. "This is going to require some thought."

I made one last swift search of the inside of what was now our ship,
trying to find a trace of Arl. I failed. I had time for nothing more,
for even though we had the flagship of Sathanas’ fleet in our hands,
that ship was surrounded by fifty of the enemy loyal to Sathanas, and
more than willing to dispose of any Nortans—one Mutan Mion in
particular. We had to get our ship out of there before we were
discovered or be shot like roosting pigeons. At any moment one of the
ships alongside of us would throw a view ray into the Satana for some
purpose or other and our little game would be all over. I had no doubt
that instant death would be our fate in the event of discovery.

Tyr again took the ray while I raced forward to the control bridge. It
would have been too complicated for any of the Aesir to navigate this
ship, and, besides, most

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

of the weapons were too huge for anyone but the size of Arl or me. And
where in the name of the Gods of Space was Arl?

Quickly I placed a mind control ray upon the ship's commander, one ugly
fellow, Haltor by name. Standing him upon his feet by sheer strength of
synthetic nerve-current command, I walked him toward the general
televisor which was set to contact all of the ships of the fleet at
once. I had him rasp out a few words as though in a great hurry at some
sudden emergency.

"Commander Haltor to all ship commanders. Unforeseen emergency makes
necessary a return to Earth for certain valuable material that was
overlooked. The fleet will continue on its present course to
destination. We will rejoin you as soon as we are able."

Not giving them time to question or to think about the orders, I swung
the huge Satana in a short, tight arc that glued all of us to our seats
under a half dozen gravities, and accelerated the ship on a return
course. We were near a zone of weightlessness or the maneuver could not
have been accomplished at the speed we were traveling. The High
Commander Haltor I dropped unceremoniously to the deck where he resumed
his interrupted slumber.

If I only had used that time of the return to Mu to everlastingly
eliminate the 'great' Sathanas. But one's mind never functions correctly
near Old Sol. One should figure out what to do, then do the opposite,
when near this sun. I had decided to take Sathanas and his crew to Mu
and leave them in the hands of the Aesir as a means of education for
themselves. They could use the minds under telemach telaugs for a ready
reference library of space travel and other needed information, and in a
year or more be ready for a migration to a more beneficient energy field
on some other planet. It was not a perfect solution to my problems, for
Sathanas was not disposed of as the Nor Elders would have wished, but it
did justice to the Aesir,

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

and at the same time made it unnecessary for me to stay an illegal
length of time upon the Earth.

But some ray from the fleet had caught a glimpse of the sleepers who
should not have been sleeping, in tumbled positions everywhere about the
ship. As I accelerated full back upon the return trail, out behind me I
could see the fleet winging sharply around to turn upon me. Now I was
the hunted. I prayed for the sight of a Nor patrol ship, but nothing
showed in any direction. The ships behind me formed a 'V' of
pursuit—being the quarry, I had the unpleasant feeling the formation was
a spear point poised at my back. I was nearly helpless, for the massive
guns of the great ship were not built to be fired by small men, or a few
men, and I myself had to stay at the ship's controls. But I could leave
her under robot control while I left for a short time to swing the big
guns of the turrets for the smaller Aesir to fire. This I did and ran up
into the master turret and swung a huge dis-ray in a vicious circle at
the trailing ships. They did not want too close a taste of this. It was
probable that the whole fleet was so built that this one ship could
dominate it, for Sathanas did have sense enough to know that the type of
men he used would be the type of men apt to find a reason to turn upon
any domination. But they did not drop the pursuit. I might have shaken
off one ship by a series of swift accelerations and change of course at
each flash into invisibility of light speed, but to lose fifty pursuers
was too much to expect. Too, it is dangerous to try complete
acceleration thusly, for one may have miscalculated the weight in the
haste of battle, and the figures on the sheet, suddenly resolved into
actual force in the driver plates, would smear us against the metal
walls—just so much human hash. In full speed flight, such maneuvers can
be suicide without full checking by several sharp minds for error.

The ship began to heat under the combined fire of the rays from the
whole circle of pursuit. I had to do something

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

fast. The old hostage gag was in my mind, but would these pursuers care
what happened to Sathanas, or would they seize the excuse to make me rid
them of their master? Well, I would soon find out.

I sped into the sealed chamber which Sathanas used to bask in his
special nutrient and stimulative pleasures. About him lay his women in
sleep and upon a bed of spikes from which still coruscated the blue fire
of synthetic pain, lay one of the women in torture. I had time to throw
the switch on the pain juice, for no sleeper ray could have put that
torture distended body to sleep. Now I understood Sathanas. He was an
ordinary idiot like Ex-Elder Zeit, who must always be plaguing some poor
devil to death. And no man can do much thinking if he is always busy
torturing some unlucky mortal.

I drew the flame sword I had appropriated from one of the sleepers who
was my size. Holding its point a little way from his breast, I gave his
sleeping body a slight taste of its potent destructive power. He
screamed into wakefulness. Such screams from a full grown man—a God
almost. A bystander would have thought I hurt him. Maybe I did cause him
pain at that—I hope so.

"Now, you overgrown hunk of diseased meat," I ordered him. "Will you
call off that fleet or must I kill you?" I activated the telescreen
beside the dais and upon it appeared the fleet, a great crescent of
powerful shapes. "Step up and speak!"

Sathanas was suddenly reasonable. He stepped to the screen and showed
himself. "It may be best for you to fall back away out of range, while
the lord of Mandark under Van of Nor has time to discuss a little
business with me. You can use the time to dispatch that little package
of stuff on its way to the rendezvous. I can use it if it is safely
there. I am a hostage and his terms must be understood."

The fire from the fleet ceased. It was none too soon, either. Probably
they had supposed Sathanas was dead

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

as well as the crew. Although the hull was not pierced, many of the
sleepers had died from the rays upon us. They dropped away from us
swiftly. Soon they were but hovering dots upon the far ray-view horizon,
hundreds of miles astern. I kept the televisor upon the fleet. There was
little discussion among them. They were just awaiting my next move. One
ship moved off from the fleet and returned again upon the course we had
just traveled along. Quickly I learned the reason for this action.
Putting the question into the mind of one of the officers of the distant
fleet, I was struck dumb by his answer, automatic and unconscious as I
knew the thought was to him. I couldn't believe it. The mystery of our
fruitless search for Arl aboard ship suddenly became clear to me. The
answer in the man's mind was: "The ship is taking the great bodied queen
of the giant Mutan Mion, beautiful Arl, to the place where women are
made into love machines and automatons of the pleasure science. She will
be a valuable stim operator after her will is removed and the will to
pleasure only placed in her. Her beauty will be much sought after by the
great ones. I wish I was getting the money someone will get for her from
the dark ones of the evil palace of pleasure science."

Arl! It couldn't be another. And she was being taken from me. While I
was still digesting the horrible facts, the ship disappeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[176:22](irl21.htm#fr_58.md) NUTRIENTS: These
nutrients are based on the hydrogen ion flow in the body. Most of the
electric by which the greatest electrical machine known (human body)
operates is borne about the body as a charge upon a flow of hydrogen
ions. The ancients had developed a method of superimposing upon the
hydrogen ion charges of certain energy flows not electric as we know it.
These were borne into the body upon rays, where they become a part of
the charge upon the hydrogen ion flow within the body's batteries, and
are there borne to all the functioning parts of the flesh to be absorbed
directly by the flesh. These rays—nutrient in nature—were formed
directly from energy ash, the stuff of which all matter is formed. As
well they had methods of ionizing and rendering absorbable by the body
such nutrients as we call vitamins. These volatile essences of nutrient
foods they ionized and introduced into the blood stream as "nutrient
rays"—driven through the air by electric pressure and sometimes by
super-sonic force. These ions were charged in a complementary way that
made them attractable by the ordinary body electric charge.—Author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. A Satanic Hostage](irl22.md)
