[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl23)  [Next](irl25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

### CHAPTER XII

#### Harald's Hostages

Servants of evil men can be fiends. These were. In the growth caverns,
many things that no man should see were going on. Little girls were
being trained by ro-mech to be faultless dancers—automatons of rhythm.
The process was designed to develop those muscles and thoughts needed by
a dancer to the exclusion of other growth within her body. To attain
this, she was wired to a thought record taken from some famous dancer's
brain, and day after day, her little body mechanically repeated the
motions and her brain mechanically repeated the thoughts of the dancer
until the whole dance became automatism. A thing was produced which
would never be human and a thing hard to describe to those who have not
seen it.

These creatures were slaves. They had nothing whatever to say about
their fate in any way. Much of the treatment was very beneficial; the
slavers adopted the best medical science of the immortal races to gain
their own ends. It was the unbalance of the character aimed at by such
men as Harald and Sathanas that was evil.

There were hundreds of liquid nutrient tanks in which females of all
sizes and races were suspended. Upon their brains telerays played,
impressing repeatedly hypnotic commands as well as the whole gamut of
erotic thoughts culled from millions of years of the development of the
science of pleasure in just such gilded palaces of slavery. All this was
extremely pleasant to the recipient, so much

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

so as to crowd all other tendencies from their minds. They were given
such treatment from the earliest childhood, if they fell into the hands
of the slavers at that age. They received no other education. Thus, the
art of pleasure was burned into their brains until they knew no other
objective.

Through every pleasure nerve of the body ran nutrient and growth
stimulating flows introduced directly into the nerves by tiny needles.
The whole body immersed in the nutrient liquid, evolved a covering flesh
more alive, more soft, more reactive to sensation than is the case in
the normally developed human being.

Such women had many men passionately enslaved to them, giving them every
penny of their income. All this went directly into the pockets of such
as Harald. Naturally he never released any of these profitable slaves
from his bondage.

Thus all the growth and life science of the vast races of immortals was
here perverted in this evil world of Pandral to the ends of the
master—power and gold. No one but Harald had a will in any matter on all
Pandral but for the profit of the master.

The growth rays, if concentrated on those nerves which cause pleasure
sensations, can give a person infinitely greater capacity for pleasure
than in the normal person. But, when this is done, the ability to resist
such pleasure does not grow normally and the creature becomes a servant
to the will to pleasure. And, since the greatest pleasure comes from
synthetic nerve impulse generators, they become a servant of the
machine. While this could be a means of enhancing the joy of life in the
proper hands, such men as Harald were certainly not the proper hands.

At last I found and released my beloved. I cannot tell you what had been
done to her, but I have hopes of repairing the damage. She would have
become a delectable morsel for some mad master, for what had been
designed for her was not a choice future.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

We herded the heterae, the drunken customers, the whole crew of
unnatural servants aboard the captive vessels and dispatched them toward
the courts of the Nor Empire. I will be there when their cases come up,
and I will have plenty to say. Some of those child victims of his will
yet grace Mandark after Vanue's laboratories are through with their
reconstruction. Vanue's reward system will shake evil thought out of
their beautiful young heads.

I said to Harald: "You think you can pervert the life stream of the race
to your own selfish ends. Love is sacred to the Gods. Your manufacture
of will-less sirens will not be appreciated by the courts such men hold
in Nor for just your kind. It's only by accident that a youngster of my
diminutive stature—a mere fifty feet of man—came upon your place in my
pursuit of Sathanas. Had one of our leaders chanced upon information
leading to this hole, your lot would have been different. Already you
would have been dealt with. It pays to be virtuous so far as you can
imagine virtue, for when one steps off the path, one faces these beings
whom no power of our imagination could vision . . . no force we could
conjure up would ever overcome, for their life is ages old and has been
gaining in strength for all those years. Those who take a whole planet
to build one home upon will not allow their laws to be set aside by any
pipsqueak who conceives a new way to make money and fails to remember
that the race is sacred to the Gods. You have forgotten that though the
Gods must of necessity dwell afar, yet they do not forget their source.
Some of the very creatures you have mutilated were kin of such mighty
men, and if I had not caught up with you they would have, and your fate
would have been far different from the trial and imprisonment I plan for
you."

Harald made no answer, but only glared at me in furious frustration.

"The great ones always search for the young of the race for better
brains to carry out their mighty plans, and

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

they are not pleased with the pollution of the blood that bears their
agents. They guard the tree of life, for they have a mighty use for its
fruit. Even assuming they were evil, and it is sometimes true that they
guard the tree for nothing better than to pick the beautiful fruit—the
young females as they mature—still they are not pleased with the
malformation—-the defiling of the tree that bears their much desired
beauties to grace the harems of Gods. Even assuming the Gods themselves
had no higher purpose than yourself, would you believe that they would
allow you to pollute a tree that produced the agents of their immortal
pleasures? Has it not seemed strangely easy for me to overcome your
greater strength? We are probably flooded with the observation and
control rays of mightier ones that we can imagine exist. How else could
a man take a fortress like this with two simple mental radios and a
couple of dis-guns? If you are ever free again, don't forget the Gods.
One way to remain alive is to envision the will of the Gods and carry it
out as if they were observing you, for sooner or later they will observe
you. Go now, to central Nor and to trial for every ill deed you have
worked against the life of Normen."

Pandral in the future will be a base for the Nor patrol. It is well
suited to the purpose.

Once more I took Sathanas aboard the Satana. I instructed the four Aesir
in the mind reading apparatus until I felt sure that nothing Sathanas
knew would be lost to them. Then setting them on their course for Earth,
I abandoned them to their pursuit of knowledge they would get from
Sathanas. The arch-fiend was immobilized by a nerve operation I
performed. There is little danger that he will get out of hand on Earth
before the Aesir have used him for the purpose to which I dedicated the
rest of his misused life. He will serve as a map and a guide to the
operations of the ships the Aesir will need for a migration to the dark
spaces beyond the deadly light of any sun. And when

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

the Aesir soar at last into the starless dark, Sathanas will lie in
chains in one of the deepest pits of the forgotten cities beneath the
Earth's crust. May he lie there forever.

. . . and Satan did lie there forever, as Dante tells us, but he
succeeded in being a curse to man in spite of his chains.

THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mr. Shaver's Lemurian Alphabet](irl25)
