[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](irl21)  [Next](irl23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0932813631/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*I Remember Lemuria*, by Richard S. Shaver, \[1948\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### A Satanic Hostage

1 looked at Sathanas’ face as he heard me read the man's thought over
the distance telaug beam. He leered his sardonic and famous smile which
he used only when he counted coup over some enemy. I juiced him a little
with the flame sword and he sank half dead at my feet. I had lost all
sympathy for the romance of evil as personified by Sathanas. He cost too
much to have around. Arl was lost to me forever, unless I regained her
soon, for a woman's soul cannot be replaced in her body once it is
removed from her mind. I might get Arl back, but it did not look as
though she would be anything but a smiling automaton to my wishes—a
woman without volition or real thought. Well, I would regain her,
anyway. Some Arl would be better than no Arl. I said as much to
Sathanas: "So you prefer your woman in the condition in which you are
putting my Arl. Yet, you do me the favor of doing the same thing to my
Arl who was always too self-willed for my comfort. You have done me a
favor, Sathanas, for which I will show my gratitude in due time.
Meanwhile, stop that leering, I don't like it. A flame sword is a weapon
that throws off a red flaming beam of destructive ions in any direction
it is pointed," I explained to his agonized face, "and just now it is
pointed at you, so don't try being so very clever. Even a God's patience
can be exhausted by a fool's asinine facial expression." Sathanas
altered his leering.

Meanwhile I had a problem on my hands. There was nothing I could do
about Arl except try to heal her again

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

once I got her back. The hovering fleet was just awaiting my next move.
So was I. I had to keep Sathanas in my hands. I dosed him with sleeper
beams to quiet the contortions of his face, then I turned toward the
ship's controls keeping us headed for Mu. I didn't use any more speed.
In his present state, Sathanas was no gift for the Aesir, and I had the
fleet hot on my heels. I sat down to think.

At last it struck me! My ship, the Darkome, was the answer. It lay where
I had left it, if the crew had followed my orders. I could not try to
contact the Nor patrol by radio from the Satana, as the wave lengths of
the apparatus were known and watched by the pursuing fleet. To try this
would only invite attack by Sathanas’ ships. Their allegiance to their
master would not be so great that they would wait quietly by while I
called the whole strength of vast Nor down upon them. I knew that it was
only because I had not attempted this that they did not continue their
attack in spite of my threat upon their master's life. But, if I could
set a course near enough to the Darkome, if the crew of the waiting ship
were on the alert and saw the whole string of enemy ships course
overhead, and if none of the ships of Sathanas’ saw the dark shape of
the Darkome in the shadows of the rocks of the moon's surface, if all
these things worked out correctly, then the Darkome would contact the
Nor patrol over our secret wave lengths and the fleet behind us couldn't
possibly have the slightest idea of any strategy.

If the Darkome lay where I had placed her, well under the shadow of a
mighty meteor crater's wall, it was possible that the fleet could pass
overhead without detecting her presence—unless the crew had placed a
light for my guidance. That worried me—but I had given orders not to do
so. The ordinary space radio is on a wave length known to everyone, but
for secret communication the radio panel of Nor war ships contained
several switches for different types of messages, and the radio, after
such switches

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

were thrown, operated on a wave length known to none but the
construction men on the home planet. The receivers were also set up in
the same manner so that secret messages could be heard only by
commanders of ships of the intelligence branch according to which switch
was set for the broadcast. Too, directional beam transmission cut down
the chance of the message being intercepted by the Satanists. It might
work. I stepped on the plate dis-flow button, my speed shot up to an
uncomfortable acceleration. We shot past the moon, right over the
Darkome's position. Whether she lay where I last left her or had gone in
search of me, I could not tell. The place was all in the dark shadow of
the mountains of the moon. I could not drop a beam to her without
betraying her position. If she lay there, and if the fleet behind me
failed to observe her, the chances were good that Nor ships would soon
be coming toward our position at a good hundred light speeds. The men of
the Darkome would hardly miss the sight and thunder of our drivers
overhead. This was my only chance for escape from this Arch-fiend whose
power over me still held, though he lay nearly dead at my feet.

Now, my problems were multiplied. First, I had to complete the capture
and death of Sathanas. Second, I had to rescue my Arl from a secret
stronghold of sin, the location of which I hadn't the faintest idea.
Third, I had to turn over a brain to the Aesir for them to use to escape
the sun-age death which I had sworn would not consume them. To stop me
were the fifty great ships of war waiting impatiently overhead for me to
conclude my conference with Sathanas and release him and his ship. It
was ridiculous of them but they apparently expected me to strike a
bargain with Sathanas and to take his word for a contract while I went
about my business. Such is evil thought—ridiculous upon analysis. It was
obvious to me that there was no way for me to release Sathanas from my
hands except by death. I couldn't trust his word in the slightest; yet,
to a logical man,

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

there was no other thing that fleet was waiting for. Then they could
come flaming in with all rays blasting. Some of them would have died.
But certainly so would have the Satana and myself and her master gone up
with her. What was I supposed to do with him—in their minds? I can never
understand evil.

Why didn't they give the ship a flood of sleeper ray? Because we would
have gone spinning down to Earth and not one of them could have stopped
our fall, for the weight of the great ship was too much for their cargo
magnetic grapple rays. The truth was that they were just waiting and so
was I. Well, I had more to wait for than they, but they didn't know it.
It is possible, too, that they thought me fool enough to trust the word
of their master to release me and to restore Arl in return for his life.

Why didn't I kill him? I thought I might have to reenact the threat
scene with the flame sword at his breast over the televisor to convince
them I still meant business, and while that possibility existed, keeping
him alive was a good investment.

I could not land the ship on Mu, for if a sleeper beam was used on the
whole ship, Sathanas and I would have been taken alive.

I hung the ship on her driver beams’ balance at fifty miles over the
rocks and waited. But, I kept my hand on the controls in such a way that
should a sleeper beam drop me unconscious, the ship would drop with me.
We waited while I kept up a running fire of conversation with the now
awakened Sathanas. Quickly I figured out these angles and awakened him
as I saw my safety lay in pretending to dicker with him for some
understanding. The fool believed me and was promising to set me off at
Quanto, a base that was safe for him to approach, not being heavily
defended, and leave me there after he had returned Arl to me. He assured
me that the place where she had been sent was not far away. But, I knew
as well as I know Arl's face,

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

that he was lying. I did not have to look at the telaug needles to see
the false needle vibrating in the red zone of der thought. No truth ever
comes out of a man when he is in der, and all of Sathanas’ thoughts were
full of der—I knew that quite well. Yet, the man could live and other
men could follow him. Why won't men study the lessons provided them to
help them over the ever present opposition of dero which they are
continually warned against? I can tell you—they are another kind of
errant—a mentally blinded errant who cannot see because they will not
look. Why don't they look? Because the der is in their will, too. How
could Nor men have a der will when it is checked for continually?
Because Sathanas, whose defection was hidden from the medicos by his
doting family, had put the der will in them himself with cleverly
contrived de-stim rays. After they had been fully infected with the
deadly radioactivity, they had been ripe for his plans. How could
Sathanas know so much about der as to use it on his own men to make them
tractable to his will, and yet not understand the need for removing the
radio-active material from his mind that caused his own err. Because
Sathanas was mad, and a madman is not logical. 'Der' is a good thing to
understand and I had studied it a long time.

Hanging there above old Mu, my four Aesir friends waiting with glum
faces, I felt like a fly hung up in a spider web. But, somehow I knew
that the wasp was coming for these spiders. Standing at the controls, I
would doze for an instant, and the great Satana would start her long
deadly plunge to the surface of Earth. The sudden drop would awaken me,
or the Aesir would shake me awake and I would bring the ship back to its
former position. Still faintly dotting the far ray-view horizon lay the
fleet of the Satanists watching their master's ship. Sooner or later
they would figure out that there was nothing to wait for, and would
speed off, for there was no other choice left to them. They could do him
no good now, for his fate

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

was in my hands. As this became clear to their officers, one by one they
deserted the vigil, flashing out of sight into immense speed to . . . to
where? I wish I knew. Some of them would be smoked out in a hurry once I
got my hands on the Darkome again.

At last I saw what I was waiting for—the Dread.Nors of the Nor Patrol
suddenly swooping out of the invisibility of light speed into the
visible ranges of movement as they braked their fight between the Moon
and Earth where braking could be done without danger from weight's
inertia. It can seem like magic—this speeding from weightless point of
space to weightless point at the speed of many light velocities. One
instant you are here, and the next your ship has arrived . . . if the
automatic ultrafast relays have tripped your drive and brake rockets
correctly. If they fail, you would not live to talk about it. It is
delicate stuff to plot such courses—to handle shiploads of men whose
lives hang on their hair-breath of mental coordination necessary to set
all the instruments aright before you take your course. To avoid
disastrous inertia at start and stop is a feat, indeed.

Instantly, the patrol went into action. A moment before, the sky had
been completely empty, then, suddenly, the Nor-ships appeared—guns
blasting at the Satanists, like ships coming from the fourth dimension
of ultra-speed into the three dimensions of visible speeds. One by one
the ships of Satan's fleet dropped blazing into the seas of Earth. I
grinned down at the semi-conscious Sathanas. "It seems that I win, O
Lord of Foolishness and Evil, who turns on better men than himself who
have done him no wrong. Soon your fleet will be no more. What do you
think they will do with you?"

I gave his head a little ben-ray so that he would be able to answer me
and be able to realize and suffer from the realization of his position.
His answer was a snarl of hatred. "You may have won this time, but there
will come

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

another day, Mutan Mion."

"If I know my Nor leaders, there will be no other day. However, you can
win my support if you tell me where they have taken Arl. I will claim
you as my captive and make sure that you live if you tell me where I can
find my beloved."

Sathanas, as I had known he would, caved in immediately and told me the
position of the pleasure science center where Arl had been taken.
Although he had probably sworn a dozen mighty and terrible oaths not to
reveal to

Nor men any detail of the place, he did so at the first sign that it
might be of value in saving his life. And like all evil men, he expected
me to keep my word to one who would betray a trust without any
provocation. Why? Because he knew my reputation as a man who keeps his
word. Well, to keep that reputation, which at times has a great value, I
would keep my word to the Arch-fiend. I would save him and turn him over
to the Aesir as a walking map of the heavens where his evil life would
at least find a use—a real use in making Gods and immortals out of
worthy mortals.

As I wrote down the position of the place Sathanas described, I
qualified my promise. to him. "However, I promise that you will never
again lead men to death . . . you are through with power."

The remaining ships of the Satanists’ fleet raised the signal of
surrender and were herded in beside our own floating giant which had
hoisted the white flag as the first blast of power from a Nor driver was
seen on the detectors. In less time than it takes to tell, the Satana
was swarming with clean cut men in the smart, glittering uniforms of the
Nor Patrol—efficiency and law backed up by cool shiny dis guns, and
ordered in clipped stern voices.

The Satanists never had a chance once their position we known. And well
they knew it, too. I was never so glad to see anyone as that sharpfaced
young officer who

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

boarded us and cheerfully rubbed my position in to me. I showed him the
mighty Sathanas coiled up in an agonized heap of epilepto-ray-charge,
for I had no desire of a reputation for softness among the patrol man,
and had dosed him with epilepto-ray as they drew alongside. His smile of
triumph was very warm and pleasant. He fully understood the predicament
he had rescued me from and I knew that he never intended to forget this
episode. "'How Mion got hold of the devil and couldn't let go . . .'"
was the story I would hear many times before I moved on to the heavy
planets.

"Opportune, our arrival, wasn't it, sir? You are the Earthman, Mutan
Mion of Nor, now of Van of Nor? Yes, I know much of you, but I have
never had the pleasure of meeting you."

I shook his hand, not minding the implied sarcasm. "Yes, you saved me
from a nasty situation. I was captured by the big fellow as I returned
from a trip to Earth. We managed to take the ship from his crew just as
this fleet showed up to the rendezvous here. We were safe because we
still held Sathanas alive, but how to let go—how to get away from that
bunch of armored battlewagons, I couldn't figure."

"Well, I guess it's all over now. We have only to take his nibs back to
Nor and turn him and his remaining followers in." The young officer's
face was greatly relieved that there was no more trouble in this affair
for him. But I dashed his hopes.

"That's not entirely true, my friend. A few hours ago he sent my Lady
Arl to a place that is called the "Pleasure Science Center." She is to
be the victim of a mind degrading operation, and afterward is to be sold
as a slave to some commercial pleasure palace of the illegal type. Much
of Sathanas’ business was of this pandering kind and we are apt to find
many a maid of Nor there who has been or will be changed into the sort
of animal Sathanas prefers

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

around him. We have no choice but to attack the place, however far or
however strong it may be, according to the oath we swear when we take
service under the Nor flag. Remember the words: 'To uphold the honor of
Nortan womanhood at the expense even of our life or reason—to risk all
dangers for the sake of extending the rule of reason through all space .
. .'"

"I did not know, Lord Mion. The businesses of Sathanas are much larger
than Sathanas, that I do know. But of the Lady Arl or of any other Nor
maidens who are in their hands, I did not know. Where is this place they
have sent her? We must prepare an attack, of course, but that is
something we must not rush headlong into. We know little about the
strength of these illegal cults. They have only been uncovered among the
Nor since the exposure of Sathanas."

"There is no time for the usual procedure of preparation for war. They
will start work on Arl at once after she arrives. I don't intend to wait
for that to happen. I have the position of the place. To get this, I
bargained with Sathanas, promising him his life for the information. If
he has lied, he dies. He is going to accompany me so that I may read his
mind en route and learn all he knows of the thing. Whether or not you
and the ships under your command accompany me is up to you or your
superior officer at the base. The Darkome is under my command and the
Darkome leaves at once to rescue Arl from the place called the Center of
the Science of Pleasure. Its true name is more correctly the Place of
Evil Lust, or it should be. Sathanas’ ship and his own ugly self are
both mine by right of capture, according to the Code of Nor. So, I have
two ships to fling at this focus of evil."

"Where is the place?" asked the young commander—young to me, meaning he
was but a century or two my junior. He was my senior in the patrol, but
I was not under his command. In the Nor Military Organization,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

a man is responsible only to those officers who are designated over him,
that is, I could be overruled by him only after he reported to my
superiors.

"It lies on the rim of the light of Fomalhaut, twenty some light years
from this spot. Fomalhaut, itself, can be reached in four days
accelerating from the zone of weightlessness between Saturn and
Jupiter—in this system, Saturn and Jupiter are the sixth and fifth
planets from the sun, respectively. At steady acceleration, we should
reach fourteen hundred light speeds in a few hours. It is unwise to
accelerate to a greater rate for such a short trip, so it will take us
four days."

"Four days seems like a lot of time for even a short trip like this
one," countered the young commander.

"Under normal circumstances that would be true, but 1 want to decelerate
out of the ultra speeds near the sub-planet Pandral—but not too near.
That's what will take the time."

"Pandral, Lord Mion? I can't recall ever having heard of it before."

"Neither had I until I read Sathanas’ mind—but that is where these
fiends have taken the Lady Arl—and that's where I am determined to
go—alone, if need be."

"You will not have to go alone, Lord Mion—but, first, let us take
another look at Sathanas’ brain. If the place looks vulnerable, we will
chance it. If not, we will report the place—and then scout it for the
arrival of a real battle force."

I shook the man's hand. He was not over-cautious or too subservient to
ritual—the only mark of evil that one can find in the clean race of the
Nor. He was a man. We set the course at once and blasted off into the
ultra speed that is used on such journeys. Some eighty light speeds we
attained at one jolt from the center of no-weight between Moon and
Earth. I set the pursuit needle to seek out the trail of the ship that
had borne Arl away to her 'life of

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

pleasure' as these fiends ironically called condemning a human to a
mindless life of slavery to evil desire. With another set of blasts from
the ro-pilot as we passed between Saturn and Jupiter, we attained
fourteen hundred light speeds—all that we required.

Then we put the telaug on Sathanas’ mind and sat down to the job of
examining every picture it contained that in any way related to our
objective and the force that defended its evil existence. There was a
great deal to know—to learn, we found. For many centuries this place—its
true name was Pandral—had been in the business of manufacturing and
peddling slaves for the Hell-holes of the rims of the Nor Empire. Like
every great empire, Nor's sway extended only so far, and where her
authority stopped, there lived her parasites, those who pandered to the
thoughtless sybarites of the Empire who sought outside Nor what could
not be obtained where her law prevailed. The very absoluteness and
thoroughness of Nor police work gave them their opportunity, for those
thirsts of evil origin could not be quenched in Nor, but those who
thirst will drink some way, and so Normen themselves supported their
worst enemies—just as they do in less intelligent worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Plot Against Pandral](irl23.md)
