[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classical
Paganism](../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../../neu/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bulf38) [Next](bulf40) 

# CHAPTER XL.

## THE DEATH OF BALDUR- THE ELVES- RUNIC LETTERS-

### SKALDS- ICELAND.

### THE DEATH OF BALDUR.

BALDUR the Good, having been tormented with terrible dreams indicating
that his life was in peril, told them to the assembled gods, who
resolved to conjure all things to avert from him the threatened danger.
Then Frigga, the wife of Odin, exacted an oath from fire and water, from
iron and all other metals, from stones, trees, diseases, beasts, birds,
poisons, and creeping things, that none of them would do any harm to
Baldur. Odin, not satisfied with all this, and feeling alarmed for the
fate of his son, determined to consult the prophetess Angerbode, a
giantess, mother of Fenris, Hela, and the Midgard serpent. She was dead,
and Odin was forced to seek her in Hela's dominions. This Descent of
Odin forms the subject of Gray's fine ode beginning:

          "Uprose the king of men with speed  
           And saddled straight his coal-black steed."  

But the other gods, feeling that what Frigga had done was quite
sufficient, amused themselves with using Baldur as a mark, some hurling
darts at him, some stones, while others hewed at him with their swords
and battle-axes; for do what they would, none of them could harm him.
And this became a favourite pastime with them and was regarded as an
honour shown to Baldur. But when Loki beheld the scene he was sorely
vexed that Baldur was not hurt. Assuming, therefore, the shape of a
woman, he went to Fensalir, the mansion of Frigga. That goddess, when
she saw the pretended woman, inquired of her if she knew what the gods
were doing at their meetings. She replied that they were throwing darts
and stones at Baldur, without being able to hurt him. "Ay," said Frigga,
"neither stones, nor sticks, nor anything else can hurt Baldur, for I
have exacted an oath from all of them." "What," exclaimed the woman,
"have all things sworn to spare Baldur?" "All things," replied Frigga,
"except one little shrub that grows on the eastern side of Valhalla, and
is called Mistletoe, and which I thought too young and feeble to crave
an oath from."

As soon as Loki heard this he went away, and resuming his natural shape,
cut off the mistletoe, and repaired to the place where the gods were
assembled. There he found Hodur standing apart, without partaking of the
sports, on account of his blindness, and going up to him, said, "Why
dost thou not also throw something at Baldur?"

"Because I am blind," answered Hodur, "and see not where Baldur is, and
have, moreover, nothing to throw."

"Come, then," said Loki, "do like the rest, and show honour to Baldur by
throwing this twig at him, and I will direct thy arm towards the place
where he stands."

Hodur then took the mistletoe, and under the guidance of Loki, darted it
at Baldur, who, pierced through and through, fell down lifeless. Surely
never was there witnessed, either among gods or men, a more atrocious
deed than this. When Baldur fell, the gods were struck speechless with
horror, and then they looked at each other and all were of one mind to
lay hands on him who had done the deed, but they were obliged to delay
their vengeance out of respect for the sacred place where they were
assembled. They gave vent to their grief by loud lamentations. When the
gods came to themselves, Frigga asked who among them wished to gain all
her love and good will. "For this," said she, "shall he have who will
ride to Hel and offer Hela a ransom if she will let Baldur return to
Asgard." Whereupon Hermod, surnamed the Nimble, the son of Odin, offered
to undertake the journey. Odin's horse, Sleipnir, which has eight legs
and can outrun the wind, was then led forth, on which Hermod mounted and
galloped away on his mission. For the space of nine days and as many
nights he rode through deep glens so dark that he could not discern
anything, until he arrived at the river Gyoll, which he passed over on a
bridge covered with glittering gold. The maiden who kept the bridge
asked him his name and lineage, telling him that the day before five
bands of dead persons had ridden over the bridge, and did not shake it
as much as he alone. "But," she added, "thou hast not death's hue on
thee; why then ridest thou here on the way to Hel?"

"I ride to Hel," answered Hermod, "to seek Baldur. Hast thou perchance
seen him pass this way?"

She replied, "Baldur hath ridden over Gyoll's bridge, and yonder lieth
the way he took to the abodes of death."

Hermod pursued his journey until he came to the barred gates of Hel.
Here he alighted, girthed his saddle tighter, and remounting clapped
both spurs to his horse, who cleared the gate by a tremendous leap
without touching it. Hermod then rode on to the palace, where he found
his brother Baldur occupying the most distinguished seat in the hall,
and passed the night in his company. The next morning he besought Hela
to let Baldur ride home with him, assuring her that nothing but
lamentations were to be heard among the gods. Hela answered that it
should now be tried whether Baldur was so beloved as he was said to be.
"If, therefore," she added, "all things in the world, both living and
lifeless, weep for him, then shall he return to life; but if any one
thing speak against him or refuse to weep, he shall be kept in Hel."

Hermod then rode back to Asgard and gave an account of all he had heard
and witnessed.

The gods upon this despatched messengers throughout the world to beg
everything to weep in order that Baldur might be delivered from Hel. All
things very willingly complied with this request, both men and every
other living being, as well as earths, and stones, and trees, and
metals, just as we have all seen these things weep when they are brought
from a cold place into a hot one. As the messengers were returning, they
found an old hag named Thaukt sitting in a cavern, and begged her to
weep Baldur out of Hel. But she answered:

                "Thaukt will wail  
                 With dry tears  
                 Baldur's bale-fire.  
                 Let Hela keep her own."  

It was strongly suspected that this hag was no other than Loki himself,
who never ceased to work evil among gods and men. So Baldur was
prevented from coming back to Asgard.\*

\* In Longfellow's Poems will be found a poem entitled "Tegner's Drapa,"
upon the subject of Baldur's death.

### THE FUNERAL OF BALDUR.

The gods took up the dead body and bore it to the seashore where stood
Baldur's ship "Hringham," which passed for the largest in the world.
Baldur's dead body was put on the funeral pile, on board the ship, and
his wife Nanna was so struck with grief at the sight that she broke her
heart, and her body was burned on the same pile with her husband's.
There was a vast concourse of various kinds of people at Baldur's
obsequies. First came Odin accompanied by Frigga, the Valkyrior, and his
ravens; then Frey in his car drawn by Gullinbursti, the boar; Heimdall
rode his horse Gulltopp, and Freya drove in her chariot drawn by cats.
There were also a great many Frost giants and giants of the mountain
present. Baldur's horse was led to the pile fully caparisoned and
consumed in the same flames with his master.

But Loki did not escape his deserved punishment. When he saw how angry
the gods were, he fled to the mountain, and there built himself a hut
with four doors, so that he could see every approaching danger. He
invented a net to catch the fishes, such as fishermen have used since
his time. But Odin found out his hiding-place and the gods assembled to
take him. He, seeing this, changed himself into a salmon, and lay hid
among the stones of the brook. But the gods took his net and dragged the
brook, and Loki, finding he must be caught, tried to leap over the net;
but Thor caught him by the tail and compressed it, so that salmons ever
since have had that part remarkably fine and thin. They bound him with
chains and suspended a serpent over his head, whose venom falls upon his
face drop by drop. His wife Siguna sits by his side and catches the
drops as they fall, in a cup; but when she carries it away to empty it,
the venom falls upon Loki, which makes him howl with horror, and twist
his body about so violently that the whole earth shakes, and this
produces what men call earthquakes.

### THE ELVES.

The Edda mentions another class of beings, inferior to the gods, but
still possessed of great power; these were called Elves. The white
spirits, or Elves of Light, were exceedingly fair, more brilliant than
the sun, and clad in garments of a delicate and transparent texture.
They loved the light, were kindly disposed to mankind, and generally
appeared as fair and lovely children. Their country was called Alfheim,
and was the domain of Freyr, the god of the sun, in whose light they
were always sporting.

The black or Night Elves were a different kind of creatures. Ugly,
long-nosed dwarfs, of a dirty brown colour, they appeared only at night,
for they avoided the sun as their most deadly enemy, because whenever
his beams fell upon any of them they changed them immediately into
stones. Their language was the echo of solitudes, and their
dwelling-places subterranean caves and clefts. They were supposed to
have come into existence as maggots produced by the decaying flesh of
Ymir's body, and were afterwards endowed by the gods with a human form
and great understanding. They were particularly distinguished for a
knowledge of the mysterious powers of nature, and for the runes which
they carved and explained. They were the most skilful artificers of all
created beings, and worked in metals and in wood. Among their most noted
works were Thor's hammer, and the ship "Skidbladnir," which they gave to
Freyr, and which was so large that it could contain all the deities with
their war and household implements, but so skilfully was it wrought that
when folded together it could be put into a side pocket.

### RAGNAROK, THE TWILIGHT OF THE GODS.

It was a firm belief of the northern nations that a time would come when
all the visible creation, the gods of Valhalla and Niffleheim, the
inhabitants of Jotunheim, Alfheim, and Midgard, together with their
habitations, would be destroyed. The fearful day of destruction will
not, however, be without its forerunners. First will come a triple
winter, during which snow will fall from the four corners of the
heavens, the frost be very severe, the wind piercing, the weather
tempestuous, and the sun impart no gladness. Three such winters will
pass away without being tempered by a single summer. Three other similar
winters will then follow, during which war and discord will spread over
the universe. The earth itself will be frightened and begin to tremble,
the sea leave its basin, the heavens tear asunder, and men perish in
great numbers, and the eagles of the air feast upon their still
quivering bodies. The wolf Fenris will now break his bands, the Midgard
serpent rise out of her bed in the sea, and Loki, released from his
bonds, will join the enemies of the gods. Amidst the general devastation
the sons of Muspelheim will rush forth under their leader Surtur, before
and behind whom are flames and burning fire. Onward they ride over
Bifrost, the rainbow bridge, which breaks under the horses' hoofs. But
they, disregarding its fall, direct their course to the battlefield
called Vigrid. Thither also repair the wolf Fenris, the Midgard serpent,
Loki with all the followers of Hela, and the Frost giants.

Heimdall now stands up and sounds the Giallar horn to assemble the gods
and heroes for the contest. The gods advance, led on by Odin, who
engages the wolf Fenris, but falls a victim to the monster, who is,
however, slain by Vidar, Odin's son. Thor gains great renown by killing
the Midgard serpent, but recoils and falls dead, suffocated with the
venom which the dying monster vomits over him. Loki and Heimdall meet
and fight till they are both slain. The gods and their enemies having
fallen in battle, Surtur, who has killed Freyr, darts fire and flames
over the world, and the whole universe is burned up. The sun becomes
dim, the earth sinks into the ocean, the stars fall from heaven, and
time is no more.

After this Alfadur (the Almighty) will cause a new heaven and a new
earth to arise out of the sea. The new earth filled with abundant
supplies will spontaneously produce its fruits without labour or care.
Wickedness and misery will no more be known, but the gods and men will
live happily together.

### RUNIC LETTERS.

One cannot travel far in Denmark, Norway, or Sweden without meeting with
great stones of different forms, engraven with characters called Runic,
which appear at first sight very different from all we know. The letters
consist almost invariably of straight lines, in the shape of little
sticks either singly or put together. Such sticks were in early times
used by the northern nations for the purpose of ascertaining future
events. The sticks were shaken up, and from the figures that they formed
a kind of divination was derived.

The Runic characters were of various kinds. They were chiefly used for
magical purposes. The noxious, or, as they called them, the bitter
runes, were employed to bring various evils on their enemies; the
favourable averted misfortune. Some were medicinal, others employed to
win love, etc. In later times they were frequently used for
inscriptions, of which more than a thousand have been found. The
language is a dialect of the Gothic, called Norse, still in use in
Iceland. The inscriptions may therefore be read with certainty, but
hitherto very few have been found which throw the least light on
history. They are mostly epitaphs on tombstones.

Gray's ode on the "Descent of Odin" contains an allusion to the use of
Runic letters for incantation:

          "Facing to the northern clime,  
           Thrice he traced the Runic rhyme;  
           Thrice pronounced, in accents dread  
           The thrilling verse that wakes the dead,  
           Till from out the hollow ground  
           Slowly breathed a sullen sound."  

### THE SKALDS.

The Skalds were the bards and poets of the nation, a very important
class of men in all communities in an early stage of civilization. They
are the depositaries of whatever historic lore there is, and it is their
office to mingle something of intellectual gratification with the rude
feasts of the warriors, by rehearsing, with such accomplishments of
poetry and music as their skill can afford, the exploits of their
heroes, living or dead. The compositions of the Skalds were called
Sagas, many of which have come down to us, and contain valuable
materials of history, and a faithful picture of the state of society at
the time to which they relate.

### ICELAND.

The Eddas and Sagas have come to us from Iceland. The following extract
from Carlyle's lectures on "Heroes and Hero Worship" gives an animated
account of the region where the strange stories we have been reading had
their origin. Let the reader contrast it for a moment with Greece, the
parent of classical mythology:

"In that strange island, Iceland,- burst up, the geologists say, by fire
from the bottom of the sea, a wild land of barrenness and lava,
swallowed many months of every year in black tempests, yet with a wild,
gleaming beauty in summer time, towering up there stern and grim in the
North Ocean, with its snow yokuls \[mountains\], roaring geysers
\[boiling springs\], sulphur pools, and horrid volcanic chasms, like the
waste, chaotic battlefield of Frost and Fire,- where, of all places, we
least looked for literature or written memorials,- the record of these
things was written down. On the seaboard of this wild land is a rim of
grassy country, where cattle can subsist, and men by means of them and
of what the sea yields; and it seems they were poetic men these, men who
had deep thoughts in them and uttered musically their thoughts. Much
would be lost had Iceland not been burst up from the sea, not been
discovered by the Northmen!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Next: [CHAPTER XLI. The Druids- Iona.](bulf40)
