<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wmp13)  [Next](wmp15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1QZ5I/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People*, by D. Amaury Talbot,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

# CHAPTER XII

### JUJUS

OF jujus there are two kinds, good and bad. The former are usually
termed *idemm* by Ibibios and *ndemm* by Efiks, while the latter are
called *mbiam*. By a queer turn of native thought all, or nearly
all--for in spite of careful inquiry many details were probably
concealed from us--*idemms* would appear to have female attributes, and
most of these beneficent jujus bear the additional title "Bestower of
Babes"; yet no authenticated example of an idemm priestess has reached
our cars. The cult would appear to be served only by men. Of *mbiam*
priestesses, on the other hand, the names of several could be given,
though it is better not to do so, since the greater number of these
appear as far as possible to seek to conceal their identity from the
males of the tribe. To them, however, go women in trouble, especially
those who wish to invoke the aid of the juju to remove a successful
rival from their path, or inflict the curse of barrenness upon a more
favoured fellow wife. Such a case came before the Native Court when a
woman, Unang Obo by name, accused one Teahri of invoking *mbiam* against
her. In the course of the evidence Ese Efiom, sworn, stated.

I am an *mbiam* priestess. The defendant never

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

came to me to ask me to invoke *mbiam* on Unang Obo. The accused and
other women came to the juju house and took an *mbiam* drum to beat
round the town, calling people to assemble and give reason why a
calabash was broken."

This last-mentioned action was usually taken by a wife who wished to
divorce herself from her husband on the ground that he was keeping a
woman who had already borne twins as wife or sweetheart. A calabash, or
native pot, is always regarded as the feminine symbol, as is a spear
that of the opposite sex. To break a calabash, therefore, signifies that
a woman no longer regards herself as the wife of the man to whom she has
hitherto been married.

Another example of this custom came before the Native Court at Ikotobo,
in which the plaintiff stated:

"Defendant is my husband. I had no son. After he married me one of his
wives took an empty calabash and ran round the market beating it with
her hands, and shouting, 'My husband has married this woman, therefore I
have nothing more to do with him.' By our custom, if the old wives were
not satisfied with a new one whom their husband brought to the house,
they used to proclaim publicly, 'My husband has married such a woman. I
will have nothing more to do with him'--knocking at the same time upon
the calabash. As she beat it she cried, 'The new wife has already borne
twins,' after which she went away. Last year, however, she came back and
was his wife once more. On that I told defendant to divorce me, but he
replied, 'I cannot do so.' Some time later he wished to become a member
of the Idiong

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Society, and I helped him to gather together the entrance money, but
after the ceremonies were over he said, I can no longer be your
husband.'

"Then, on account of the money which I had given him, I refused to go
away, but he said, 'I am now a member of Idiong, and if you do not leave
me Idiong himself will kill you.' At that time there were several Court
Messengers present. I said, 'First you must pay me back what I gave to
help you join this society'; but my husband said, 'You must keep
yourself for the future, for if you do not go away from me you will
certainly die.'

"In revenge for this treatment the woman went to an *mbiam* priestess
and bought a bottle of juju medicine, which she buried in the yard,
believing that this would bring about the death of her husband and that
of her rival."

Beside its functions as giver of babes and bestower of prosperity on
farm and byre, an *idemm* juju is thought to exercise a beneficent
influence not only upon its worshippers, but even upon their descendants
to the third and fourth generation, should such be reduced to poverty.

A story illustrating this gentler aspect of juju worship is told of a
man named Akpan Adia Agbo, of Ikot Akpan, who died some fifteen years
ago. While yet a small boy he had the misfortune to lose both his
parents, first his father and then his mother, and was left with nothing
to eat and none to care for him. When he went round to the houses of the
townsfolk they drove him away, so he crept off by himself and slept in
the Egbo shed. At dawn each day he left

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

his sleeping-place lest he should be driven forth, and went out
searching for something to eat.

When he came to the place where the juju offerings were laid before the
shrine, sometimes a small chicken, and sometimes a few plantains were to
be found.

Now his parents had been pious people who had always given of their best
to the juju. Before the mother died she had gathered together all that
she had and offered it as a last sacrifice, praying that the spirit
might protect her son and be to him as a mother, since there was none
other to care for him.

So the boy took what he found and ate fearlessly, cooking the food in a
secret place, and trusting that the juju would do him no harm for the
theft.

For several years he lived thus, but at length a sister of his dead
father, who some years before had married and gone to a distant town,
came back, and finding the boy deserted, took him to her home. There she
fed him well, and showed him every kindness, but when he was grown up
the longing came to go back to his own people. So the woman said, "Very
well, if you are able to feed yourself you can go:"

On reaching his native town the lad asked to be shown the place where
his father's mimbo farm was. When the people saw how big and strong he
had grown they agreed to do as he wished, and led him thither.

At once he began to cut mimbo, and they found that his palm trees bore
sap more plentifully than those of all the other townsfolk. He sold the
wine for a good price, and with the money bought goats and sheep. These
latter bore kids and lambs in great

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

abundance, so that he soon grew rich and was able to marry a wife strong
and tall, who bore him many piccans.

Whatever he undertook succeeded, so that those who had driven him forth
as a boy began to come under him, and in the end he became head chief of
Ikot Akpan. In his house dwelt threescore wives, and sons and daughters
so numerous that he never counted them. All this prosperity came to him
because the juju helped him, and blessed everything that he did from the
time when he was lonely and deserted and had no sustenance save that
which he took from the sacrifices.

A very different story, embodying the attributes more usually connected
with the idea of juju worship, was told us by Idaw Imuk, half-brother of
the head chief and most famous juju priest of the town where the events
are said to have taken place. It may perhaps be called:

## AN IBOIBO IPHIGENIA.

In the old days there was a very famous juju at Idua Eket. The name of
this was Edogho Idua, and it was the dominant juju for many miles round.

"Only a little time before Government came to our country, one of the
principal chiefs of Idua, Ukpon by name, wanted to join the cult, for
the spirit was said to be strong to protect, and rich to bestow
blessings upon its worshippers, as well as swift to avenge wrongs done
them by enemies. In preparation for the initiatory feast many goats were
brought, cows also, with yams and plantains innumerable; palm wine too
and all that is necessary to make glad

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

the hearts of guests. So soon as everything was in readiness Ukpon sent
round to all the countryside to bid the people come and rejoice with him
over his entry into the cult.

"In great numbers they came and ate up all the good things provided for
their entertainment. Seven days they feasted, playing the play of the
juju, and dancing and singing continuously both by day and night. When
some of the dancers grew weary and went to rest, others took their
places, so that the sound of rejoicing rose ceaselessly in the cars of
the juju during all that time.

"On the eighth day they left off dancing and gathered round to witness
the last and greatest sacrifice. A man who had been bought for the
purpose was led forth and slain before the shrine. As the blood of the
victim bespattered the fetish, Ukpon cried out boastfully, 'See, Edogho!
This is but a dog! If you protect me well I will bring you far better
offerings!'

"At once the juju answered, 'So ho! It is but a dog which you have
sacrificed to me. If you do not *at once* therefore fetch me a man I
will not help you at all.'

"On hearing this Ukpon repented of his boastfulness and was very sorry,
for he had not counted upon the extra expense of a second offering; but
the wrath of the juju was too terrible to be braved, so he went forth
obediently and bought another victim, thinking that Edogho would be
satisfied at last.

"To his grief, however, the juju announced, 'Because of the word you
have spoken you must bring me a human sacrifice every year for seven
years, and the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

one which I choose first of all is your first-born piccan.'

"To this Ukpon answered, 'Rather than sacrifice the little daughter who
is my only child I will forfeit all the gifts which have already been
spent upon you and leave your cult to-day'; but the juju answered:

"'Not so. If you leave me I will destroy the whole town this very
night.'

"On hearing this cruel saying Ukpon turned round and called upon the
townsfolk, crying:

"'The juju asks for my only child. I beg you, therefore, help me to
collect the other sacrifices which he demands, so that this dear one may
be spared.'

"On hearing this the people consulted together, and at length arranged
that seven compounds should, each in turn, provide a man every year,
till the seven years were over.

"Thus they did, but after that time was up they came to Ukpon and said,
'We are not able to pay this toll any more. For a long time now we have
given a man each year, but now we can do so no more.'

"So Ukpon went before the priest and put the case to him, begging that
his foolish speech might be forgotten, and that all might now be well.
Through the mouth of his servant, however, the spirit made answer:

"'You called upon the townsfolk to help you, but in vain. In spite of
all that you have done I will take your piccan in my own way.'

"Now in the meantime the girl had grown up to be a maiden so beautiful
that she was sought in marriage by many youths. She was still the only

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

child of her house and the pride of both her parents. Yet, knowing that
it was useless to struggle further, when the time came round for the
annual sacrifice Ukpon led her before the Juju.

"Bitterly the girl wept as she went to the shrine, and bitterly wept the
mother, but it was all of no avail. Her young blood gushed forth and the
reek of it was sweet in the nostrils of Edogho Idua.

"In despair at the sight of his pitiful dead, Ukpon cried out, 'If I had
only known the ways of this juju I would never have had anything to do
with it! Should the juju keep on like this I will take it and throw it
into the water!'

"Then the spirit announced in a terrible voice, through the mouth of the
priest his servant, 'Before you throw me into the water I will destroy
you utterly with all your house.'

"That night the compound of the unfortunate man burst into flame, and
himself, his wife and all within were utterly consumed.

"After that the other townsfolk feared 'too much' to place themselves in
the power of so terrible a juju. No fresh members joined the cult. It
lost its power, and since Government came to our country, it has had no
more authority within the town."

Chief Ansa Ekang Ita Henshaw told us of a place called Eise, which,
according to his account, lies opposite to Akuna-Akuna on the Cross
River. Here there is said to be a very powerful crocodile juju, in
connection with which is a priestess. There appears to be no mystery
about the celebration of the rites of this cult. Anyone, so we were
told, either white

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

or black, may witness them, which is fortunate, since otherwise it would
be difficult to believe that Chief Ansa's story was of actual
present-day happenings, rather than a page torn from some as yet
unpublished novel by Sir H. Rider Haggard.

Coming across this tale in a place so reminiscent of scenes through
which in the days of our youth we hurried breathless, led by the
author's magic, the thought forced itself upon us as to the ingratitude
with which we regard many writers who, all unknown to us, had so great
an influence in determining the course of our lives. To the great
authors of old we are forced to yield some tithe of their due, because
they have marked us so deeply with their mark that we see to a certain
extent at least through their eyes, and even when coming suddenly upon a
scene of surpassing beauty find ourselves repeating their very words,
because none other seem fitted to describe it. We could not forget them
if we would, for from Homer and his great brothers of song, from Virgil,
Herodotus, and many a less-known Roman and Greek, sayings, forgotten
till the moment, suddenly come to mind at some fresh sight as if spoken
anew in one's ear. So it is too with Beowulf and the Maldon Poem, with
the sweet haunting rhymes of old ballads and the great moderns: Dante,
Shakespeare, Goethe, Keats, and Shelley--all demand a gratitude which we
could not withhold if we would; but as for men of the present day--to
how many of these do we offer adequate tribute for having first turned
our thoughts to adventure or research, to the glory of man's work on the
edges of Empire, to the fascination of seeking for old-world

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

treasures, hidden in forgotten glades and amid long-buried cities, or
the joy of penetrating secrets behind the back of beyond?

With something of all this in mind we accepted the offer of one of our
kind friends at Oron to take with us on a six hours' canoe journey a
copy of "The Yellow God."

In a country where every tree and stone hides a story which is simply
crying out to be written down, it seemed almost wrong to give any time
at all to the reading of one safely printed; but the temptation to see
how a writer, who to one's youthful fancy seemed to breathe the very
essence of Africa--the terrible and mysterious--would stand the hard
test of reading in an open canoe, amid scenes so near to those which he
describes, was irresistible. The accuracy of description and the
convincingly real language of the wonderful Jeekie came as a surprise.
It was pleasant to slip back again into the atmosphere of childhood,
even at the cost of finding a description of the fall of one of the
great trees, witnessed by us a little while before, given almost word
for word as we had written it down on reaching camp some half hour after
the occurrence. A pencil stump soon erased the passage from our
manuscript, and a few days later Chief Ansa's story was told us. It is
given as nearly as possible in the words of my informant.

"To the left of the town of Eise lies a river in which live crocodiles
of many kinds--big, mighty ones, and others very small. The people
honour these as their juju, and of this cult a woman is always chosen to
be the head. When the priestess grows too old

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

to serve fittingly any more, the King Crocodile himself chooses out a
new one. The way in which the choice is made is as follows:

"In the night-time the lord of all the crocodiles goes himself or sends
a messenger into the town. Through the quiet streets the great reptile
creeps, straight for the house of the woman who has been chosen. Arrived
there he lays him down by the wall behind which glow the 'seeds of fire'
kept alive for the cooking of the morrow's meal.

"When people come forth at dawn they see the great beast lying before
the house, and know at once the meaning of the sight. Where there is but
one woman in the family she is forthwith acclaimed as the new priestess;
but as this is hardly ever the case, the townsfolk go round and try to
find out which of the women in the house is the one chosen for the
service. All are led before the diviner, and trial made of each in turn,
until one is named for the honour.

"When this has happened the old priestess knows that her time has come,
for it is the will of the lord crocodile that she should die.
Uncomplainingly, therefore, she hands over everything to her successor,
teaches her all the lore of the cult which has been handed down to
herself from a long line of predecessors, and, when all is ended,
quietly lies down never again to rise.

"Whenever anyone in the town has offended against the law of the juju, a
sign is given so that the evil-doer may be sought out and punished. So
sure as the chief crocodile is angered he sends forth one of his breed
as a messenger, who goes up into the town

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

and catches a dog in his jaws. This he carries to the water, and then
swims up and down with his prey held aloft, so that all the people may
see and take notice.

"Then the townsfolk know that one of their number has transgressed
against the law of the juju, and that, because of this, trouble is about
to fall upon them. So they consult the oracle, and try to find out which
is the sinner, and begin to get together a sacrifice in order to appease
the wrath of the sacred reptiles.

"Only the priestess may offer sacrifice. At the edge of the water she
stands, calling upon the name of the juju, a live chicken held aloft in
her hand. After awhile one of the holy crocodiles is seen swimming
slowly towards her. He lays his head on the bank by her feet, waiting
until the prayer is finished, after which she bends down and sets the
chicken close by his cruel jaws. Sometimes he swallows it at once,
sometimes lets it run a little way, then dashes after, but always
catches it in the end, and dives with it beneath the water. Next, rum or
palm wine is poured into a horn or into one of the long cucumber-shaped
calabashes. The priestess chants a new invocation and the beast comes to
the surface again. Then she cries aloud, 'Behold! I bring you your drink
offering,' at which he opens his mouth and receives the libation. After
that he waits until the last rite is over, on which land-dwellers and
water-dwellers alike all go back to their homes.

"One of the strangest things about this strange cult is that the
crocodile is said never to accept any chicken which has once been owned
by a 'twin mother.' No matter how cunningly people may seek to deceive

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

him in the matter by passing the bird through many hands, or however
long a time it may have been kept in other compounds, should it ever
have been in the possession of a 'twin woman' the crocodile will know
this and refuse to appear at the call of the priestess to receive the
polluted offering.

"On great occasions a ram or goat is sacrificed. This is too heavy for
the priestess to hold up by herself alone, so two men usually help her,
standing one on either hand.

"So soon as her cry is heard ringing out from beneath the uplifted ram,
nine crocodiles are said to be seen hastening down stream. In the midst
of them swims their chief, the King Crocodile, a big mighty beast, very
old, with the others stretching out, four on either side, as if to guard
him. Straight to the feet of the priestess swims the central figure,
while the rest stay a little way off. Then the ram-bearers step to the
edge of the water into which they fling their burden. This the great
reptile seizes in his jaws and drags under, while his eight companions
dive beneath the surface in order to share the sacrifice with him.

"Such were the rites of this juju ordained to our fathers before the
great trees of the forest were yet formed as small seeds in the heart of
the flowers which bore them, and such are the rites which last unchanged
till to-day."

This account is quite unconfirmed, but we hope some day to visit Eise
and make the acquaintance of its priestess.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13: Woman And Secret Societies](wmp15.md)

</div>
