<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wmp15)  [Next](wmp17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1QZ5I/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People*, by D. Amaury Talbot,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

# CHAPTER XIV

### WOMAN IN WAR TIME

IN war time, even now, strong women on both sides act as scouts. They
know that they will not be killed, so go before the main body fearlessly
spying upon the enemy. As soon as the first sign of the latter is seen
they cry out to warn their own men, and then run aside so as not to be
in the way.

At times a band of Amazons comes across and captures a single foeman.
Then these women, usually so gentle and kindly, seem to change their
whole nature. They fall upon the luckless man, bind, and often cruelly
wound him; then hand him over in triumph to be slain by the men of their
own party.

Perhaps the most important service rendered by the women of the tribe in
time of war is the carrying out of the secret rites decreed by ancient
law for the burial of a warrior. As much as could be learnt of the
matter from the men of the tribe is thus recorded:

"When a man in the prime of life is cut off in battle, the body is
carried home to the dead man's town by wedded women who are his next of
kin. No man may touch the corpse. Weeping and singing sad songs, it is
borne by their gentle hands to a place of thick bush called *owok
afai*--the forest of those

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

slain by sudden death. . . . No maiden may be present at these rites;
only to wives may such sad mysteries be revealed." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

Later, an ancient woman was induced to confide to me part at least of
these strange rites. I had not intended to publish them, nor, indeed,
much of the information already incorporated in the foregoing account.
Certain English scientists, however, of the highest distinction, have
been good enough to point out that the matter is not without
ethnological interest, and also that it is most improbable that this
little study will ever reach those in any way concerned. Save for one
detail, therefore, all that could be gleaned on the subject is given
here.

After the bodies of dead warriors have been borne into the shadows of
that part of the forest set aside for this purpose, they are gently laid
upon beds of fresh leaves, high piled to form a last couch, not far from
the place where an open grave has been prepared. Young boughs are next
picked from sacred trees, the names of which, unfortunately, my
informant could not be persuaded to reveal. These boughs are drawn over
the bodies of the slain amid low, wailing chants and fast-falling tears.
The chants are said to contain a prayer that the virility of the warrior
thus cut off in the pride of life and strength may not be lost, but
rather should go forth to bless with increase the hearths, farms and
byres of his own townsfolk.

My informant explained that she was only able to give vaguely the
meaning of the chants sung on

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

such occasions, since these have been handed down in a tongue so old as
to be practically forgotten in the present day. It is a matter of great
regret to us that the expense of transport in countries such as this,
where all impedimenta must be borne upon carriers' heads, had hitherto
kept us from adding a phonograph to the already somewhat long list of
scientific apparatus which we are in the habit of carrying about with
us. Lady Frazer, who has herself rendered such inestimable services to
science, had urged us to do so, and had we but been able to follow her
advice it might have been possible to secure records of these old songs,
the chance to obtain which may in all probability never occur again.
Alas! "Our Lady Poverty" is a hard task-mistress, and often places a
stern veto upon the garnering of much of the rich harvest which, in
Africa, lies on every hand awaiting gleaning.

Though the exact meaning of the ritual chants has now been lost, the
idea underlying the ceremonies is indicated by the actions accompanying
the song, as, for instance, when the sacred boughs are drawn over that
part of the body regarded as the seat of virile energy, with the avowed
purpose of withdrawing the spirit of fertility into the leaves. Before
interment, small portions of the body are also cut away and placed,
together with the sacred leaves, in earthen pots never before used.
These are wrapped up in the garments of the celebrants, and borne forth
by them in silence, to be secretly interred in farm or byre, or hidden
away in holes dug beneath the hearth or bridal bed.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

The reason that knowledge of such rites must be kept alike from men and
maidens of the tribe is said to be that this secret was among those
entrusted to women in the days when woman, not man, was the dominant
sex, and that these were not disclosed at the time when males were
initiated into the mysteries of the secret societies, because it had
been revealed that on the guarding of this secret depended the strength
of the tribe. Were the rites once disclosed the power of the juju would
be broken, few or no babes would be born, farms and herds would yield
but scanty increase, while the arms of future generations of fighting
men would lose their strength and hearts their courage--until the Ibibio
people were either enslaved or had vanished from the face of the earth.

During our last leave in England we had the privilege of talking over
those primitive customs and beliefs which seemed to us of special
interest with so great an authority as Dr. Wallis Budge, of the British
Museum. Among other incidents he listened to that above given, and when
the little account was finished pointed out the striking similarity
between this still surviving rite and the strange story of the origin of
Horus--that seed of life and love snatched by the widowed Isis from
death itself. Indeed, were the account of this Ibibio rite given in full
detail it might almost seem as though intended as a re-enactment of the
ancient tragedy of the Nile, when the mighty goddess Isis found the body
of the slaughtered Osiris, and by her knowledge of the mysteries of
birth and death "the Great Mother" wrung a

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

new life from out the very jaws of desolation and despair. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)

At present there seems little danger of a falling off in numbers among
Ibibios, for the greatest pride of both men and women is to become the
parents of many children. The head chief of Oyubia, Enyenihi by name,
has a family of thirty, all of whom he proudly claims as his own
offspring. Large as the number seems, however, it is quite outdone by
the crowd of children which surrounds many chiefs. Akpan Udaw Ibomm of
Ikotobo, for instance, who died in 1913, had a hundred and sixty sons
and daughters, of all of whom he claimed to be the actual father. Ofeok
Oyo of Ikua Ita too, who has only lately died, was the mother of twenty
fine children. Yet, almost to the day of her death she carried herself
as straight and well and was as tall and good to look upon, according to
native ideas, as many a woman who had borne but a single babe. Indeed
the Ibibios and neighbouring peoples would seem to be a standing
contradiction to the theory that polygamy tends to restrict the race. We
were informed on the authority of Mr. John Bailey, a well-known native
Government official, who was present when Sir Claude Macdonald went up
to Afikpo, on the Cross River, that one chief

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

alone brought ninety sons to salute the Chief Commissioner! True it is
that the distinguished administrator himself, whose memory is held in
grateful remembrance by European and native alike throughout the length
and breadth of the colony for whose prosperity he did so much, thinks
that *nineteen* would be a more probable number to give; but owing to
the marriage customs and rules as to family membership it is by no means
impossible that one chief should be able to produce the number stated.

Among some of the more civilised Efiks of Calabar the growth of the
family seems to have been restricted, to a certain extent, from motives
of vanity on the part of the women, who fear that much child-bearing
might spoil their beauty. Yet, even here, there does not seem to be
cause for anxiety as to the danger of racial suicide. The late Chief
Esonta of Old Town, for instance, had forty-five wives, who, between
them, are said to have borne him a hundred and sixty children!

Chief Essien Etim, who died in 1910, and was a well-known Calabar chief,
is stated to have had ninety-nine sons and daughters. After his death, a
dispute arose as to the distribution of the property, and the family
marched into Court to lay the matter before His Honour Judge Weber. It
was fortunate that the disagreement was only among themselves, so that
litigation did not extend to another family of like or superior size.

Another well-known chief, Efa Etung Effion by name, had sixty wives and
ninety-five piccans; while Chief Abassi Okun Abassi of Creek Town had a
mere

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

thirty-five to show; but then he had only seven wives all told! The
aforementioned numbers are given on the authority of Chief Daniel
Henshaw.

To a certain extent large families may be accounted for by the custom
which, on the death of a chief, caused the wives to be divided out among
sons and brothers, who henceforth assumed towards them the position
formerly held by the deceased; care being taken that a woman should not
thus be given to her own son. Before death a man usually "makes his
will," under which term is included the disposal of his wives and female
dependents. The women of the household are called before him on his
death-bed, and he there and then decides to which relative each should
be given. Often in this way a grown woman is allocated as "wife" to a
small boy of eight or nine years old. In such a case all children which
she may bear to other men, while the child-husband is growing up, are
looked upon as his. So that, supposing some half-dozen women are
bequeathed in this manner to a boy of eight, the latter on reaching the
age of twelve might easily find himself titular "father" of a dozen or
more children.

A case illustrating such a "marriage" came before the Native Court at
Idua Oron. In this the plaintiff, Akon Abassi, stated on oath:

"My former husband died and left behind him a young brother of about ten
years of age. According to his will I was betrothed to the latter, but
as I was over twenty years old and already a mother I asked the parents
of the child-husband to receive back their dowry, because the boy was
too young for me."

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

A similar case occurred at the same sitting in which a woman named Kadu
claimed divorce from a small boy, Affion Usuk Inyi by name. In the
course of her evidence the plaintiff stated:

"About six and a half years ago I came out of the Fatting-house and was
married. Not long afterwards my husband died, and I was told to become
the wife of a boy about twelve years of age. I am now almost twenty-five
years old, and therefore summon the defendant to receive back his dowry
and set me free, as the child is too young to be my husband."

Many cases are known, however, in which young and attractive women have
refused the advances of other wooers, and preferred to wait until the
youth, to whom they have been given by the Will of their late husband,
should be of sufficient age to wed them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[206:1](wmp16.htm#fr_38) "By Haunted Waters." P.
Amaury Talbot.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[209:1](wmp16.htm#fr_39) Since writing the
above, it has been our good fortune to have the opportunity of studying
the customs of Ibo and New Calabari women. It would seem that the lives
of these latter are ruled, even more markedly than those of their Ibibio
sisters, by rites of which nothing may be revealed to the males of the
tribe, or indeed, to any man.

As an instance may be mentioned the secret rites carried out by every
New Calabari widow during the seven days of mourning following the death
of her husband. These strange ceremonies entail almost incredible
self-denial, pain and discomfort on the unfortunate celebrants, but,
according to unanimous testimony, no word of what transpires on such
occasions has as yet reached male ears.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15: Widowhood And Burial Customs](wmp17)

</div>
