<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wmp18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B003C1QZ5I/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Woman's Mysteries of a Primitive People*, by D. Amaury Talbot,
\[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

# L'ENVOI

Degema, Nigeria.  
June, 1911    

SUCH, from cradle to grave, is the life story of an Ibibio woman, so far
as those of her people were willing to confide it to one of an alien
race. It is naturally a matter of regret that, owing to the fear of
being blamed by their kin for having imparted so much information to a
stranger, hardly one of my informants would allow her name to be given
as authority for any statement here set down. When, however, men and
women can be brought to grasp the fact, to which some natives with more
than a veneer of education are gradually awakening, that Africans have a
great deal more to win than lose by placing on record old customs and
beliefs before these are overwhelmed by the oncoming waves of alien
religion and culture, the greatest stumbling-block will have been
removed from the path of inquirers. It is true that there is much of
barbarity and hideous cruelty in these ancient ceremonies, which the
civilised negro would fain hide from the knowledge of white races, but
it is doubtful whether there is anything more terrible to be disclosed
concerning the fetish rites of West Africa than those known to have been
practised in the early stages of all the great religions of the world,
as witness Egyptian

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

and Babylonian bas-reliefs. Yet, side by side with much that will be
found revolting to twentieth century ideas, there yet remain traces of
traditions and beliefs of a depth and value to which northern races are
only just awakening.

Again, at the present day, whether we sympathise with or decry the
feminist movement, the fact remains that, for good or ill, a spirit of
restlessness has swept over the women of the world. A stirring and
quickening has come to them, rousing a consciousness of power long
latent which, rightly directed, may suffice to destroy pitfalls and
sweep clean those foul places which now surround the path of the poor
and weak, but which, wrongly guided, might lead along unlovely roads to
sex antagonism and barren hate. The condition of many an African tribe
of to-day is in all essentials the same as that through which we
ourselves once passed in long-forgotten ages. Surely then, on whichever
side we stand in the vexed question of the hour, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) it is well for us to look back now and
again and watch how primitive woman held her own, or learn what yet
remains to be gleaned of the stages by which she rose to dominion over,
or sank to serfdom beneath, the men of her day.

While re-reading these pages before sending them to press, news came
that two women, splendidly trained and equipped, have set out to do, in
another quarter of the globe, what is so inadequately attempted here.
Perhaps, later on, others as well fitted as they

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

may be induced to turn their attention to the women of Africa.

To my critics I would say that the first steps along a road, which to a
certain extent at least has hitherto remained untrodden, are necessarily
difficult and uncertain, and that only the intense interest which such a
study has for us and the more than kindness of those whose opinion we so
greatly value has emboldened me, in default of one more fitted, to
attempt even so inadequate an account of these primitive women.

Perhaps a few words on another subject may be permitted here. A recent
visitor to the coast wrote on her return reproaching her countrymen
because so few English officials take their wives to West Africa, while
many French and Germans do so. In discussing the matter with a German
acquaintance on one of the boats, she quotes him as saying, apropos of
the presence of white women, "It is only the English who fear the
rains"--and herself adds in comment, "I deplored, though I could not
resent, the slight touch of contempt in his tone."

Had this gifted authoress been aware of the true state of the case, and
known how many men fruitlessly apply year after year for permission to
bring their wives, she could have removed a misapprehension from the
mind of her fellow-traveller, and would herself have had nothing to
deplore on this score with regard to her countrymen save their
misfortune in being deprived of those whose companionship they eagerly
desire. Of one other point she, in common with the general public, also
seemed unaware. The German

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

and French Governments, recognising the fact that the presence of white
women in their colonies does more than anything else to destroy abuses,
raise the standard of morals, and make men contented with their lot,
defray the cost of the voyage for the wife of every official, while the
whole expense, averaging some seventy pounds per tour, must be borne by
the Englishman, who, when all things are taken into account, is no more
highly paid than his brother officials across the border.

It is, of course, true that many women are unsuited for the hardships of
life out here. Some, too, might possibly hinder work, either by seeking
to interfere in so-called "government palavers" which by no means
concern them, or by holding back their husbands from that constant
travelling which alone makes possible efficient supervision in countries
such as these. For an official the interests of Government should
naturally come before all others, but it would be easy enough for the
authorities to judge, from travelling returns and district reports,
whether, in any case, the presence of a wife had resulted in a falling
off in efficiency, and those women deemed undesirable could be forbidden
to return.

On behalf of my sister and myself I would venture to express thanks to
Government for having allowed us, during nearly six years, to accompany
my husband on all his journeyings. The conditions under which
administration is carried on in countries such as this can hardly be
grasped at home. In the chief towns it is true that, save for the
unhealthiness of the climate, the state of affairs would not seem so
much harder

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

than in England; but in disturbed districts and at bush stations, where
adequate supervision often entails ten to twelve hours work a day for
long stretches, with the thermometer at a temperature of 80° to 90°,
interspersed with marches varying from twelve to twenty miles per them
in a downpour almost constant for nearly half the year, things wear a
very different aspect. Under these conditions it is impossible for the
overworked officials to give time to seemingly insignificant matters
which are, however, so important in a climate such as this, i.e. variety
of diet, food values, airing of garments, and, above all, the filtering
of water. Were the restrictions now placed on the coming of wives
removed, I venture to think it would do more than anything else to
decrease the death toll and improve the standard of health in the
tropics.

It was lately remarked to me by a woman of high rank in the colony, "Out
here one hardly ever hears a man complain as to the worries and
hardships of his lot." Difficulties are made light of and anxieties
borne in silence, while on every hand one sees examples of devotion to
duty not the less heroic because unrecorded, and a gay-hearted courage
which is beyond all praise. Few even among the great Elizabethans took
more terrible risks than are borne every day by one or other of these
quiet men whose names are seldom or never heard in England. Yet, when in
carrying out orders they meet a cruel death, as only too often happens,
or still more frequently are invalided home, ruined in health by the
hardship of life out here, scarcely a word of praise or thanks is
accorded them.

At the present time, Nigeria is fortunate in the

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

presence of a woman whose goodness, charm and broad sympathies are
gratefully acknowledged by all who have the privilege of meeting her.
Could but a few more such be attracted to the colony conditions would
indeed soon show a vast improvement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[239:1](wmp19.htm#fr_48.md) A matter of much
interest at the time of writing, but now relegated to the half-forgotten
things of yesterday by the cataclysm which burst upon the world in
August, 1914.

In conclusion, I would venture to add that, to the great anthropologists
at home and to those highly placed officials who have given
encouragement so unstinted, as also to the one whose selflessness made
possible the writing of this little record, I have no words in which to
express my grateful thanks. Had the idea been earlier suggested, or had
it been possible before beginning to gather information concerning the
women dealt with in these pages, to have had the advice of those
scientists who on our return so generously devoted time and trouble to
pointing out the best lines on which to carry out such a study, this
little account would naturally have been of far greater value. We can
only hope that--better equipped as we now are for further
investigations, through the teaching and advice so more than kindly
expended upon us--we may have the opportunity of undertaking fresh
inquiries as to the women of other Nigerian tribes.
