[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor04)  [Next](sor06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### 3

### *The LITTLE DEMON of the HEARTH and HOME*

THE early centuries of the Middle Ages, when the legends were in making,
give all the impression of a dream. Among rustic populations, deeply
submissive to the Church and of a gentle spirit (the legends themselves
attest this), we would gladly assume a high degree of innocence. Surely
it must have been God's own time, this. Nevertheless, in the
*Penitentiaries*, where the most ordinary sins are noted down, strange
and dishonouring forms of depravity are mentioned too, of rare
occurrence under the reign of Satan.

This is due to two causes—utter ignorance, and the habit of living in
common, which brought near relatives into the closest contiguity. They
seem to have had scarce an inkling of our morality. Their own, in spite
of ecclesiastical prohibitions, appears to have been that of the
Patriarchs, of the remotest antiquity, which looks upon marriage with
strange women as wicked, and only allows the kinswoman to be a lawful
bride. Allied families formed only a single household. Not daring as yet
to disperse their dwellings over the wastes that surrounded them,
tilling merely the outlying demesne of a Merovingian palace or of a
monastery, they retired every night together with their beasts under the
roof of a vast *villa*. Hence inconveniences similar to those of the
*ergastulum* of classical antiquity, in which slaves were herded
promiscuously. More than one of these communities still existed in the
Middle Ages, and even later. The Lord of the Soil recked little of what
resulted from the arrangement. He regarded as forming a single family
this tribe, this mass of human

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

beings "getting up and going to bed together,"—"eating bread off one
platter and meat out of one pot."

In this indiscriminate way of living, woman met with very little care or
protection; the place she occupied was an extremely humble one. True,
the virgin, the ideal woman, rose higher from century to century, but
the woman of real life counted for mighty little in these rustic
communities, these massed aggregates of men and cattle. Such was the
unhappy but inevitable outcome of a state of things which could only
change for the better when the common habitation was subdivided, when at
length men plucked up courage to live apart, in separate hamlets, or to
settle as isolated cultivators of fertile lands at a distance, and build
huts in clearings of the forest. The separate hearth created true family
life; the nest made the bird. Henceforth they have ceased to be
chattels—they are living souls. . . . The wife and mother has come into
existence.

 

A touching moment. At length she has a *home;* she can therefore be pure
and holy at last, poor creature. She can brood quietly over a thought,
and undisturbed, as she sits spinning, dream dreams while he is abroad
in the forest. The hut is wretched enough, damp and ill-built, and the
winter wind whistles through it; but to make up for all defects it is
silent. There are dim corners in it where her dreams can find a
lodgement.

She is an owner now, possesses something of her very own. *Distaff*,
*bed*, *chest* is all the household has, as the old song says. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) But soon a table will be added, a bench,
or a couple of stools. . . . A poorly appointed house! but its furniture
includes a living soul. The firelight heartens it; the consecrated bush
of box guards the bed, to which is often added a pretty bunch of
vervain.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The lady of this
palace sits spinning at her door, watching a few sheep the while. They
are not rich enough yet to keep a cow; but this will come in time, if
God blesses the house. The forest, a bit of pasture land, a hive of bees
that feed on the heath are their livelihood. They do not grow much wheat
yet, having no certainty of reaping a crop so long in growing. This
life, poverty-stricken as it is, is yet less hard upon the wife. She is
not broken with fatigue, made old and ugly before her time, as she will
be when the time of farming on a large scale has arrived. And she has
more leisure too. Beware of judging her in any way by the coarse
literature of the *Noëls* and *fabliaux*, the silly laughter and licence
of the broad tales composed at a later date. She is alone, without
neighbours. The evil, unhealthy life of dark little shut-in towns, the
prying into each other's affairs, the pitiful, perilous
scandal-mongering,—none of this is begun yet! There is no old harridan
yet, coming creeping at dusk down the narrow, gloomy street to tempt the
young wife and tell her *someone* is a-dying of love for her. The serf's
wife we are describing now has no friend but her dreams, no one to
gossip with but her beasts or the forest trees.

*They* talk to her,—we know not what about. They awake in her things her
mother told her, her grandmother—old, old things that for century after
century have been handed on from woman to woman. Harmless memories come
back of the ancient spirits of the country, a gentle, genial family
religion, which in the common life just quitted and its noisy
promiscuity, had doubtless lost most of its force, but which now returns
like a ghost and haunts the lonely cabin.

A strange, dainty world of fairies and elves, made to appeal to a
woman's soul. Directly the great stream of invention that produced the
saintly legends runs dry and stops, these other legends, older and
equally poetical, but in a totally different way, come to share their
vogue with them, and reign softly and secretly in gentle hearts. They
are the woman's especial treasure, which she

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

fondles and caresses. A fairy is a woman too, a fantastic mirror in
which she sees her own self, only fairer and daintier than the reality.

What were the Fairies? What we are told is that in old days, queens of
the Gauls, proud and fantastic princesses, at the coming of Christ and
His apostles, were wickedly impertinent and turned their backs. In
Brittany they were dancing at the time, and never stopped. Hence their
cruel sentence; they are doomed to live on till the Day of
Judgment. <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18.md) Many of them are reduced
to the tiny dimensions of a rabbit or a mouse; for instance, the
kowrig-gwans (fairy dwarfs), who at night-time, at the foot of old
Druidical stones, ring you round with their elvish dances; or to take
another example, the lovely Queen Mab, who makes her royal coach out of
a walnut-shell. They are a trifle capricious, and sometimes
mischievously disposed,—and what wonder, considering their unhappy
destiny? Whimsical and tiny as they are, they possess a heart, and crave
to be loved. Sometimes kindly, sometimes the reverse, they are full of
fancies. At the birth of a child they come down the chimney, endow the
babe with gifts good or bad, and fix its fate. They love good spinsters,
and spin divinely themselves. *To spin like a fairy*, the goodwives say.

In the *Fairy Tales*, disencumbered of the absurd ornaments the latest
editors have dressed them out in, is found the people's very inmost
heart. They mark a poetical period between the coarse promiscuity of the
primitive *villa* and the licence of the days when a rising
*bourgeoisie* produced the cynical *fabliaux*.

These Tales *have* a historical side, recalling the great famines,—in
the ogres and so on. But as a rule they float in a higher ether than
common history, soaring on the wings of Fantasy through the realms of
eternal Poesy, expressing the desires of men's hearts, which are ever
the same and have an unchanging history of their own.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

The longing of the poor serf to get breathing time, to find rest, to
discover a treasure that shall end his wretchedness, recurs again and
again in them. More often still, by a nobler aspiration, this treasure
trove is a soul to boot, a treasure of sleeping love that must be
awaked,—as in "The Sleeping Beauty"; though often the charming heroine
is found hidden under a mask by reason of a fatal spell. Whence that
touching Trilogy, that admirable *crescendo*,—*Riquet of the Tuft*,
*Ass's Skin*, *Sleeping Beauty*. Love will take no denial; under all
these hideous disguises, it pursues, and wins, the hidden fair one. The
last of these three tales reaches the true sublime, and I suppose no one
has ever been able to read it without tears.

A very real and very genuine passion underlies it, that of unhappy,
quite hopeless love, one that cruel Nature often sows between pure souls
of too widely separated ranks, the poignant regret of the peasant woman
that she cannot make herself fair and desirable, to be loved of the
knight; the stifled sighs of the serf, as looking down his furrow, he
sees riding by on a white horse a too, too charming vision, the
beautiful, the adored, mistress of the castle and the lands he tills. It
is like the Eastern fable, the melancholy idyll of the impossible loves
of the Rose and the Nightingale. But there is one great difference; the
bird and the flower are both beautiful, equal even in beauty. But here
the inferior being, so low placed in the scale of rank, confesses
humbly, "I am plain and homely, a monster of ugliness!" The pity of it!
. . . But all the same, with a persistency and a heroic power of will
unknown to the East, and by the very ardour of his longing, he breaks
through the silly obstacles in his way. He loves so truly he is loved in
turn, this monster; and Love makes him beautiful.

There is an infinite tenderness in it all. This soul of enchantment
turns her thoughts to others besides herself; and is eager to save all
nature and all society as well. All the victims of those rough days are
her especial favourites,—the child beaten by a cruel stepmother, the
youngest sister scorned and ill-treated by

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the others. She extends her pity even to the lady of the castle herself,
compassionating her for being in the hands of the ferocious baron, Blue
Beard. She commiserates the brutes, and comforts them for the misery of
still wearing the shapes of animals. They must be patient, a brighter
time is coming; one day their captive souls will take wings and be free,
lovable and beloved. This is the other side of Ass's Skin and other
similar stories. Here at any rate is evidence of a woman's
tender-heartedness. The rude field labourer is brutal enough with his
beasts; but woman is different, she sees something else than beasts in
them. She judges them as a child does, observes the human and spiritual
elements in them, ennobles the whole animal world with her sympathy. Oh!
happy spell! Lowly as she is, and convinced of her own plainness, yet
she has invested all Nature with her beauty, and the charm of her
personality.

 

But is she so plain, this little peasant wife, whose dreaming
imagination feeds on all these fancies? I have described her life, how
she keeps house, how she spins as she watches her sheep, how she trips
to the forest and gathers her little bundle of firewood. No very hard
work is hers as yet; she is not the repulsive-looking countrywoman of a
later time, disfigured by unremitting labour in the wheat fields.
Neither is she the heavy citizen's dame, fat and indolent, of the towns,
who formed the subject of so many appetising stories amongst our
forefathers. Our heroine is timid, and has no sense of security; soft
and gentle, she is conscious of being in God's hand. On the mountain
crag she sees the black and lowering castle, whence a thousand dangers
may at any moment descend. She fears and honours her husband; a serf
elsewhere, by her side he is a king. For him she keeps the best, living
on almost nothing herself. She is slim and small, like the pictured
saints in church windows. The meagre fare of those days is bound to make
fine-strung creatures, but having only a frail vitality. Witness the
enormous infant mortality. These pale-faced blossoms are nothing but
nerves. At a later date this will

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

break out in the epileptic dances of the fourteenth century. At present
in the twelfth and thereabouts, two weaknesses are connected with this
condition of semi-starvation: at night, somnambulism, and by day,
hallucination, dreamy reverie, and the gift of tears.

 

All innocence as the woman is, still she has a secret—we have said so
before—a secret she never, never confesses at church. She carries shut
within her breast a fond remembrance of the poor ancient gods, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19.md) now fallen to the estate of spirits, and a
feeling of compassion for them. For do not for an instant suppose,
because they are gods, they are exempt from pain and suffering. Lodged
in rocks, in the trunks of oaks, they are very unhappy in winter. They
greatly love heat, and prowl round the houses; they have been surprised
in stables, warming themselves beside the cattle. Having no more
incense, no more victims, poor things, they sometimes take some of the
housewife's milk. She, good managing soul, does not stint her husband,
but diminishes her own portion, and when evening comes, leaves a little
cream behind in the bowl.

These spirits, which no longer appear except by night, sadly regret
their exile from the day, and are eager for lights. At nightfall the
goodwife hardens her heart and sallies out fearfully, bearing a humble
taper to the great oak where they dwell, or the mysterious pool whose
surface will double the flame in its dark mirror to cheer the unhappy
outlaws.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Great heavens! if she were discovered! Her husband is a prudent man, and
has a holy terror of the Church's anger; he would most certainly beat
her, if he knew. The priest makes fierce war on the poor spirits, and
hunts them out of every corner. Yet surely they might be let live in
peace in the old oaks. What harm do they do in the forest? But no!
Council after Council launches its anathemas against them. On certain
days the priest even goes to the oak, and mumbles prayers and sprinkles
holy water to drive away the evil spirits.

What would become of them if there were no kind soul to pity them? But
she is their protection; good Christian as she is, she yet has a warm
corner in her heart for them. None other is to be trusted with sundry
little intimate secrets of her woman's nature, innocent enough secrets
for a chaste wife like her, but which the Church would be sorely
scandalised if it heard. They are her confessors, to whom she does not
fear to make these touching feminine confidences. She thinks of them as
she lays the Yule log on the fire. It is Christmas, but it is the old
Feast of the Spirits of the North as well, the *Feast of the Longest
Night*. The same of the *Vigil of May Night*, the *pervigilium* of Maïa,
when the mystic tree is planted. The same again, the fires of St. John's
Eve, the true festival of life and flowers and new-born love. Above all,
the childless wife makes it a duty to love these feasts, and observe
them piously. A vow to the Virgin might not perhaps be successful; she
is hardly in full sympathy with such a case. Whispering low, the anxious
wife prefers to address her prayer to some old-world deity, adored as a
rustic god of yore, and whom such-and-such a church has been
good-natured enough to make into a saint. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20.md) Thus bed and cradle, the tenderest
mysteries a chaste and fond soul broods over, all this is still the
province of the gods of ancient days.

 

Nor are the spirits ungrateful. One day she wakes, and lo! without her
putting a hand to anything, the household tasks are

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

done. She is struck dumb, crosses herself, and says nothing. When her
man is gone to work she asks herself what it means, but can find no
answer. It must be a spirit. "What is he? what is he like? . . . Oh! how
I should love to see him! . . . But I am afraid. . . . They say folks
die who see a spirit." Meantime the cradle moves, rocks all by itself. .
. . She is lost in wonder, and presently hears a tiny, soft, soft voice,
so low she might almost think it spoke within her own breast. It says,
"Dear, dearest mistress, if I love to rock your child, ’tis because I am
a little child myself." Her heart beats wildly, but soon she gathers
better courage. The harmless innocence of the act makes the spirit seem
harmless too; he must be good and gentle, one God must surely tolerate
at least.

 

Henceforth she is no longer alone. She plainly feels his presence, and
he is never far from her. He rubs against her skirt, she can hear the
rustle he makes. He is for ever on the move about her, and evidently
cannot quit her side. If she goes to the stable, there he is again. And
she is almost sure, the other day, he was in the butter-firkin. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[5](#fn_21.md)

What a pity she cannot catch him and have a good look at him! Once, all
of a sudden, when she stirred the live embers, she thought she saw him
dancing an elfin dance among the sparks. Another time she all but
captured him in a rose. Small as he is, he works away, sweeping and
tidying and sparing her a world of trouble. All the same he has his
faults. He is volatile and overbold, and if he *were* caught he would
most likely escape. Also he sees and hears too much. Sometimes he
repeats in the morning some little word she has said quite low, low
down, at bedtime, after the light was out. She knows for certain he is
very indiscreet,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

and most inquisitive. It troubles her to feel herself followed about
everywhere; she complains how annoying it is, and likes it all the
while. Sometimes she will threaten him and send him about his business.
At last she is really alone, and quite reassured at the thought. But
next moment she feels on her cheek a light caressing breath, a touch
like a bird's wing. He was under a leaf, the rogue. . . . He laughs, and
his sweet voice—no mockery in it now—tells her his delight in having
stolen a march on his modest, modest mistress. Now she is really angry;
but the rascal only trills, "No! no! little mistress, darling little
mistress, you are not angry,—not at a thing like that!"

She is ashamed and dares say no more. But she has her suspicions he
loves her over-well. Her scruples are awaked,—and she loves him all the
more. At night she thought she felt him in bed, that he had slipped in
between the sheets. She was afraid, offered a prayer to God, and pressed
close to her goodman's side. What is she to do? She has not the heart or
the courage to tell the priest. So she tells her husband, who laughs at
first in sheer incredulity. Then she confesses a little more,—that Robin
Goodfellow is a sly fellow, sometimes too bold by half. . . . "What
matter? he is so wee!" Thus her husband himself reassures her.

Are we also to be reassured, we who can see more plainly? Yes! she is
still perfectly good and innocent. She would shudder to imitate the
great lady up yonder in the castle, who under her very husband's eyes,
has her court of lovers and her page. Still we must allow the elfin
lover has made good progress already. Impossible to have a less
compromising page than one who can lie hid in a rose. And there is much
that is love-like about him too. Few can be more encroaching; so tiny he
is, he can slip in anywhere.

He slips even into the husband's heart, pays court to him, wins his good
graces. He looks after his tools, works in his garden, and of evenings
for his reward, behind the child and the cat, crouches in the chimney
corner. His little voice makes itself heard, for all the world like a
cricket's, but he is seldom seen, except when a

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

struggling beam of light falls upon a particular crack where he loves to
lie. Then they catch a glimpse, or think they do, of a sharp, whimsical
little face; and cry, "Ah, ha! little one, we saw you."

All very well to tell them at church they must beware of evil spirits,
that one they think quite harmless, one that slips into the house like a
puff of wind, may really and truly be a demon. They take good care not
to believe a word of it. Why! his littleness is proof enough of
innocence; and certainly they have prospered more since he came. The
husband is as sure of it as the wife, perhaps surer. He is firmly
convinced the dear, frolicsome little Brownie makes the happiness of
their home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[22:1](sor05.htm#fr_17.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Trois pas du côté du banc,  
Et trois pas du côté du lit,  
Trois pas du côté du coffre  
Et trois pas, revenez ici.

           "Three steps towards the bench,  
            Three steps towards the bed,  
            Three steps towards the chest,  
            And three steps back again."  
   (Old French song of *The Dancing-Master*.)

</div>

<span id="fn_18"></span>[24:2](sor05.htm#fr_18.md) The authorities of all
dates have been brought together in M. Alfred Maury's two learned books,
*Les Fées*, 1843, and *La Magie*, 1860. Consult also, for the North,
Grimm's *Mythologie*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[27:3](sor05.htm#fr_19.md) Nothing can be more
touching than this fidelity to the old faith. In spite of persecution,
in the fifth century, the peasants used still to carry in procession,
under the form of poor little dolls of linen and flour, the deities of
the great old religions—Jupiter, Minerva, Venus. Diana was
indestructible, even in the remotest corner of Germany (see Grimm). In
the eighth century some pagan processions are still performed. In some
humble cabins, sacrifices are still made and auguries taken, etc.
(*Indiculus paganiarum*, Council of Leptines in Hainault). The
*Capitularies* threaten death in vain. In the twelfth century Burchard
of Worms mentions the various prohibitions and declares they were all
unavailing. In 1389 the Sorbonne once more condemns the remaining traces
of Paganism, and about 1400 Gerson (*Contra Astrol.*) mentions Astrology
as an actual superstition still obstinately surviving.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[28:4](sor05.htm#fr_20.md) A. Maury, *Magie*, 159.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[29:5](sor05.htm#fr_21.md) This is one of the
little glutton's favourite hiding-places. The Swiss, who know his
likings, to this day make him presents of milk. Their name for him is
*troll;* among the Germans he is called *kobold*, *nix;* among the
French, *follet*, *goblin*, *lutin;* among the English, *Puck*, *Robin
Goodfellow*. Shakespeare makes him oblige sleepy maidservants by
pinching them black and blue to wake them in the mornings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Temptations](sor06.md)
