[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor07)  [Next](sor09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### 6

### *The PACT with SATAN*

ONLY the victim lacked. All knew the most acceptable gift they could
offer the châtelaine was to deliver the unhappy creature into her power.
Right tender the gratitude she would have shown the man who had given
her this proof of devotion, handed over to her mercy the poor bleeding
limbs of her rival.

But the prey was on the alert. A few moments more and she would have
been spirited away, imprisoned for good and all within the stone walls
of a dungeon. She snatched up a tattered cloak lying in the cattle-shed
to cover her nakedness, took wings, so to speak, and before midnight
struck, found herself leagues away, far from any thoroughfare, on a
desert heath all thistles and brambles. The heath skirted a wood, where,
under the glimpses of an uncertain moon, she was able to scrape together
a few acorns, which she munched and bolted like a wild beast. Centuries
seemed to have passed since yesterday; she was another woman altogether.
The proud beauty, the queen of the village, was no more; her very soul
and its every outward manifestation was utterly changed. She pounced on
the acorns like a famished wild boar, sat squatted at her food like an
ape. Thoughts, scarcely human, were crowding through her brain, when she
hears, or thinks she hears, a screech-owl's hoot, followed by a shrill
peal of laughter. She is startled; but there! ’tis perhaps only the
mocking jay that can imitate every sound, and delights in these
deceptions.

The weird laugh is heard again. Where it comes from she cannot tell. It
seems to issue from an old hollow oak.

But now she hears words plainly articulated, "Ah, ha! so you

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

are come at last. . . . Very unwilling you were to come; you never would
have come at all had you not found yourself in the extremity of direst
straits. . . . You must needs, proud lady, be whipped to the enterprise,
and cry and whine for mercy, mocked, scorned, an outcast and a byword to
your own husband. Where would you be this night, if I had not pitied you
and shown you the *in pace*, the dungeon they were making ready for you
in the castle crypts? . . . Late, late in the day, you come to me,—old
woman, old witch, they call you now. . . . You were young once, and you
treated me ill then, me your little Robin Goodfellow that was so eager
to serve you. . . . Your turn now (if I will have you) to serve me, and
kiss my feet.

"You were mine from your birth up; the roguery you hid so well, the
diabolic charm you could not hide, made you mine. I was your lover, your
husband. Your own has shut the door in your face. But I will be kinder;
I welcome you to my domains, my free and open plains and spreading
forests. . . . What do I gain, you ask? Have I not long had you in my
power at propitious seasons? Have I not overwhelmed, possessed you,
filled you with the flame of my desire? I have changed, renewed the very
blood in your veins. There is not an artery in your whole body I do not
circulate through. You cannot tell yourself how completely and entirely
you are my bride. But your wedlock has not yet been solemnised with all
the formalities due. I am a stickler for propriety, a gentleman of
scruples. . . . We must be made one for all eternity."

"Great sir, situated as I am, what can I, what should I say? Oh, indeed
I have felt, I have felt only too plainly, since many a day, that you
are my destiny, my only and inevitable destiny. Artfully have you
caressed and favoured and enriched me, to bring me to ruin at the last.
Yesterday, when the black hound bit my poor naked limbs, his teeth
burned in my flesh . . . and I cried, 'It is he!' The same evening, in
the Castle Hall, when that Herodias debauched and overawed the board,
someone was there

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

ready to pander to her hate and promise her my blood . . . and it was
you again!"

"True enough! but ’tis I likewise that saved you, and led you hither.
And why did I so? Because I would fain have you all my own, with none to
interfere between us. Frankly, your husband was an offence to me. And
you, you would be for ever bargaining, making terms. Quite other is my
way; my maxim is, all or nothing! That is why I have tormented you a
trifle, disciplined, chastened you, to ripen you for my embraces. . . .
I am particular, and pick and choose; I do not, as folk think, accept
every silly soul that may be ready to give itself to my power. I am for
select souls, at the right toothsome crisis of fury and despair. Look
you! I must needs tell you, I like you well, as you are today; you are
more desirable than ever before, you are a delectable soul for Satan. .
. . Ah! how long, how long I have loved you! . . . But to-day I am
hungry, hungry for you! . . .

"I will deal largely and liberally with you. I am not one of those
husbands who make bargains with their future bride. If you would merely
be rich, rich you should be on the instant. If you would merely be a
queen, step into the place of Queen Jeanne of Navarre, it should be
done, and none should say me nay—and verily the King would lose little
in the pride and wilfulness of his spouse. ’Tis a greater destiny to be
my wife. But there, say what you would have yourself."

"Great sir, I want nothing but the power of working ill."

"Ah, a charming, a right charming answer! . . . How well you merit my
love! . . . Truly that comprehends everything, both the Law and the
Prophets. . . . Seeing you have chosen so wisely, you shall be given
into the bargain all the rest to boot. You shall know all my secrets.
You shall see the foundations of the earth. The world shall come to you,
and pour out gold at your feet. . . . More, here I give you the true
diamond, my bride, the brilliant of first water, *Revenge*. . . . I
know, you gipsy, I know your most hidden wish; our two hearts beat as
one in this. . . .

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That is the thing
will ensure me final and certain possession of you. *You shall see your
lady enemy on her knees before you*, asking mercy and beseeching, happy
if only you would hold her pardoned, doing the same she did once to you.
Yes, she shall weep . . . and you shall say No! with a condescending
smile, and hear her cry in her agony, 'Death and damnation, ah me l' . .
. Then comes my turn to act."

"Great sir, I am your servant. . . . I was ungrateful once, I confess.
For indeed you have always been over good to me. I am yours, I am yours,
my master and my god! I want no other. Gracious is the light of your
countenance, and your service a sweet service of delight."

With this she falls grovelling, and adores him from the ground! . . .
First she does him homage according to the Templars' rite, symbolising
the utter abnegation of self and self-will. Her master, the Prince of
this World, the Prince of the Gales of Heaven, breathes himself into her
being like a rushing mighty wind. She receives at once and together the
three sacraments, reversed and desecrate,—Baptism, Priesthood, and
Marriage. In this new church, the exact opposite of its counterpart, the
Church of God, everything is reversed. Patient and submissive, she bore
the cruel initiation, <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) her spirit
borne up and comforted by the one word, "Revenge!" Far from the infernal
levin exhausting her energies, making her weak and ailing, it made her
more strong and terrible, and brought fire from her eyes. The moon, that
had modestly veiled her face an instant, shuddered to see her now.
Swollen out horribly with the hellish vapour, with fire and fury, and (a
new circumstance) with an unholy longing of desire, she showed for a
moment enormous in her excessive proportions, and of an awe-inspiring
beauty. She gazed around her, . . . and nature itself seemed changed.
The trees had found a language of their own, and told her tales of ages
long ago. The

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

herbs were simples now. Plants that yesterday she kicked away
contemptuously like hay, were become beings that spoke to her of
healing.

Next day she woke in full security, far, far out of her enemies’ reach.
They had sought her fruitlessly, finding only a few fluttering rags of
the fatal green robe. Had she in her despair leapt into the torrent? Had
she been carried off bodily and alive by the Demon? None knew. In either
case she was damned, there could be never a doubt of that. The Lady of
the Castle was comforted not a little they had not found her.

Had they met her, they would hardly have known her, so mightily was she
changed. Her eyes alone remained the same, not bright and flashing, but
filled with a strange, appalling, sombre glow. She was afraid, herself,
of terrifying others; she did not drop them, but she looked askance, to
mask their sinister effect by the obliquity of her gaze. Suddenly grown
dark of skin, she might to all appearance have passed through the
flames. But such as gazed more heedfully, felt that the flame was rather
an internal one—that an unclean and consuming fire glowed in her bosom.
The flaming bolt Satan had driven through her, still glowed within, and
threw, as if from a sinister, half-veiled lamp, a grim, but still
perilously enticing, reflection. Men drew back shuddering, but did not
quit her, and their senses were stirred and troubled.

She found herself at the entrance of one of those caves of the
troglodytes that occur in such numbers in certain hills of the centre
and west of France. It was the border marches, then a wild stretch,
between the land of Merlin and the land of the Faery Queen. Open heaths,
stretching limitless on every side, bore present witness to old-time
wars and everlasting forays, the terrors of plunder and violence that
kept the countryside yet unpeopled. There the Devil was at home; of the
scattered inhabitants, the most part were his fervent disciples, his
devotees. For all the fascination the rugged brushwoods of Lorraine, the
dark pine forests of the Jura, the salty wastes of the Burgos, may have
exercised

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

over him, his favourite haunt was perhaps these western borderlands of
France. It was not merely the home of the dreamy shepherd, of the
satanic accoupling of she-goat and goat-herd, but the scene of a close
conspiracy with Nature deeper than elsewhere, of a more intimate
comprehension of healing drugs and noxious poisons, of mysterious
relations, the connecting link of which has never been fathomed, with
Toledo the learned, that university of diabolic arts.

It was the beginning of winter. His cold breath, stripping the trees,
had piled up heaps of leaves and twigs of dead wood. All this she found
ready at the mouth of her gloomy shelter. Traversing a stretch of forest
and a quarter of a league of heathy waste, one came down within hail of
a group of hamlets a runlet of water had brought into existence. "Behold
your kingdom," the voice within her whispered. "A beggar-woman to-day,
tomorrow you shall be queen of all this countryside."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[58:1](sor08.htm#fr_30.md) This will be found
explained later. We must beware of the pedantic additions of the moderns
in the seventeenth century. The tinsel ornaments fools tack on to so
awful a reality only serve to lower Satan to their own poor level.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. King of the Dead](sor09.md)
