[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor05)  [Next](sor07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

### 4

### *TEMPTATIONS*

I HAVE omitted from the above picture the deep shadows of that cruel
period, as these would have darkened it unduly. I refer especially to
the uncertainty in which the rustic household habitually lived as to its
lot, the suspense, the chronic terror of the savage violence that might
burst at any moment on their unoffending heads from the castle above.

The feudal régime involved precisely the two things of all others that
go farthest to make a hell on earth; on the one hand, the *extreme of
immobility*,—the man was nailed to the soil, and emigration utterly
impossible; on the other, a high degree of *uncertainty* as to the
continuance of existing conditions.

Optimistic historians who talk so glibly of fixed quit-rents, and
charters, and purchases of emancipation, forget the paucity of
guarantees forthcoming for it all. So much is bound to be paid to the
Feudal Lord, but he can take all the rest too, if he likes. This is
called in so many words *the right of prehension*. Work away, goodman!
And while you are abroad in the fields, the dreaded troop from the
heights may swoop down on your house and carry off what it pleases "for
the service of the Seigneur."

No wonder, if you look at him the fellow is gloomy over his furrow, and
hangs his head! . . . Yes! and he is always like that, with anxious brow
and heavy heart, like a man constantly expecting bad news.

Is he pondering revenge? Not he; but two thoughts fill his mind, two
anxieties trouble him alternately. The first, "In what condition will
you find your house when you go back to-night?" The other, "Ah! if only
the clod I turn would let me see a treasure

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

underneath! if the kind Devil would give me wherewith to buy our
freedom!"

It is said that at this appeal (like the Etruscan "genius" that emerged
one day from under the ploughshare in the shape of a child) a dwarf, a
gnome, would often lift its tiny figure from the soil and standing up in
the furrow ask him, "What will you of me then?" But the poor man would
be dumbfoundered, and wanted nothing now. He turned pale and crossed
himself, and then the whole vision was gone.

Was he sorry afterwards? Did he never say to himself, "Fool, fool, do
you mean then to be for ever unhappy?" I can well believe it, but I am
no less convinced an unsurmountable barrier of terror prevented him from
going further. I do not think for an instant, as the monks would have us
believe, who have given accounts of Sorcery and Witchcraft, that the
pact with Satan was a mere caprice, a sudden impulse of a lover or a
miser. We need only consult common sense and human nature to be certain
of the contrary, that people never resorted to such extremes except as a
last resource, in utter despair, under the awful pressure of unending
wrong and wretchedness.

 

"But," they tell us, "these excessive miseries must have been largely
diminished as we near the days of St. Louis, who forbade private wars
between great lords." My own opinion is exactly the opposite. During the
eighty or a hundred years which intervened between this prohibition and
the English Wars (12401340), the seigneurs, no longer having their
customary amusement of burning and pillaging the lands of the
neighbouring lord, were ferocious in the treatment of their vassals. St.
Louis's peace was their war.

The ecclesiastical seigneurs, the monkish seigneurs, and the like, make
the reader of the *Journal d’Études Rigault* (published recently) fairly
shudder. The book gives a revolting picture of wild, barbarian licence.
The monkish seigneurs showed especial violence towards the nunneries.
The austere Rigault, Confessor

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

of the sainted King and Archbishop of Rouen, makes a personal
investigation into the condition of Normandy. Every night he rides up to
the door of a fresh monastery. Everywhere he finds the monks leading the
bold, bad life of feudal nobles, going armed, drinking, duelling,
hunting recklessly over waste and cornland alike, the nuns living with
them in indiscriminate concubinage, and everlastingly with child by
them.

Such was the Church! What must the lay nobles have been? What was the
inside like of those gloomy towers that, viewed from the plain below,
inspired mere panic terror? Two tales, true history doubtless both of
them, *Blue Beard* and *Griselda*, tell us something. What was he for
his vassals, his serfs, this torturer, who treated his own family with
such refinement of cruelty? We can judge from the only one of them
brought to trial, and that not till the fifteenth century, Gilles de
Ritz, the kidnapper of children. Sir Walter Scott's *Front de Bœuf*, the
barons of melodrama and romance, are poor creatures compared to these
terrible realities. The Templar in *Ivanhoe* is an equally feeble and an
entirely artificial portrait. The author has not dared to face the foul
actualities of celibacy among the Knights of the Temple, and of life
inside the fortified castle, where very few women were allowed, as being
mere useless mouths. The Romances of Chivalry give exactly the opposite
of the truth. Indeed, it has often been observed how literature in many
cases expresses the entire contrary of contemporary life and character;
as, for instance, the insipid pastoral plays of the Florian type that
held the stage during *the Terror* of the Revolutionary Period.

The domestic arrangements of these mediæval castles, where they can
still be traced, tell us more than all the books put together.
Men-at-arms, pages, serving-men, packed together at night under
low-browed vaults, by day stationed on the battlements, on narrow
terraces, suffering the most atrocious boredom, found breath and life
only in their sallies on to the plain below—no longer now warlike
expeditions against neighbouring lands,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

but hunting parties, *man*-hunting parties, exactions, outrages, without
number on the households of the surrounding serfs. The Lord knew
perfectly well himself that a mass of men like this without women could
only be kept in hand on condition of occasional licence.

The appalling notion of a hell where God uses the wickedest souls, the
most sinful of all there, to torture the less sinful, delivered up to
them as playthings, this noble dogma of the Middle Ages was literally
realised. Men felt instinctively God was far from them. Each razzia was
another proof of the domination of Satan, a convincing proof it was to
him they must henceforth address their prayers.

To add insult to injury, there was much coarse laughter and ribald wit
indulged in. "But surely the serf women were too unattractive," it may
be objected. The answer is, it was no question of beauty; the pleasure
consisted in outraging, beating, and making women cry. As late as the
seventeenth century, the great Court ladies would almost die of laughing
to hear the Duke of Lorraine describe how his fellows raided peaceable
villages, killing and torturing every woman, old women included.

Outrage was especially rife, as may be supposed, among the well-to-do
households, of a relatively superior rank, which were to be found among
the serfs, families of serfs supplying mayors to the community from
generation to generation, such as are found as far back as the twelfth
century taking the first place in the villages. The nobility hated,
mocked, and would fain have ruined these. Their new sense of moral
dignity was an unpardonable offence; it was unforgivable that their
wives and daughters should be chaste and virtuous women. What right had
they to be respectable? Their honour was not theirs to keep. *Serfs of
the body*, that was the cruel phrase everlastingly thrown in their
teeth.

 

It will be hard to believe in days to come that, among Christian people,
the Law did a worse thing than any it did to the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

slaves of Antiquity,—that it expressly sanctioned as a right the most
deadly outrage that can wring a human being's heart.

The ecclesiastic seigneur, no less than the lay, possesses this foul
prerogative. In a parish in the neighbourhood of Bourges, the curé,
being a seigneur, laid express claim to the *firstfruits* of every
bride, though in practice he was quite willing to sell his wife's
virginity to the husband for money down. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)

The theory has been too readily accepted that this outrage was only
formal, never actually done. But the price named in certain countries
for release from it was far beyond the means of almost any peasant. In
Scotland, for instance, the Feudal Superior claimed "several cows,"—an
enormous, an impossible price. Thus the poor young peasant's wife was at
her Lord's discretion. Moreover, the *Fors du Béarn* state in so many
words that the right was literally exacted. "The peasant's eldest son is
always reckoned the Seigneur's child, for he may be of his
engendering." <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23.md)

All feudal customs, even where this is not mentioned, invariably impose
an obligation on the newly made bride to go up to the castle to present
the *marriage meat-offering*. An odious practice to force the poor
trembling creature thus to run the gauntlet of anything it might enter
the heads of the wild pack of insolent, wifeless retainers that
harboured there to do to her.

 

One can still see the shameful scene,—the young husband bringing his
bride to the castle. One can imagine the guffaws of the knights and
squires, the ribald tricks of the pages, that welcomed the unhappy pair.
"At any rate the presence of the Lady of the Castle will keep them in
check," you say. Not a bit of it. The fair châtelaine the romances would
have us think so delicate, <span id="fr_24"></span>[3](#fn_24.md) but who
was quite capable of taking command of the garrison

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

in her Lord's absence; who was used to judging, punishing, ordering
torture or death; who had a hold over the Baron himself by means of the
fiefs she brought him—she was no tenderhearted protectress, least of all
for a serf, who perhaps was a pretty woman too. Flaunting publicly, as
was the habit of the time, her favoured knight and her page, she was not
sorry to justify the liberties she allowed herself by similar
misdemeanours on her husband's part.

She will be no obstacle to the game in hand, the amusement they are
getting out of the poor trembling fellow eager to redeem his wife. They
begin by bargaining with him, laughing at the agonies of the
"hard-fisted peasant," and end by sucking his very marrow and blood. Why
this dead set at the pair? Because he is fittingly dressed, an honest
man of respectable position, a notable person in his village. Because
she is pious, chaste, and modest, because she loves him, because she is
afraid and in tears. Her pretty eyes ask for pity,—in vain.

The unfortunate man offers all he possesses, even the dowry itself. . .
. No use! it is not enough. Angered at the injustice of such harsh
treatment, he urges, "But my neighbour, he paid nothing." . . . Ho! ho!
argufying now, the insolent scoundrel! Then the whole pack crowds round
him, shouting; sticks and brooms belabour him with a hail of blows.
Finally he is hustled and kicked out of doors, and they scream after
him: "Jealous brute, with your ugly, lenten looks, who's stealing your
wife? You shall have her back to-night, and to cap the favour, with
child! . . . Say thank you; why! you're nobles now. Your firstborn will
be a Baron!" All crowd to the windows to see this ludicrous figure,
death in his heart, wedding-clothes on his back. . . . Peals of laughter
pursue him, and the roystering mob, down to the meanest scullion, gives
chase to the "poor cuckold!" <span id="fr_25"></span>[4](#fn_25.md)

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

The man would have died on the spot of rage and chagrin, but for one
hope,—of the Devil's help. He goes home alone, and finds his house, how
empty, how deserted! No! not empty; there is someone there. Satan sits
at the hearth-side.

Presently she returns too, pale, disordered, in pitiful estate! . . .
She throws herself on her knees, and craves his pardon. At this the
man's heart is like to burst. . . . He puts his two arms round her neck,
and weeps and sobs and cries aloud till the very walls tremble. . . .

Still her coming brings God back to the house. Whatever she may have
endured, she is pure, innocent, and holy yet. Satan will get nothing
to-day. The Pact is not ripe for signing yet.

Our silly national *Fabliaux* and ridiculous *Contes* without exception
assume that under this mutual injury and all subsequent ones she will
have to affront, the wife is on the side of her outragers and against
her husband; they would have us believe that the poor girl, bullied and
shamefully used, made a mother in spite of herself, is delighted and
overjoyed at it all. Can anything be more improbable? No doubt rank,
politeness, elegance were likely enough to seduce her; but no one took
the trouble to use these means. They would have much fine fun indeed of
anyone who for a serf's wife should have played the high-bred lover. All
the rout, chaplain, cellarer, down to the very serving-men, thought they
were honouring her by outrage. The humblest page fancied himself a great
Lord, if only he seasoned his love-making with insults and blows.

 

One day, when the poor woman had been maltreated in her husband's
absence, she was heard to exclaim, as she recoiled her

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

long hair, "Oh, miserable Saints of wood, of what avail to make vows to
them? Are they deaf? or are they grown old? . . . Why have I not a
Spirit to protect me, strong and powerful,—if an evil Spirit, I cannot
help it? I see them many a one carved in stone at the church door. What
are they doing there? Why do they not fly to their proper home, the
castle yonder, to carry off these miscreants and roast them in hell? . .
. Oh for strength and power! Who can give me these? I would gladly give
my whole self in exchange. . . . Alas! what could I give? What have Ito
give? I have nothing left. Woe on me, body and soul,—on my soul that is
but ashes! Why—why cannot I have, instead of my elfin friend, who is
good for nothing, a great, strong, powerful Spirit?"

"Oh, sweet little mistress mine, ’tis by your fault I am so small, and I
cannot grow bigger. . . . And besides, if I were big, you would never
have liked me, never have allowed me near you, and your husband even
less. You would have had me driven off by your priests and their holy
water. . . . I will be big and strong if you wish. . . . Mistress mine,
Spirits are neither big nor little, strong nor weak. At desire, the
tiniest can become a giant."

"Why? How?"

"Nothing simpler. To turn your Spirit into a giant, you have but to give
him a gift."

"A gift! What gift?"

"A sweet woman's soul."

"Oh, horror! Who are you, say? And what is this you ask?" "Nay, such
gifts are made every day. . . . Would you price yourself higher than the
lady yonder of the castle? She has pledged her soul to her husband, to
her lover; nevertheless she gives it again all to her page, a child, a
little silly lad. I am far more than your page; I am more than any
serving-boy. In how many things have I been your little maid and
tirewoman? Nay, do not blush, do not be angry. . . . Let me tell you
only, I am all about you, and already perhaps within you. For how else
should I know your thoughts, even the very thought you hide

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

from your own self? . . . Who am I? I am your little soul, that talks
unconcernedly to your great, your proper soul. . . . We are inseparable.
Do you rightly know how long I have been with you? For more than a
thousand years. For I was your mother's, and her mother's, your
grandmother's and great-grandmother's. . . . I am the genius of the
hearth and home."

"Tempter! tempter! . . . but what will you do?"

"I will make your husband rich, and you powerful, so that folk shall
fear you."

"What say you? Are you then the demon of hidden treasures?"

"Why call me demon, if I am but doing a just work, a task of kindness
and gentle piety? . . . God cannot be everywhere, He cannot be always at
work. He likes to rest sometimes, and leaves us, the Spirits, to see to
little matters, to correct the inadvertences of His Providence, the
miscarriages of His justice. . . . Your husband is an instance, poor,
hardworking, deserving mortal, who toils and moils himself to death, and
gains the barest living. God has not had time yet to think of him. . . .
Albeit a trifle jealous, still I love him, my good host,—and pity him.
He can no more, he must give in. He will die like your children, killed
already by dire poverty. Last winter he was ill. What will become of him
next winter?"

Then she put her face between her two hands, and wept for long hours. At
last, when she had no more tears left, though her sobs still shook her
breast, he said, "I ask nothing. . . . Only, I beseech you, let us save
him between us."

She had made no promise, but she belonged to him from that hour forth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[36:1](sor06.htm#fr_22.md) Laurière, ii. 100, under
word *Marquette;* Michelet, *Origines du Droit*, 264.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[36:2](sor06.htm#fr_23.md) This work was not
published till (1842) subsequently to the *Origines* (1837).

<span id="fn_24"></span>[36:3](sor06.htm#fr_24.md) This delicacy and
refinement is well instanced in the treatment the ladies of the Court
were for inflicting with their own hands on Jean de Menny, their poet,
the author of the *Roman de la Rose* (about 1500). They would certainly
<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>have carried out their intention, had it
not been for the witty poet's clever subterfuge.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[37:4](sor06.htm#fr_25.md) Nothing can be merrier
than the old French *Contes;* but they have a certain monotony. The
jokes are limited to three: the injured husband's <span id="page_38">p.
38</span> despair, the squalls of the victim of the lash, the grimaces
of the fellow on the gallows. The first is funny; the second sets you
laughing till you cry; but there! the third caps all, and you hold your
sides in inextinguishable merriment! Mark now, the three are only one
after all. It is always the man who is down, the weakling that can be
outraged without risk of retaliation, the person who is incapable of
self-defence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Diabolical Possession](sor07.md)
