[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor10)  [Next](sor12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

### 9

### *SATAN the HEALER*

THE silent, sombre drama of the Bride of Corinth is repeated literally
and exactly from the thirteenth to the fifteenth centuries. In the gloom
of night which still broods over the world, the two lovers, Man and
Nature, meet again and embrace with transports of joy; and lo! at the
self-same instant, to their horror, see themselves smitten with
appalling scourges! Still, as of old, we seem to hear the bride telling
her lover, "All is over. . . . Your locks shall be white to-morrow. . .
. I am a dead woman, and you shall die."

Three horrid afflictions in three successive centuries. In the first,
the loathsome disfigurement of the outward form,—skin diseases, leprosy.
In the second, an inward curse,—weird nervous excitations, epileptic
dances. These die down, but the blood grows tainted, chronic ulcerations
pave the way to syphilis, that scourge of the sixteenth century.

 

The diseases of the Middle Ages, so far as we can get vague and
unsatisfactory glimpses of them, were predominantly hunger, languor, and
poverty of blood, the emaciation men admire in mediæval sculpture. The
blood was thin as water, and scrofulous complaints were bound to be all
but universal. With the exception of Arab or Jewish physicians, hired at
great cost by the rich, medical treatment was unknown,—the people could
only crowd to the church doors for aspersion with holy water. On
Sundays, after Mass, the sick came in scores, crying for help,—and words
were all they got: "You have sinned, and God is afflicting you. Thank
Him; you will suffer so much the less torment in the life

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

to come. Endure, suffer, die. Has not the Church its prayers for the
dead?" Feeble, fainting, neither hoping nor caring to live, they
followed this advice to the letter, and dropped into the grave in sheer
indifference to life.

A fatal despair, a wretched death in life, that could not but prolong
indefinitely these times of lead, and constitute a fatal bar to all
progress. What could be worse than this facile resignation, this docile
acceptance of death, this impotence and total absence of energy and
aspiration? Better far the new epoch, those last years of the Middle
Ages, which at the price of atrocious sufferings, at last inaugurates
for mankind the possibility of renewed activity,—the *resurrection of
desire*.

 

The Arab philosopher Avicenna maintains that the prodigious outbreak of
diseases of the skin which marks the thirteenth century resulted from
the use of those excitants whereby men at that period sought to awake,
or to revive, the flagging energies of love. No doubt the hot,
inflammatory spices, imported from the East, were not without effect;
while the newly discovered art of distillation and various fermented
liquors then first coming into use may likewise have exerted an
influence in the same direction.

But another and a mightier fermentation, and a much more general one,
was taking place. From the bitter internal conflict of two worlds and
two spirits a third survived which silenced them both. Waning Faith,
nascent Reason were in the death grip; between the two combatants
another intervened and mastered mankind,—the unclean, fierce spirit of
their eager, passionate appetites, the cruel emanation of their furious
ebullition.

Finding no outlet, whether in bodily gratifications or in a free play of
mind, the sap of life is dammed back and putrefies. Without light or
voice or speech, it yet spoke in pains of body, in foul eruptions of the
skin. Then a new and terrible thing follows; baulked desire, unsatisfied
and unappeased, sees itself checked

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

by a cruel spell, a hideous metamorphosis. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) Love that was drawing nigh, blindly, with
arms thrown wide, steps back shuddering. Yes! love may fly; but the fury
of the tainted blood persists, the flesh burns in agonising, itching
torments, while more agonising still, the inward conflagration rages,
fanned by the breath of despair.

What remedy does Christian Europe find for this double evil? Death,
captivity; nothing else is better. When bitter celibacy, hopeless love,
fierce thwarted passion, bring you to an unhealthy, morbid state; when
your blood grows corrupt, down with you into an *in pace*, or build your
lonely cabin in the desert. You shall live, warning-bell in hand, that
all may flee your presence. "No human being must see you; no consolation
can be yours. If you approach too near, death is the penalty!"

 

Leprosy is the last degree, the apogee, of the scourge; but a thousand
other terrible and cruel ills only less hideous abound everywhere. The
purest and the fairest of womankind were stricken with detestable
eruptions that were looked upon as the visible sign of sin or a direct
punishment from God. The men had recourse to means mere loss of life
would never have led them to adopt; prohibitions were forgotten, and the
old consecrated medicines forsaken, and the holy water that had proved
so useless. They visited the Witch, the Sorceress. From force of habit,
as

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

well as from fear, they still frequented the churches; but the true
church was henceforth her hut, her haunt in heath, in forest, and in
desert. Thither it was they now carried their prayers.

Prayers for healing, prayers for some joy of life. At the first symptoms
that showed the blood corrupted, they would away in great secrecy, at
furtive hours, to consult the Sibyl: "What must I do? What is this I
feel within me? . . . I am burning; oh! give me something to calm my
blood. . . . I am burning; give me something to appease my intolerable
longing."

A bold, guilty step they repent them of when evening comes. It must
indeed be pressing, this new and fatal constraint; the fire must indeed
be agonising, to make all the saints so utterly of no avail. But then
the trial of the Knights Templars, the trial of Pope Boniface, have
unmasked the Sodom that lurked under the altar stones. A Pope a
Sorcerer, a friend of Satan, and finally carried off by the Foul Fiend:
this turns all men's notions upside down. Not without the Devil's help
surely could the Pope, *who is no longer Pope in Rome*, in his city of
Avignon, Pope John XXII., a cobbler's son of Cahors, amass more gold
than the Emperor himself and all the kings of the earth! Like Pope, like
Bishop; did not Guichard, Bishop of Troyes, win a boon of the Devil, the
death of the King of France's daughters? . . . It is not death *we* ask
for, but pleasant things, life, health, beauty, pleasure,—things of God,
that God refuses us. . . . Well, then, suppose we were to get them by
the favour of the *Prince of this World?* 

 

That great and puissant doctor of the Renaissance, Paracelsus, when he
burned the wise books of ancient medicine *en masse*, Greek, Jewish, and
Arab, declared he had learned nothing at all but from popular medicine,
from the *good women*, <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34) from
shepherds, and hangmen. The latter were often clever surgeons,—setters
of broken or dislocated bones, and accomplished farriers.

I have little doubt but that his admirable book, so full of

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

genius, upon the *Diseases of Women*, the first ever written on this
important, profound, and touching subject, owed its special merits to
the experience of women themselves, those women whose help their sisters
were used to appeal to,—I mean the Sorceresses who in every country
fulfilled the office of midwives. No woman in those days would ever have
consulted a male physician, trusted to him, or told him her secrets.
Sorceresses were the only observers in this field, and, for women in
particular, were the sole and only practitioners.

 

The most certain fact we know as to their methods is that they made
great use, for the most various purposes, as calmants and as stimulants,
of a wide family of herbs, of doubtful repute and perilous properties,
which proved of the most decided advantage to their patients. These are
appropriately known as the *Solanaceæ* (herbs of consolation). <span
id="fr_35"></span>[3](#fn_35)

A profuse and familiar family of plants, the majority of whose species
are to be found in extreme abundance, under our feet, in the hedgerows,
in every field. So numerous a family, that a single one of its genera
embraces eight hundred species. <span id="fr_36"></span>[4](#fn_36)
Nothing in the world easier to detect, nothing commoner. Yet these herbs
are for the most part very risky to employ. Audacity was required to
determine the doses, it may well be the audacity of genius.

To begin at the bottom of the ascending scale of their

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

potency. <span id="fr_37"></span>[5](#fn_37) The first to be named are
simply pot-herbs, good to eat, and nothing more,—aubergines, tomatoes,
inappropriately called love-apples. Others of these harmless varieties
are the quintessence of all that is calming and soothing,—the mulleins
(shepherd's club), for instance, so useful for fomentations.

Next in the scale you will find a plant already open to suspicion—one
that many believed a poison; a herb honey-sweet at first, afterwards
bitter, that seems to say in the words of Jonathan, "I have tasted a
little honey, and behold! for this I die." Yet this death is useful—it
is the deadening of pain. The bittersweet, that is its name, was bound
to be the first essay of a bold homœopathy, which by slow degrees
aspired to the most dangerous poisons. The slight irritation, the
pricking sensations it produces, sufficed to point it out as a remedy
for the predominant maladies of the period, viz. diseases of the skin.

The fair girl, in despair at seeing herself marked with hateful
blotches, carbuncles, spreading eruptions, came weeping for succour in
her affliction. With married women the scourge was still more cruel. The
bosom, the most delicate thing in all nature, and its vessels, which
form an interlaced flower of incomparable perfection below the
skin, <span id="fr_38"></span>[6](#fn_38) is, by virtue of its liability
to congestion and blocking of the veins and arteries, the most exquisite
instrument of pain,—pain keen, pitiless, and never ceasing. How
willingly would she have welcomed any and every poison to gain relief!
No stopping to bargain with the Witch who promised a

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

cure, and between whose hands she was ready at once to place the poor
painful, swollen organ.

After the bitter-sweet, too feeble a medicament for such a case, came
the black mulleins, possessing a somewhat greater activity. This would
afford relief for a day or two. But at the end of that time the poor
woman would be back again with tears and supplications. "Well, well! you
must return once more this evening. . . . I will find you something. You
decide to have it; but ’tis a deadly poison."

 

The Sorceress was running a terrible risk. Nobody at that time had a
suspicion that, applied externally or taken in very small doses, poisons
are remedies. All the plants which were confounded together under the
name of *Witches’ herbs* were supposed ministers of death. Found in a
woman's hands, they would have led to her being adjudged a poisoner or
fabricator of accursed spells. A blind mob, as cruel as it was timid,
might any morning stone her to death, or force her to undergo the ordeal
by water or *noyade*. Or, worst and most dreadful fate of all, they
might drag her with ropes to the church square, where the clergy would
make a pious festival of it, and edify the people by burning her at the
stake.

She makes the venture for all that, and starts in search of the fearsome
herb, slipping out late at night or early in the morning, when she is
less afraid of being observed. But a little shepherd lad was there, who
tells the village, "If you had seen her as I did, gliding among the
fallen stones of the old ruin, glancing from side to side, muttering
some unintelligible gibberish to herself the while! . . . Oh, I was
rarely frightened, I tell you. . . . If she had caught me, I should have
been done for. . . . She might have turned me into a lizard, or a toad,
or a bat. . . . She gathered a villainous-looking herb, the ugliest I
ever saw,—a pale, sickly yellow, with stripes of black and red, like
flames of hell-fire. The dreadful thing was that all the stem was hairy,
like a man's hair,—long, black, snaky hair. She tore it up roughly,

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

with a groan,—and in an instant I lost sight of her. She could not have
run so fast, she must have flown away! . . . What an awful woman! What a
danger for all the countryside!"

Doubtless the plant looks terrifying. It is the henbane (*hyoscyamus*),
a cruel and deadly poison, but at the same time an excellent emollient,
a soothing, sedative plaster, that relaxes and softens the tissues,
relieves the pain, and often cures the patient.

Another of these poisons, the *belladonna*, doubtless so named out of
gratitude, was sovran for calming the convulsions that sometimes occur
in childbirth, superadding peril to peril and terror to terror at this
supreme crisis. But there! a motherly hand would slip in this soothing
poison, <span id="fr_39"></span>[7](#fn_39) lull the mother to sleep,
and lay a spell on the door of life; the infant, just as at the present
day when chloroform is administered, worked out its own freedom by its
own efforts, and forced its way to the world of living men.

 

This belladonna cures the convulsive dancing of the limbs by setting up
another dance,—a venturesome homœopathy that could not but be terrifying
at the first blush. In fact it was *Medicine spelt backwards*, as a rule
the exact opposite of that which the Christians knew and thought the
only efficacious kind, the medicine of the Jews and Arabs.

How came the great discovery? No doubt by simple application of the
great satanic principle *that everything should be done backwards*,
precisely in the reverse way to that employed by the world of religion.
The Church had a holy horror of all poisons; Satan utilises them as
curative agents. The Priest thinks by spiritual means (Sacraments,
prayers) to act even upon the body. Satan, acting by contraries, employs
material means for acting even on the soul; he gives potions to secure
forgetfulness, love, reverie, any and every state of mind. To priestly
benedictions he

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

opposes magnetic passes by dainty female hands that lull pain and
anguish to sleep.

 

Through change of treatment, and still more of clothing (no doubt by the
substitution of linen for wool), skin diseases lost much of their
virulence. Leprosy diminished, but at the same time seemed to strike
inwards and produce more deep-seated mischief. The fourteenth century
oscillated between three scourges, epileptic convulsions, the plague,
and those ulcerations which, if we are to believe Paracelsus, paved the
way for syphilis.

The first named was by no means the least formidable danger. It broke
out about the year 1350, under the appalling form of *St. Guy's dance*
(St. Vitus's dance, *chorea*), having this strange peculiarity, that the
complaint was not, so to speak, individual; those suffering from it, as
if carried away by one and the same galvanic current, would grasp each
other by the hand, group themselves in huge, endless chains, and whirl,
and whirl, like Dervishes, till they died of exhaustion. The spectators
would roar with laughter at first, then presently caught by the
contagion, would give in and join the mighty stream, and swell the awful
band of dancing maniacs.

What would have happened if the malady had persisted in the same way as
leprosy did for a long period, even in its decline?

The answer is, it was a first step, an approximation, towards epilepsy;
and if this first generation of sufferers had not been cured, it would
have produced a second definitely and distinctly epileptic. The
imagination shudders at the thought! all Europe packed with madmen,
maniacs, idiots! We are not told how the complaint was treated, and
finally arrested. The particular remedy recommended at the time, the
expedient of falling on the dancers with kicks and fisticuffs, was
infinitely well adapted to aggravate the cerebral disturbance and lead
to actual epilepsy.

We cannot doubt there was another treatment practised that was never
voluntarily mentioned. At the period when Sorcery and Witchcraft were at
their point of highest activity and repute,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

the very extensive employment of the *Solanaceæ*, and especially of
belladonna, was the most marked general characteristic of the remedial
measures taken to combat this class of disease. At the great popular
gatherings, the Witches’ Sabbaths, we shall describe later, the
*Witches’ herb*, infused in hydromel, beer, as well as in cider <span
id="fr_40"></span>[8](#fn_40) and perry, the strong drinks of the West,
set the crowd dancing,—but in wanton, luxurious measures, showing no
trace of epileptic violence.

 

But the greatest revolution the Sorceress brought about, the chief
movement of all *in contradiction*, in direct contradiction to the
spirit of the Middle Ages, is what we might well call a rehabilitation
of the belly and its digestive functions. They boldly proclaimed the
doctrine that "nothing is impure and nothing unclean." From that moment
the study of physical science was enfranchised, its shackles loosed, and
true medicine became a possibility.

That they carried the principle to mischievous lengths no one can deny;
indeed, the fact is self-evident. Nothing is impure but moral evil.
Everything physical is pure; nothing physical can properly be excepted
from examination and study, prohibited in deference to an empty
idealism, or worse still a silly feeling of repulsion.

Here above all had the Middle Ages displayed their most essential
characteristic, what we may call *anti-Nature*, splitting up the unity
of created things, and drawing distinctions, constituting castes,
classes, hierarchies. Not only according to this is the spirit *noble*,
the body *not noble*,—but there are actually particular parts of the
body which are *noble*, and others not,—plebeian it would appear.
Similarly, Heaven is noble, the Abyss not. Why? "Because heaven is
high." But heaven is neither high nor low; it is above us and beneath us
at once. And the Abyss, what is *it?* Nothing; a figment of the
imagination. The same

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

foolish conceptions as to the macrocosm of the universe and the
microcosm of the individual human being.

All is of a piece; solidarity rules throughout. The belly is the servant
of the brain, and feeds it; but it is no less true that the brain,
working ceaselessly to make the sugar required in the processes of
digestion, <span id="fr_41"></span>[9](#fn_41) is no less active to
assist the belly.

 

Abuse was lavished upon them; filthy, indecent, shameless, immoral, were
only some of the epithets levelled at the Sorceress. For all that it can
confidently be affirmed her first steps in the direction indicated were
a happy revolution in all that is most moral, in kindness and human
charity. By a monstrous perversion of ideas, the Middle Ages regarded
the flesh, in its representative, woman (accursed since Eve), as
radically impure. The Virgin, *exalted as virgin, and not as Our Lady*,
far from raising actual womanhood to a higher level, had degraded it,
starting men on the path of a barren, scholastic ideal of purity that
only led to ever greater and greater absurdities of verbal subtlety and
false logic.

Woman herself even came eventually to share the odious prejudice and to
believe herself unclean. So she lurked in hiding at the hour of
childbirth, blushed to love and give happiness to men. Woman, so sober
as a rule in comparison with the opposite sex, who in almost every land
is a vegetarian and an eater of fruits, who sacrifices so sparingly to
the natural appetites, and by her milk and vegetable diet wins the
purity of the innocent substances that are her food, she of all others
was fain to ask pardon almost for existing at all, for living and
fulfilling the conditions of life. A submissive martyr to false modesty,
she was for ever torturing herself, actually endeavouring to conceal,
abolish, and annul the adorable sign of her womanhood, that thrice holy
thing, the belly of her pregnancy, whence man is born in the image of
God everlastingly from generation to generation.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

Mediæval medicine concerns itself exclusively with the superior, the
pure being (to wit, man), who alone can be ordained priest, and
incarnate the living God upon the altar.

Animals, too, occupy some of its attention; indeed, it begins with them.
But does it ever think of children? Very seldom. Does it pay any heed to
women? Never!

The Romances of those days, with their subtle refinements, represent the
exact opposite of the everyday world. Apart from the courts of kings,
and high-born adultery, the main subject-matter of these tales, woman is
always the poor, patient Griselda, born to exhaust every sort of pain
and humiliation, often beaten, never properly cared for.

The Devil only, woman's ally of old and her confidant in the Garden, and
the Witch, the perverse creature who does everything *backwards and
upside down*, in direct contradiction to the world of religion, ever
thought of unhappy womanhood, ever dared to tread custom underfoot and
care for her health in spite of her own prejudices. The poor creature
held herself in such lowly estimation! She could only draw back blushing
shyly, and refuse to speak. But the Sorceress, adroit and cunning,
guessed her secrets and penetrated her inmost being. She found means to
make her speak out at last, drew her little secret from her and overcame
all her refusals and timid, shamefaced hesitations. Submit to treatment!
She would sooner die, she said. But the *barbarous Witch* knew better,
and saved her life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[79:1](sor11.htm#fr_33) Leprosy was supposed due
to the Crusades, to be an importation from Asia; but as a matter of fact
Europe had only herself to thank for the scourge. The war persistently
waged by the Middle Ages against the flesh and against cleanliness was
bound to bear fruit. More than one female saint is commended for having
never washed even the hands;—how much less the rest of the body! An
instant's nakedness would have been a mortal sin. The worldling
faithfully follows these precepts of the cloister. The society of those
days, so subtle and refined, which makes sacrifice of marriage and
appears animated only by the poetry of adultery, retains singular
scruples on this simple point of personal ablutions, dreading every form
of purification as a defilement. Never a bath known for a thousand
years! We may be quite certain not one of those knights, those fair and
ethereal ladies, the Percivals, Tristrams, Iseults, ever washed. Hence a
cruel accident, highly unpoetical in such romantic surroundings,—the
furious itches that tortured our thirteenth-century ancestors.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[80:2](sor11.htm#fr_34) The polite, flattering
name fear conferred upon the Sorceresses.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[81:3](sor11.htm#fr_35) It is cruel to note the
ingratitude of mankind. A thousand other plants have usurped their
place, a hundred exotic herbs have been preferred by fashion, while
these poor, humble *Solanaceæ* that saved so many lives in former days
have been clean forgotten with all the benefits they conferred. Who
indeed has any memory for such things? Who recognises the time-honoured
obligations men owe to innocent nature? The *Asclepias acida*, or
*Sarcostemma* (flesh-plant), which for five thousand years was the
*consecrated host of Asia*, the palpable god-made flesh of all that
continent, which gave five hundred millions of the human race the
blessedness of eating their god, the same plant that the Middle Ages
knew as the *Poison-killer* (Vincevenenum), has never a word of
recognition in our books of botany. Who knows but two thousand years
hence mankind will have forgotten the virtues of wheat? See Langlois, on
the *soma* of India, and the *hom* of Persia (*Mém. de l’Académie des
Inscriptions*, xix. 326).

<span id="fn_36"></span>[81:4](sor11.htm#fr_36) *Dict. d’Histoire
Naturelle* of M. d’Orbigny; article *Morelles* (Nightshades), by M.
Duchartre, after Demal, etc.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[82:5](sor11.htm#fr_37) I have not been able to
find this scale detailed in any work I have consulted. It is the more
important, inasmuch as the witches who undertook this series of
experiments, at the risk of being branded as poisoners, undoubtedly
began with the weakest, and advanced little by little to the more
powerful. Thus each degree of potency gives a relative date, and allows
us to establish in this very obscure subject an approximative
chronology. I propose to say more of this in the following chapters,
when I come to speak of the Mandragora and the Datura. I have followed
particularly Pouchet, *Solanées et Botanique générale* (Solanaceæ and
General Botany). In this important monograph M. Pouchet has not
disdained to draw from the ancient writers, Matthiole, Porta, Gessner,
Sauvages, Gmelin, etc.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[82:6](sor11.htm#fr_38) See plate in that
excellent and quite inoffensive work, the *Cours de Physiologie* of M.
Auzouz.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[84:7](sor11.htm#fr_39) Madame La Chapelle and
M. Chaussier have returned to these practices of old-fashioned popular
medicine with great advantage to their patients (Pouchet, *Solanées*, p.
64).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[86:8](sor11.htm#fr_40) Then quite a new
beverage. It first began to be manufactured in the twelfth century.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[87:9](sor11.htm#fr_41) This is the great
discovery that makes Claude Bernard's name immortal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. Charms and Love Potions](sor12)
