[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor18)  [Next](sor20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

### 17

### *SATAN TURNS ECCLESIASTIC 1610*

WHATEVER the appearance of fanaticism and satanic possession still
displayed by the Sorceresses, it is quite plain both from Lancre's
account and others of the seventeenth century that by this time the
Witches’ Sabbath was become primarily a matter of money-making. The levy
contributions which are virtually compulsory, demand payment from those
present, and fine the absent. At Brussels and in Picardy they pay in
accordance with a fixed tariff anyone bringing in a new member to the
confraternity.

In the Basque countries there is no attempt made at concealment.
Assemblages are held twelve thousand strong, including persons of every
class, rich and poor, priests and nobles. Satan, a nobleman himself,
over and above his triple horns, wears a laced hat, like a gentleman. By
this time he has found his old throne, the Druid stone, too hard a seat,
and has given himself a good gilded armchair. Does this mean he is
growing old? Nimbler than in his young days, he plays all sorts of
pranks and gambols, springs up like a Jack-in-the-box from the depths of
a huge crock, officiates, legs kicking in the air and his head
downwards.

He is for having everything done decently and in order, and defrays the
expenses of the arrangements and decorations. Besides the usual yellow,
red, and blue fires that amuse the eyes and alternately reveal and
conceal the flying shadows, he entertains the ear with strange music,
"in especial certain little bells that tickle" the nerves, like the
penetrating vibrations of some

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

particular harmonies. To crown his magnificence, Satan has silver plate
brought for use at the feast. His very toads display an affectation of
refinement and elegance, and like little lords, come to the festival
tricked out in green velvet.

The general appearance is that of a huge fair, a vast masked ball, when
the disguises are of the thinnest. Satan, who knows his world, opens the
dance with the Bishop of the "Sabbath," or else the King and
Queen,—dignitaries established on purpose to flatter the bigwigs, the
rich or noble personages who honour the assembly by their presence.

All is changed from the old grim festival of revolt, the sinister orgy
of serfs, of *Jacques* as they were nicknamed, communicating by night in
love, by day in murder. The frenzied *Sabbatical Round* no longer forms
the one and only dance. It is supplemented by Moorish dances, lively or
languishing, amorous and obscene, in which girls trained for the
purpose, such as the Murgin and the Lisalda mentioned above, simulate
and parade the most lust-provoking actions. These dances, it is said,
were the irresistible attraction which among the Basques inevitably drew
to the Witches’ Sabbath all the world of women, wives, maids, and
widows,—the last especially in great numbers.

Apart from these diversions and the feast to follow, it would be
difficult to account for the unbounded popularity the "Sabbath" enjoyed.
Loveless love was the dominant note; the festival was expressly and
avowedly a celebration of female sterility. This Boguet establishes
beyond a doubt.

True, Lancre tells a different tale in one place, in order to scare
women away and make them afraid of being got with child. But as a rule
he is more sincere, and agrees with Boguet. The cruel, indecent
examination he undertook of the Witches’ persons is good and sufficient
proof of his belief in their sterility, and that sterile passive love is
the foundation-stone of the "Sabbatical" observances.

This could not but have cast a gloom over the festival, if the men had
had hearts. It was the mad women who flocked there

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

to dance and feast that paid for all; but they were resigned to their
fate, their sole aspiration being not to leave the place pregnant. True
enough they bore the burden of wretchedness and poverty far more than
men did; and Sprenger tells us the dismal cry that as early as his day
would escape them in the very act of love, "May the Devil have the fruit
of our embrace!" Yet in his time (1500) living cost but a penny a day,
while at the later period here referred to (1600), under Henri IV., it
was difficult to keep body and soul together at ten times that expense.
Throughout the whole century, the desire, the craving for sterility is
for ever on the increase.

This mournful reserve, this fear of mutual love, must have rendered the
"Sabbath" a cold, wearisome function, had not the expert mistresses of
the ceremonies, who managed the entertainment, exaggerated the burlesque
element, and diverted the spectators with many a ludicrous interlude.
Accordingly the opening ceremony of the "Sabbath," the world-old scene,
coarse and realistic, of the pretended fecundation of the Chief
Sorceress by Satan (in former days by Priapus), was followed by another
travesty, a *lavabo*, <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md) a cold
purification (to chill and sterilise), which she received not without
grimaces expressive of shuddering and mortal chill, the whole forming a
broad farce in which the Sorceress usually substituted an
attractive-looking understudy for herself, the Queen of the "Sabbath,"
some young and pretty married woman.

Another distraction, no less abominable, centred round the black wafer,
the *black radish*, the subject of a thousand coarse witticisms in
ancient Greek days, when it was used as an instrument of punishment upon
the man-woman or puthic and the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

young debauchee who went with other men's wives. Satan sliced it into
little discs which he then solemnly swallowed.

The grand finale was, according to Lancre,—which means, no doubt,
according to the two hussies who made him believe whatever they
pleased,—a very astonishing thing to happen before so numerous an
assemblage. Incest would seem to have been publicly, indiscriminately,
and ostentatiously indulged in, by way of reproducing the old satanic
conditions needed to originate the Sorceress—that is to say, the
mother's impregnation by her own son. But this horror was not only
unnecessary by this time, when Sorcery had become hereditary in certain
fixed and legally descended families, but impossible in fact, a thing
altogether too shocking to be endured. Possibly merely a travesty of it
was acted, a grotesque kind of miracle-play between a comic Semiramis
and a dotard Ninus.

There was another and probably a more serious feature, a comedy of real
and actual life, and one that points strongly to the presence of persons
of high rank and corrupt morals,—his was an odious sort of practical
joke, a cruel and coarse mystification.

They would entice to the festival some ill-advised married man, whom
they proceeded to intoxicate with their deadly brews (datura,
belladonna, and the like), till he was *spellbound* and lost all power
of motion and speech, but not the use of his eyes. His wife, also
*spellbound*, but in a different way, with erotic beverages and reduced
to a deplorable state of self-abandonment, would then be shown him naked
and unashamed, patiently enduring the caresses of another before the
indignant eyes of her natural protector, who could not stir a finger to
help her.

His manifest despair, his unavailing efforts to speak, his violent
struggles to move his torpid limbs, his dumb rage, his rolling eyes, all
provided the spectators with a cruel pleasure, not dissimilar, be it
said in passing, to that afforded by certain comedies of Molière's. In
the present instance the play was all palpitating with actuality, and
was easily pushed to the last

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

extremities of sin and shame. Doubtless the shame was followed by no
after effects, as was the invariable rule at these Witches’ Sabbaths,
and next day's recollections were but dim in the brains of the now
sobered victims; but the spectators, the actors, were *they* likely to
forget?

These criminal doings show plainly the aristocracy is now at work,
bearing no resemblance whatever to the old fraternity of serfs, the
primitive "Sabbath,"—impious and impure no doubt, but free, open, and
aboveboard, where everything was voluntary and done by universal
consent.

Satan, always corrupt, is evidently going from bad to worse. The Evil
One is growing a polite, adroit, soft-handed gentleman,—and the change
only leaves him a more false-hearted and filthy-minded villain than
before. What a new and strange departure is this for a Witches’ Sabbath,
to find him hand and glove with the priests! What of the curé who brings
his *bénédicte*, his sacristaness, to the feast, who burlesques the holy
offices, says the White Mass in the morning and the Black Mass at night!
Satan, Lancre says, recommends him to debauch his penitents, his
spiritual daughters. Simple-minded magistrate, who actually seems
unaware that for a good century now Satan has well understood and made
good profit of the advantages offered by the Church. The Devil has
turned Confessor, Director of Consciences; or if you like it better, the
Confessor has turned Devil.

Just recall, my worthy Lancre, the series of trials beginning in 1491,
which it may well be did something towards teaching the Parlement of
Paris toleration. This body discontinues almost entirely the practice of
sending the Devil to the stake, realising that he is no more now than a
mask, a cloak, to cover priestly offenders.

Not a few nuns fall victims to his new ruse of borrowing the face and
figure of a beloved confessor. We may instance the case of Jeanne
Pothierre, a nun of Le Quesnoy, a woman of middle age, forty-five years
old, but, alas! only too susceptible.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She declares her
passion for her father confessor, who takes good care not to listen to
her, and runs away to Falempin, a place at some leagues’ distance. The
Devil, who never sleeps, at once recognises his advantage, and seeing
her (in the chronicler's words) "pricked by the thorns of Venus, he
cunningly adopts the form of said father, and returning night after
night to the convent, enjoys her favours, deceiving her so thoroughly
that she declares herself to have been had by him—she had kept
count—four hundred and thirty-four times. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64.md) . . ." Her subsequent repentance met with
no little compassion, and she was speedily relieved from the agonies of
shame, a good walled dungeon being at once provided for her in the near
neighbourhood, at the Castle of Selles, where she expired in a few days,
dying a peaceful, edifying death as a good Catholic should.

What could be more touching? . . . But after all the incident was a
trifling thing compared with the notable Gauffridi affair, which
occurred at Marseilles while Lancre was still busy at Bayonne.

The Parlement of Provence had no occasion to envy the successes of their
confrères at Bordeaux. The lay jurisdiction once more seized the
opportunity of a trial for Sorcery to institute a systematic reform of
ecclesiastical morals, and undertook a searching scrutiny into the
cloistered life and mysterious secrets of the nunneries. The opportunity
was a rare and exceptional one, involving as it did, and was bound to
do, a remarkable concurrence of circumstances, a series of savage
jealousies and acts of reprisal between priest and priest. But for this
indiscreet and passionate violence, a passion and violence we shall see
breaking out again and again on subsequent occasions, we should possess
no information whatever as to the real destiny of the vast population
who live and die within these gloomy walls, and never hear one word of
what takes place behind

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

convent bars and within the portals the father confessor is alone
privileged to enter.

The Basque priest Lancre depicts, so volatile and worldly, tripping
sword on thigh to dance at the nocturnal "Sabbath," his sacristaness by
his side, was not an object of great concern or apprehension to the
authorities. He was not of the sort the Spanish Inquisitors took such
pains to screen, and for whose peccadilloes that stern conclave showed
itself so indulgent. It is clear enough from what Lancre hints, in spite
of all his reticence, there is *something else* behind. The States
General of 1614, too, when they lay it down that priests ought not to
try priests, are likewise thinking of *something else*. Here lies the
mystery, the veil of secrecy that is rudely torn asunder by the
Parlement of Provence. The father confessor of nuns, their tyrant and
the irresponsible disposer of soul and body alike, fascinating them by
all sorts of sinister acts—such is the figure revealed at the trial of
Gauffridi, and at a later date in the dreadful affairs of Loudun and
Louviers and others which Llorentz and Ricci and the rest have made us
acquainted with.

The tactics adopted were invariably the same—to extenuate the scandal
and mislead the public by concentrating its attention on the accidental
form and diverting it from the essential substance. When a priest was
tried for Sorcery, every pain was taken to lay stress on his doings as a
Wizard, and juggle into the background his priestly character, in such a
way as to put all the mischief down to the magic arts employed, and
ignore the natural fascination exercised by a man occupying a position
of absolute domination over a herd of women abandoned to his good
pleasure.

The first of these sad affairs, that of Gauffridi, it was impossible to
hush up. The thing had broken out in mid-Provence, in that land of light
where the sunshine penetrates every crevice. The principal scene of the
events that followed was not only Aix and Marseilles, but the well-known
locality of La Sainte-Baume

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (The Holy Balm), a
much-frequented place of pilgrimage, to which a crowd of curious
devotees now resorted from every part of France to look on at the duel
to the death to be fought out between two nuns afflicted with diabolical
possession and between their respective demons. The Dominicans, who
interfered in the matter as Inquisitors, deeply compromised themselves
on this occasion through the keen attention they drew to the event by
the marked partiality displayed by them in favour of one of the two
combatants. For all the pains the Parlement subsequently displayed in
order to arrive at an early settlement of the affair, the monks found
themselves bound in honour to explain and excuse the attitude they had
adopted. Hence the important book of the monk Michaëlis, a strange
medley of truth and myth, in which he exalts Gauffridi, the priest he
sent to the stake, as the *Prince of Magicians*, not only of all France,
but of Spain, Germany, England, Turkey, as well; in fact, of the whole
habitable world.

Gauffridi appears to have been a man of agreeable manners and many
accomplishments. A native of the mountains of Provence, he had travelled
widely in the Low Countries and in the East. He enjoyed the best of
reputations at Marseilles, where he served as priest at the Church Des
Acoules. His Bishop thought highly of him, and the most pious ladies
selected him as their Confessor. He possessed, we are told, a singular
aptitude for winning the love of all such.

Nevertheless, he would probably have preserved his good repute intact
had not a certain noble Provençal lady, a woman blinded by passion, and
whom he had already ruined, pushed her infatuation to such lengths as to
confide to his care (with a view, perhaps, to her religious education) a
charming child of twelve, named Madeleine de la Palud, a pretty blonde
of a gentle and affectionate disposition. Gauffridi lost his head, and
failed to respect either her tender age or the sweet innocence and utter
confidence of his pupil.

But presently she grew into a woman, and realised her calamity;

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

how, noble as she was, she was bound to an inferior by an unworthy tie
and could now never hope for marriage. In order to keep her, Gauffridi
said he could wed her before the Devil, if he could not before God. He
flattered her pride by telling her he was the *Prince of the Magicians*,
and that she should be the Queen. He placed on her finger a silver ring,
engraved with cabalistic signs. Did he take her with him to the Witches’
Sabbath, or did he merely make her think she had been there, clouding
her mind with magic potions and magnetic spells? This much at least is
certain, that the poor child, torn between credulity and doubt,
tormented by anxiety and terror, became from this time liable to fits of
insanity and subject on occasion to epileptic seizures. Her
overmastering dread was of being carried off alive by the Devil. She
dared not stay longer in her father's house, and took refuge at the
Convent of the Ursuline Sisters of Marseilles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[161:1](sor19.htm#fr_63.md) The instrument employed
is thus described by Boguet (p. 69): it is cold, hard, very slender, a
little longer than a finger,—evidently a *canula*. In Lancre (pp. 224,
225, 226) it is much improved, less liable to inflict injury; it is an
ell long and bent, part is of metal, the other part flexible, and so on.
Satan, on the Basque borders, midway between two great monarchies, is
well posted in the progress of this art, already very fashionable among
the fine ladies of the sixteenth century.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[164:2](sor19.htm#fr_64.md) Massée, *Chronique du
Monde* (1540), and the Chronicles of Hainault, Vinchant, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Gauffridi (1610)](sor20.md)
