[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor15)  [Next](sor17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### 14

### *PERSECUTIONS*

THE Sorceresses took small pains to hide their proceedings. They rather
boasted of their powers; and it is out of their own mouths Sprenger
gathered a large proportion of the strange stories which adorn his
Manual. The said Manual is a highly pedantic work, following with
grotesque servility the formal divisions and subdivisions in use among
the Thomist logicians,—yet at the same time the single-minded, earnest
and serious production of a man quite genuinely frightened, a man who in
the awful duel between God and the Devil, in which the former generally
*allows* the Evil One to get the best of it, sees no other possible
remedy but to pursue the latter firebrand in hand, burning with all
practicable speed those mortal frames wherein he chooses to take up his
abode.

Sprenger's sole merit is to have compiled a work more complete than any
of his predecessors, the compendium of a vast and elaborate system, the
crown of a whole literature. The old *Penitentiaries*, or manuals for
the use of confessors in their inquisition into various sins, were
succeeded by the Directories for the inquisition of heresy, the greatest
of all sins. But for the chiefest heresy of all, which is Witchcraft or
Sorcery, special *Directoria* or manuals were compiled, the so-called
*Hammers* (*Mallei*) for the detection and punishment of Witches and
Sorceresses. These manuals, continually enriched by the zeal of the
Dominicans, reached their highest perfection in the *Malleus* of
Sprenger, a work which governed the author himself in the conduct of his
great mission to Germany, and for a century remained the guide and
beacon-star of the tribunals of the Inquisition.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

What was it led Sprenger to study these questions? He relates how being
at Rome, in the refectory where the monks lodged pilgrims, he saw two
such from Bohemia,—a young priest namely and his father. The old man was
sighing and supplicating for a successful issue to his journey.
Sprenger, moved to pity, asks him the cause of his distress. The reason
he says is this: his son is possessed by the Devil, and at great trouble
and expense he has brought him to Rome, to the tombs of the saints and
martyrs. "And this son, where is he?" demands the monk. "There, beside
you." "I was startled at the answer, and shrank back. I examined the
young priest and was surprised to see him eating his dinner with a
quiet, unassuming air and answering very gently any remarks addressed to
him. He informed me that having spoken somewhat roughly to an old woman,
this latter had cast a spell upon him. The spell was under a tree; but
under what tree the Witch absolutely refused to say." Sprenger, still in
a spirit of pity and good will, proceeded to lead the patient from
church to church and from relic to relic. At each shrine visited,
exorcism, frenzy, loud cries and wild convulsions, gibberish in every
language under heaven and many uncouth gambols,—all this before the eyes
of the public, which followed the pair, wondering, admiring, and
shuddering. Devils, common enough in Germany, were less familiar in
Italy, and in a few days' time Rome was talking of nothing else. This
affair, which caused no small sensation, no doubt drew the general
attention upon the Dominican Father concerned in it. He studied the
subject, compiled all the various *Mallei* and other manuscript manuals,
and became the great authority on questions of Demonology. His great
work, the *Malleus Maleficarum*, would seem to have been composed during
the twenty years intervening between this adventure and the important
mission entrusted to Sprenger by Pope Innocent VIII. in 1484.

 

It was highly important to select an adroit personage for this mission
to Germany, a man of intelligence and tact, who should

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

prevail over the repugnance felt by Teutonic honesty towards the dark,
subterranean system he was endeavouring to introduce. Rome had met with
a rude check in the Low Countries, which put the Inquisition on its
mettle in those regions, and resulted in its being altogether excluded
from France. Toulouse, as a former stronghold of the Albigensians, was
the only exception, being subjected to all the rigours of the Holy
Office. About the year 1460 a Penitentiary of Rome, who had become Dean
of Arras, determined to strike terror among the *Chambres de Rhétorique*
(Chambers of Rhetoric), or Literary Unions, which were beginning to
discuss matters of religion. He burned one of these *Rhetoricians* as a
Sorcerer, and with him sundry rich citizens, and even knights. The
nobility was furious at this attack on its privileges, while the voice
of public opinion spoke out loudly and plainly. The Inquisition was
scouted, abominated, held accursed, particularly in France. The
*Parlement* of Paris shut the door rudely in its face; and Rome, by her
bad management, threw away this opportunity of introducing into the
north of Europe the reign of terror inseparable from the methods of the
Inquisition.

The moment seemed better chosen in 1484. The Holy Office, which in Spain
had assumed such terrible proportions, and overshadowed royalty itself,
seemed by this time to have become a conquering institution, well
capable of walking alone and bound to penetrate everywhere and subjugate
everything to itself. True, it encountered an obstacle in Germany in the
jealous opposition of the ecclesiastical princes, who, possessing
tribunals of their own, had never shown themselves very ready to revive
the Roman Inquisition. But the present situation of these princes, the
very grave anxiety which the popular movements of the time occasioned
them, made them less recalcitrant. All the Rhine country and Suabia,
even the eastern parts towards Salzburg, seemed undermined with
sedition. Every instant insurrections of the peasantry were breaking
out. Everywhere beneath the surface there seemed to lurk a vast
subterranean

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

volcano, an unseen lake of fire, which, now here, now there, betrayed
its existence by outbursts of fire and flame. The foreign Inquisition,
far more dreaded than the native variety, came very opportunely on the
spot to terrorise the country and break down rebellious spirits, burning
as Sorcerers to-day the very men who would likely enough to-morrow have
been insurgents. It formed an excellent popular weapon to overawe the
people, an admirable device for drawing off dangerous humours. This time
the storm was to be diverted upon the Sorcerers, just as in 1349 and on
so many other occasions its fury had been directed against the Jews.

Only a *man* was indispensable. The inquisitor who was to bell the cat,
who before the jealous courts of Mayence and Cologne, before the
scoffing populace of Frankfort or Strassburg, was to set up his
tribunal, was bound to be a person of intelligence and good sense. His
personal tact and dexterity had to counterbalance, to make men forget in
some measure, the odious nature of his office. Moreover, Rome has always
piqued herself in choosing her men well. Indifferent to abstract
questions, anything but indifferent to concrete individualities, she has
always believed, and she was justified in believing, that success in
practical affairs depended on the particular and special character of
the agents accredited to each country. Was Sprenger the right man in the
right place? To begin with, he was a German, and a Dominican, assured
beforehand, therefore, of the support of that formidable order and all
its monastic houses and schools. A worthy son of the schools was
indispensable, a good Schoolman, a master of the *Summa Theologiæ*,
soundly trained in his Aquinas, never at a loss for a text to clinch the
argument. Sprenger was all this,—and more than this, to wit a pedantic
fool.

 

"It is often stated, both in speech and writing, that *dia-bolus* is
derived from *dia*, two, and *bolus*, a bolus or pill, because
swallowing body and soul at one gulp, the Devil makes of the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

two only one pill, one single mouthful. But (he continues with all the
gravity of Sganarelle), according to the Greek etymology, *diabolus*
signifies *clausus ergastulo* (imprisoned in a dungeon), or else
*defluens* (whence Devil?), that is to say falling, because he fell from
heaven."

at is the derivation of *maléfce* (sorcery)? "It comes from
*maleficiendo* (ill-doing), which signifies *malè de fide sentiendo*
(ill-thinking on matters of faith)." A remarkable piece of etymology,
but one of far-reaching consequences. If sorcery is the same thing as
heresy, why! every sorcerer is a heretic, and every freethinker a
sorcerer; and the Church is justified in burning as sorcerers any and
every body who should dare to hold unorthodox opinions. This is
precisely what they had done at Arras, and they were for establishing
little by little the same good custom everywhere.

 

Here lies Sprenger's real merit, which is beyond dispute. He is a fool,
but an intrepid fool; boldly and unflinchingly he lays down the least
acceptable doctrines. Another man would have tried to elude, attenuate,
soften objections, but this is not his way. Beginning on the first page,
he sets down openly and displays one by one the natural, self-evident
reasons there are for disbelieving the satanic miracles. This done, he
adds coldly, "Merely so many heretic mistakes." And never pausing to
refute the reasons given, he copies out the texts on the other side, St.
Thomas Aquinas, the Bible, legends, canonists, and commentators. First
he shows you what common sense has to say, then pulverises it by weight
of authority.

His duty accomplished, he sits down calm, serene, triumphant, and seems
to say, "Well! what have you to say now? Would you be so daring now as
to use your reason? . . . Can you doubt, for instance, that the Devil
amuses himself by interfering between man and wife, when never a day
passes but the Church and the canonists allow this as a ground for
separation?"

There is no reply to this, and nobody will so much as whisper

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

an objection. Sprenger in the first line of this Manual for the use of
Judges, formally declaring the smallest doubt as an *act of heresy*, the
judge's hands are tied. He feels there must be no trifling; that
supposing he were so unfortunate as to experience some temptation in the
way of compunction or tenderheartedness, it would be his bounden duty to
begin by condemning himself to a death at the stake.

 

The method is everywhere identical. Good common sense first of all,
followed by a direct frontal attack, a downright, unhesitating negation
of common sense. It would seem natural enough, for instance, to say
that, love being in the soul already, it is hardly necessary to assume
the mysterious intervention of the Evil One to be required. Is not this
fairly self-evident? Not so, says Sprenger,—*distinguo*. "The man who
splits the wood is not the cause of its burning,—but only an indirect
cause. The wood-splitter is love (on this point see Dionysius the
Areopagite, Origen, John of Damascus, etc., etc.). Love therefore is
only the indirect cause of love."

This it is to be a scholar. It is no second-rate school that could
produce such a pupil. Cologne only, Louvain and Paris owned machinery
fully adapted to mould the human brain. The School of Paris was strong
indeed; for culinary Latin, what could rival Gargantua's *Janotus?* But
even mightier was Cologne, famed queen of darkness that supplied Ulrich
von Hütten with the type of the *Obscuri Viri* of his world-famous
satire, the reactionaries and ignoramuses that have always been so
fortunate and so fertile a tribe.

This solid, stolid Schoolman, so full of words and so void of sense,
sworn foe of Nature no less than of human reason, takes his seat with
superb confidence in his books and his learned gown, in the dust and
dirt and litter of his gloomy court. On the desk before him he has on
one side the *Summa Theologiæ*, on the other the *Directorium*. This is
his library, and he laughs at anything outside its limits. He is not the
sort of man to be imposed

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

upon, or to waste his time upon Astrology or Alchemy,—follies not so
foolish after all, destined in time to lead to genuine observation of
Nature's laws. Why, Sprenger is actually a sceptic, and has doubts about
the old recipes. Albertus Magnus declares positively that sage in a
fountain is sufficient to bring about a great storm; he shakes his head.
Sage? don't tell me; I beg you have me excused. It needs only a little
experience to see in this a trick of Him who would fain deceive and
cajole us all, the wily Lord of the Air; but he will get the worst of
it, he has to deal with a Doctor of the Church more cunning than the
Prince of Cunning himself.

 

Would I could have seen in the flesh this typical specimen of the judge
and the prisoners brought before his tribunal! Were God to take
creatures from two different planets and set them face to face, they
could not be more sharply contrasted, more unknown one to the other,
more completely lacking in a common language. The old Witch-wife, a
ragged skeleton of a woman, with haggard eyes alight with malice, a
creature thrice tempered in the fires of hell, the grim, lonely shepherd
of the Black Forest or the solitudes of the High Alps,—such are the wild
beings presented to the cold, dull eye of the pedant, to be judged by
the light of his school-bred intellect.

Nor will they, be it said, keep him long sweating in his bed of justice.
They will tell all they know without torture. The question will be
applied later on, never fear, but only as a complement and ornament, as
it were, to the depositions. They readily expound and relate in due
order whatever they have done. The Devil is the bosom friend of the
shepherd, and the Witch's bedfellow. She says as much, with a conscious
smile and a glance of triumph, evidently enjoying the horror of the
audience.

The old creature is a mad woman surely, and the shepherd as mad as she.
A couple of besotted fools, you say? Not so, neither; far from it. On
the contrary, they are keen and subtle-witted, both of them, beings who
can hear the grass grow and

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

see through stone walls. Another thing they can perceive plainer still
is the monumental pair of asses’ ears that nod over the learned Doctor's
cap. His dominant emotion towards them is fear; for, brave as he
pretends to be, he is trembling all the while. He himself allows that
the priest very often, unless he takes good heed, when he exorcises the
Demon, only determines the evil spirit to change its abode and pass into
the body of God's minister himself, finding it a more flattering morsel
to inhabit the person of one consecrated to Heaven. Who knows but these
simple-minded devils of shepherds and sorceresses might be taken with
the ambition to enter into an Inquisitor? He is far from feeling so bold
as his confident mien would indicate, when in his biggest voice he asks
the Witch-wife, "If your master is so all-powerful, why do *I* not feel
his assaults?" "As a fact," the poor man confesses in his book, "I felt
him only too plainly. When I was at Ratisbon, how often he would come
and rap at my window-panes! How often he would stick pins in my cap!
Then there were a hundred evil visions, dogs, apes, and so forth,
without end."

 

But the Devil's greatest delight, for he is nothing if not a logician,
is to pose the learned Doctor out of the mouth of the false-hearted hag
with embarrassing arguments and tricky questions, from which his only
escape is by imitating the cuttle-fish, that avoids his pursuers by
troubling the water and making all his neighbourhood as black as ink.
For instance, "The Devil is active only so far as God suffers him to be
so; then why punish his instruments?" Or else, "We are not free agents;
God allows the Devil, as with the Patriarch Job, to tempt and drive us
into sin, to force us by blows even. Is it just to punish one who is
thus constrained?" Sprenger gets out of the difficulty by saying, "You
are free beings,"—here follows a long array of texts. "You are
bond-servants only by reason of your pact with the Evil One." To which
the reply again would be only too easy, "If God

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

allows the Evil One to tempt us to make a pact, it is He makes the said
pact possible," and so on, and so on.

"I show over-much good nature," he declares, "in listening to these
gentry at all! ’Tis a fool's part to argue with the Devil." The populace
agrees with him to a man. All applaud the proceedings; all are eager,
excited, impatient for sentence and execution. Hangings are common
enough; but this Sorcerer and Sorceress, it will be a tasty treat to see
how the pair will sparkle and splutter like brands in the burning.

The judge has the people on his side. There is no sort of difficulty;
under the rules of the *Directorium*, three witnesses were sufficient.
How fail to get three witnesses, especially to bear false witness? In
every tattling town, in every ill-natured village, witnesses are as
common as blackberries. Besides, the *Directorium* is an old-fashioned
book, a century behind date. In this fifteenth century, an age of such
enlightenment, everything is improved. If no witnesses are forthcoming,
the *public voice* is enough, the general cry of popular
indignation! <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

 

This sincere cry of suffering and of fear, the lamentable plaint of the
unhappy victims of bewitchment, moves Sprenger strongly. Do not for a
moment suppose him a mere unfeeling pedant, a man of dry, unsympathetic
hardness. He has a heart, and that is the very reason why he is so ready
to kill. He is very pitiful and full of lovingkindness. He pities
intensely the weeping wife, a pregnant mother but now, whose babe the
Witch stifled in her womb with a look of her evil eye. He pities the
poor farmer on whose crops she has brought down the blighting

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

hail. He pities the husband who, no Sorcerer himself, is convinced his
wife is a Sorceress, and drags her, a rope round her neck, before
Sprenger, who promptly has her burned.

With a cruel man there might be means of escape; but this good,
charitable Sprenger leaves no room for hope. His humanity is so
overpowering, you must just be burned, there is no help for it,—or at
any rate an extraordinary degree of address, a presence of mind of the
readiest, is needed. One day a complaint is lodged with him by three
good ladies of Strassburg, who on the same day and at the same moment
felt themselves struck by an invisible assailant. How did it happen? The
only person they can accuse is an ill-looking fellow, who has cast a
spell over them, it would seem. Summoned before the inquisitor, the man
protests, swearing by all the saints he does not even know the ladies in
question, has never so much as set eyes on them before. The judge
refuses to believe him; neither tears nor oaths are of the slightest
avail. His great compassion for the ladies made him inexorable, and the
man's denial only roused his anger. He was already rising to order the
fellow to the torture-chamber, where he would have confessed no doubt,
as the most innocent constantly did, when he got leave to speak and
said, "I do indeed recollect how yesterday at the hour named, I struck .
. . who was it I struck? . . . no Christian women, but three cats that
ran at me savagely biting my legs." Then the judge, like a man of
sagacity as he was, saw it all. The poor man was innocent; without a
doubt the ladies on such and such days were changed into cats, while the
artful Fiend amused himself by setting them at good Christians’ legs to
work the ruin of these latter and get them taken for Sorcerers.

A less perspicacious judge would never have guessed that. But you could
not always count on having a man of such penetration on the bench. So it
was highly necessary there should lie always ready on the desk of the
tribunal a good guide-book or manual for fools, to make manifest to
simpler and less experienced inquisitors the wiles of the Enemy of
Mankind and the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

means of frustrating them, in fact the same system of deep and artful
strategy which the great Sprenger had employed to such good purpose in
his Rhenish campaigns. To this end, the *Malleus* was printed in a
pocket edition, generally of a size then uncommon, viz. small 18mo. It
would not have been seemly for the judge to have been seen fumbling over
the leaves of a great folio lying on his desk, while all the court gaped
at him; but he could quite well and without any fuss consult out of the
corner of his eye and thumb furtively under cover his pocket manual of
folly.

 

The *Malleus*, like all the books of this kind, contains a strange
admission, namely that the Devil is gaining ground, in other words that
God is losing it; that the human race, saved by Jesus Christ, is
becoming the conquest and prey of Satan. The latter, only too
manifestly, is making progress, as legend after legend proves. What an
advance he has made since the times of the Gospel, when he was too happy
to take up his abode in the swine, down to the period of Dante, when a
Theologian and a Lawyer, he argues with the saints, and pleads his case,
and as final conclusion of a victorious syllogism, says, as he carries
off the soul in dispute, with a triumphant laugh, "Ah! ha! you did not
know I was a Logician."

During the earlier years of the Middle Ages he still waits for the death
agony before taking the soul and carrying it off. St. Hildegard (circa
1100) believes "*that he cannot enter into the body of a living man*, if
he did, the members would fall to pieces; it is the shadow and vapour of
the Devil only that enter in." This last glimmer of common sense
disappears in the twelfth century. In the thirteenth we find a prior so
terribly afraid of being taken off alive that he has himself guarded day
and night by two hundred men-at-arms.

Then begins a period of ever-increasing terrors, when mankind relies
continually less and less on Divine protection. No longer is the Demon a
stealthy, furtive Spirit, a thief of the night gliding about in the
darkness, but an undaunted foe, the

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

bold ape of God, who under God's own sun, in the open light of day,
mimics the works of His hands. What authority is there for the
statement,—legends, tradition? Not these only, but the gravest Doctors
of the Church. The Devil transforms all creatures, Albertus Magnus
declares. St. Thomas Aquinas goes further still. "All the changes
capable of occurring naturally and by way of genus, these the Devil can
imitate." A startling admission truly, which in so grave a mouth amounts
to nothing less than the setting up of another Creator in face of the
accredited Artificer of the Universe! "But," he goes on, "whatever can
come to pass without germination, a changing of man to beast, the
raising to life of a dead man, acts like these the Devil cannot
perform." This is indeed to reduce God's domain to small proportions;
strictly speaking, He has nothing left Him but miracles, events of rare
and altogether special occurrence. But that daily miracle, life, is no
more his exclusively; the Devil, his imitator, shares the realm of
Nature along with Him.

So far as Man is concerned, whose weak vision draws no distinction
between Nature as created by God and Nature as created by the Devil,
this is a bi-partition of the Universe. Henceforth a dreadful
uncertainty must brood over everything. The innocency of Nature is lost.
The limpid spring, the white flower, the little bird, are they really of
God's making, or merely mocking imitations, so many snares to catch
mankind? . . . *Retro* Satanas! All nature comes under suspicion. Both
creations, the good no less than the doubtful, are darkened and
degraded. The shadow of the Evil One obscures the light of day, and
hangs looming over every department of human life. To judge by
appearances and men's apprehensions, he not merely shares the world with
God, but has usurped it in its entirety.

Such is the state of things in Sprenger's day. His book is full of the
most melancholy admissions with regard to the impotency of God. *He
allows it*, is his phrase, to be so. *To allow* so complete an illusion,
to let it be believed that the Devil is everything, God nothing, is
really more than merely to *allow;* it is to proclaim

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

the damnation of a world of unhappy souls utterly defenceless against so
grave an error. No prayers, no acts of penitence, no pilgrimages are of
any avail; no! not even (he admits the fact) the Sacrament of the Altar.
What an admission of weakness, what a loss of prestige! Nuns, after full
and free confession, *the host actually in their mouths*, are forced to
own that at that very moment they feel the fiendish lover, shameless and
unabashed, troubling their senses and refusing to quit his hold over
them. And, cross-questioned, they added with tears and sobs that the
Foul Fiend has their bodies, because he *possesses their souls already*.

 

The Manichæans of old, the Albigensian heretics of a later time, were
accused of believing in the power of Evil which contended against the
Good, making the Devil the equal of God. But now he is more than the
equal; if God, incarnate in the consecrated host, can avail nothing,
why! then the Devil must be the stronger and more effectual of the two.

I no longer wonder at the extraordinary aspect presented by the world at
that date. Spain with gloomy ferocity, Germany with the terrified and
pedantic rage the *Malleus* bears witness to, pursue the insolent and
victorious usurper in the persons of the wretched creatures whom he
chooses to take up his abode in; the stake and the rope are ruthlessly
employed against the fleshly tabernacles that have given him shelter.
Finding him over-strong for them in the soul, persecutors are fain to
drive him out of the bodies of men. But where is the use? Burn one
Sorceress, he makes good his hold on another; nay! sometimes (if we are
to believe Sprenger) he seizes the very priest who is exorcising him,
and wins a special triumph in the actual person of his judge.

The Dominicans, driven almost to despair, recommended intercessions to
the Virgin, unceasing repetitions of the *Ave Maria*. Still Sprenger
admits even this remedy to be ephemeral. A suppliant may be whipped off
between two *Aves*. Hence the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

invention of the Rosary, the chaplet of the *Aves*, by the help of which
the devotee can mumble on mechanically for an indefinite time, while the
mind is occupied elsewhere. Whole nations adopt this first attempt in
the art whereby Loyola will essay to lead the world, and of which his
*Exercitia* are the ingenious if rudimentary beginnings.

 

All this might seem to contradict what we said in the preceding chapter
as to the decay of Sorcery. The Devil is now popular, and active
everywhere; he appears to have won the day. But does he really profit by
his victory? Does he gain in actual, substantial influence? Yes! from
the new point of view of that scientific revolt that is to give us the
bright, light-bringing renaissance. No! from the point of view of the
old darksome spirit of Sorcery. The diabolic legends, in the sixteenth
century, both more numerous and more widely diffused than ever, show a
marked tendency towards the grotesque. Men tremble, but they laugh at
one and the same time. <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[137:1](sor16.htm#fr_60.md) Faustin Hélie, in his
learned and instructive *Traité de l’instruction criminelle* (vol. i.
398), has explained with perfect lucidity the way in which Innocent
III., about 1200, abolished the safeguards of accusation, till then held
indispensable,—in particular the liability to a charge of slander on the
part of the accuser. These safeguards were superseded by various
subterranean modes of procedure, *Denunciation*, *Inquisition*, etc. See
Soldan for instances of the appalling ease with which these latter
methods were applied. Verily blood was poured out like water.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[142:2](sor16.htm#fr_61.md) See my *Mémoires de
Luther*, for the Kilcrops and the like.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. A Hundred Years’ Toleration in France](sor17.md)
