[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor24)  [Next](sor26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

### 13

### *CHARLOTTE CADIÈRE at the CONVENT of OLLIOULES*

THE abbess of the convent of Ollioules was young for an abbess, being
only thirty-eight. She was a woman of wit, intelligence, and great
vivacity. Impetuous in her likes and dislikes, and easily carried away
by any impulse of heart or senses, she was conspicuously lacking,
however, in the tact and moderation required for the government of such
an establishment.

The religious house in question depended upon two sources of income. On
the one hand, it had from Toulon two or three nuns belonging to consular
families, who, bringing with them handsome dowries, did pretty much what
they pleased, living in communion with the Observantine monks, who were
confessors of the convent. On the other, these same monks, whose order
had extensive ramifications at Marseilles and throughout the country,
were able to get the nuns little girls as boarders and paying
novices,—an ill-omened connection, fraught with peril for the children,
as the Aubany affair showed clearly enough.

No serious confinement within bounds, and little discipline indoors. In
the burning nights of summer in this African climate (more oppressive
and exhausting than elsewhere in the stifling gorges of Ollioules) nuns
and novices came and went with little to control their freedom. What
occurred at Loudun in 1630 was repeated exactly at Ollioules in 1730.
The majority of the sisters (twelve, or thereabouts, out of the fifteen
the house numbered), a good deal neglected by the monks, who preferred
the well-born ladies of society, were poor, languid, disappointed
creatures, whose only consolations were gossip, childish games,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

and dubious familiarities amongst themselves, and between them and the
novices.

The abbess was afraid Charlotte Cadière would see too much of all this,
and raised difficulties about receiving her. Then suddenly changing her
mind, she took just the opposite side, and in a charming letter, far
more flattering than a little girl had any right to expect from such a
great lady, she expressed the hope that she would give up Girard as her
director. Not that she wished to transfer her allegiance to the
Observantine Fathers, who were quite unworthy of such a trust; the bold
and brilliant idea she had conceived was to make the girl her own, to be
Charlotte's confessor herself.

The lady abbess was vain and ambitious, and hoped to appropriate the
marvellous child for her own purposes. She thought she could easily gain
an ascendency over her mind, being convinced of possessing greater
powers to please than an old Jesuit Father, and would fain have
exploited the girl saint for the profit of her house.

She paid her the signal honour of receiving her at the threshold of the
outer door. She kissed her, and generally took possession of her;
presently leading her to the fine chamber she occupied as lady abbess,
she told her they would henceforth share it in common. She was enchanted
with her modest bearing and rather sickly elegance, as well as with a
certain mysterious, affecting touch of strangeness about her. Charlotte
had suffered extremely during the short journey, and the abbess was for
getting her to bed at once, in her own bed. She told her she was so fond
of her she wanted her to share it, that they should sleep together like
sisters.

In view of the object she had in view, this was perhaps an injudicious
step. It was going too far; to lodge the saint in her own apartments
would have been quite enough. By yielding to this curious caprice of
having the child sleep with her, she made her appear too much in the
light of a little favourite. Such intimacy, very much practised among
ladies of the world, was

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

a thing forbid in convents, a thing to be done surreptitiously, and a
bad example for a lady superior to set.

The abbess was astonished, however, to find her protégée hesitate.
Doubtless modesty and humility were not the only factors in this
reluctance. Still less would it have been due to any repugnance for the
lady's person; relatively speaking, she was a younger woman than poor
Charlotte Cadière, enjoying a vitality and health she would fain have
communicated to her little sick friend. She pressed her tenderly to
consent.

To make her forget Girard was her object, and she expected much from
this close intimacy at all hours of the day and night. It was the
especial foible of lady abbesses, their most cherished pretension, to
confess their nuns,—as is permitted by St. Theresa. This was bound to
come of itself, under the pleasant conditions arranged. The girl would
surely make her confessors only trifling confidences,
[keeping](errata.htm#9) the innermost privacy of her heart for the one
person of her predilection. Of evenings, at night, behind the
bed-curtains, under the caresses of a companion eager to penetrate her
soul, she would let slip many a secret,—both of her own and other
people's.

She was unable just at first to shake herself free from such pressing
importunities, and shared the lady abbess's bed. The latter deemed her
hold secure now,—doubly secure, and on two different grounds; she was
hers both as a saint and as a woman,—I should say as a girl, nervous,
sensitive, and from very weakness, perhaps sensual. She had her legend
composed, her words, every remark that escaped her, written down.
Moreover, she carefully collected the most homely details of her
physical existence, sending the report to Toulon. She would so gladly
have made her an idol, her little doll and darling. On such slippery
ground the downward road was no doubt easy and rapid, but the girl had
scruples, and was in a way afraid. She roused herself to a great effort
that might have been supposed beyond her exhausted strength. She asked
humbly to quit this dove's nest, this

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

downy bed, and pampered existence, to share the ordinary life of the
novices or of the boarders.

Great the surprise and mortification of the abbess, who deemed herself
insulted. She was deeply offended at what she called her ingratitude,
and never forgave her.

 

A warm welcome awaited her from the rest of the community. The mistress
of the novices, Mme. de Lescot, a nun from Paris, equally clever and
good-hearted, was a superior woman to the abbess. She seems to have
realised what Charlotte was really, the victim of an unfortunate
destiny, a young heart full of God's Holiness, but cruelly marred by
abnormal accidents of fate, bound to bring her headlong to shame and
some sinister end. Her only preoccupation was to watch over her, to
guard her against her own imprudent impulses, to explain and excuse
whatever seemed most inexcusable in her conduct.

Barring the two or three noble ladies who lived with the monks, and had
small liking for the high abstractions of mysticism, all loved the girl
and thought her a very angel from heaven. Their sensibility, which
wanted an object, was concentrated on her, and her alone. They found her
not only pious and supernaturally religious, but a good girl and a good
sort, a charming and diverting companion. Ennui was a thing of the past;
Charlotte both amused and edified them with her dreams,—truly, by this I
mean sincerely, recounted and always overflowing with the purest
tenderness. She would say, "I travel everywhere at night, even to
America. I leave letters everywhere, to tell the people to be converted.
To-night I shall come and find you, even though you were to lock
yourself in your room. We will go together into the Sacred Heart."

Miraculous! One and all, at midnight, received, so they declared, the
delicious visit. They firmly believed they felt Charlotte kiss their
cheeks, and lead them away into the Heart of Jesus (pp. 81, 89, 93).
They were very frightened and very

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

happy. The most soft-hearted and credulous of them all was a nun from
Marseilles, Sister Raimbaud by name, who enjoyed this felicity no less
than fifteen times in three months, or, in other words, every six days
pretty nearly.

All pure fancy—as is sufficiently proved by the fact that Cadière was
with each and all of them at identically the same moment. Still the
abbess was hurt, in the first instance because she was jealous at
feeling herself the only one left out in the cold, in the second place
being convinced that Charlotte, however buried she might be in her
dreams and visions, would be only too certain eventually to hear from so
many bosom friends about the scandals of the establishment. They were
not hard to see. But as nothing could penetrate Charlotte Cadière's mind
otherwise than by special illumination from on high, she believed
herself to have discovered them by revelation. Her gentle heart was
stirred to its depths, and she felt profound compassion for God, who was
so vilely outraged. Once more she imagined herself bound to pay for the
rest, to save the sinners from the chastisements they had deserved by
exhausting in her own person whatever fiercest cruelty the fury of the
devils might inflict.

This all burst upon her unexpectedly and overwhelmingly on June 25th,
St. John's Day. In the evening she was with the sisters in the novices’
room. Suddenly she fell back writhing and screaming, and presently
became unconscious. On her waking, the novices crowded round her,
waiting inquisitively to hear what she would say. But the mistress, Mme.
Lescot, guessed of what sort this would be, and felt sure she would ruin
herself. She carried her off straight to her own room, where she found
her body to be scarified all over and her linen stained with blood.

How came Girard to fail her in the midst of these struggles, internal
and external? This was a thing she could not understand. Surely did she
need support; yet he never came, or if he did, only to the public
parlour, at long intervals and for a hurried visit.

She writes to him on June 28th (by her brothers, for though

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

she could read, she scarcely knew how to write), summoning him in the
most ardent and pressing terms. He answers her appeal by pleading for
delay; he has to preach at Hyères, he has a sore throat, etc. Contrary
to all expectation, it was the abbess herself who eventually got him to
come. No doubt she was anxious about the discoveries Cadière had made as
to the internal economy of the convent. Convinced she would speak of
these to Girard, she wanted to anticipate her revelations. She wrote the
Jesuit a letter of the most flattering and tender character (July 3rd;
p. 327), begging him, when he came, to see her first, as she wished,
unknown to everyone, to be his pupil, his disciple, as the
humble-hearted Nicodemus was our Lord's. "I shall be able, quietly and
unobtrusively," she writes, "to make great strides in virtue, under your
guidance, by favour of *the blessed freedom my position gives me. Our
new novice affords a pretext* that will serve to conceal and at the same
time forward my purpose" (p. 327).

An extraordinary, a reckless step to take, that shows how ill-balanced
was the lady abbess's mind. Having failed to supplant Girard with
Charlotte, she was for trying to supplant Charlotte with Girard. Without
preface or preparation she went straight to the point, as great ladies
will, who are still well able to please, and whose overtures are certain
to be instantly accepted, even going so far as to refer to the *freedom*
she enjoyed!

This false step was determined by the belief that Girard had pretty well
ceased to care for Charlotte by this time, as indeed was the case. But
she might have guessed he had other difficulties on his hands at Toulon.
He was disturbed and anxious about another affair, no longer involving a
mere child, but a lady of ripe age, easy circumstances, and good
position, the best-conducted of all his penitents, Mlle. Gravier to wit.
Her forty years had been unavailing to protect her; Father Girard would
tolerate no independent lamb in the fold. One fine morning she was
astounded and deeply mortified to find herself pregnant, and gave vent
to bitter recriminations (July; p. 395).

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

Girard, preoccupied by this fresh misadventure, looked coldly upon the
very unexpected advances made by the abbess of Ollioules. He suspected
her of laying a trap for him in conjunction with the Observantine
Fathers, and resolved to be very cautious. He saw the abbess, already
half regretting her imprudent letter, and then Charlotte afterwards, but
only in the convent chapel, where he heard her confession.

The latter could not but be wounded by the slight, and no doubt his
behaviour was very strange and to the last degree inconsistent. He would
disturb her peace of mind with frivolous, flattering letters, and little
playful, almost loverlike, threats and teasings (*Dépos. Lescot.* and p.
335 ),—then scornfully refuse to see her except in public.

In a note written the same evening she pays him out cleverly, telling
him how at the moment he gave her absolution she had felt herself
marvellously detached both from her own personality *and from every
human creature*.

The very thing Girard most desired! The threads of his life were sorely
entangled, and Charlotte was only a further embarrassment. Far from
being annoyed at her letter, he was delighted at what she said, and made
*detachment* the text of an urgent sermon. At the same time he
insinuated how great was the need of prudence on his part. He had
received, he told her, a letter in which he was seriously warned of the
errors he had committed. However, as he was leaving on Thursday (the
6th) for Marseilles, he would pay her a flying visit (pp. 329, July 4th,
1730).

She waited for him, but no Girard appeared. Her agitation was intense;
the flood rose to its height and became a raging, tempestuous sea. She
confided in her bosom friend Raimbaud, who would not leave her, but
slept the night with her (p. 73), against the rules, saving appearances
by saying she had come to her room in the early morning. It was the
night of July 6th, a night of concentrated, overpowering heat, in the
narrow, shut-in furnace of Ollioules. At four or five, seeing her
struggling in sharp agony, she "thought she had the colic, and went to
the

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

kitchen in search of fire." During her absence Charlotte had recourse to
extreme measures, which could certainly not fail to bring Girard there
without a moment's delay. Whether by reopening the wounds on her head
with her nails, or in some way forcing the iron-pointed crown over her
brow, she continued to drench her face with blood, which ran down in
great gouts. The pain transfigured her whole appearance, and her eyes
glittered strangely.

The scene lasted a good two hours. The nuns crowded in to see her in
this extraordinary condition, and were lost in admiration. They were for
bringing the Observantine Fathers, but Charlotte would not allow them.

The abbess, for her part, would have taken good care not to let Girard
know, having no wish for him to see her in her present pathetic
condition, which was too touching by far. However, the kind-hearted Mme.
Lescot saw to this, and had the father duly informed. He came, but
instead of going up to her chamber at once, like a true charlatan, he
had an ecstasy of his own in the chapel, where he remained a whole hour
prostrate on his knees before the Blessed Sacrament (p. 95). Going
upstairs at last, he finds all the nuns assembled round Charlotte. He is
told how for a moment she had looked just as if she were at Mass, moving
her lips for all the world as if she were receiving the wafer. "Who
should know it better than I?" was the impostor's ready answer. "An
angel had given me notice. So I said Mass, and gave her communion from
Toulon." The sisters were overwhelmed by the miracle, one of them
actually being ill for two days afterwards. Then Girard, addressing
Cadière with unseemly levity, "Ah! ha! little sweet-tooth," he cried,
"so you are robbing me of half my share?"

The rest withdraw respectfully, and leave him face to face with his
pale-eyed, bleeding, enfeebled victim,—and for these very reasons the
more strongly moved. Any other man would have been touched; what more
naïve, more striking avowal could she give of her dependence than this
irresistible craving she

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

had to see him? This avowal, expressed in her bleeding face and wounded
brow, must surely stir his compassion. She was humiliating herself, but
who could fail to pity her under the circumstances? She was constrained
then for once to yield to Nature's impulses, this innocent being? In her
short and unhappy life, then, the poor girl saint, so much a stranger to
things of the senses, did know one hour of human weakness. What he had
had of her without her consciousness could count for little or nothing.
Now, with consent of soul and will, he was to have all.

Charlotte is very brief, as may be supposed, about all this. In her
deposition she says shamefacedly she lost consciousness, and scarcely
knew what happened. In a confession made to her friend, Madame Allemand
(p. 178), without formulating any complaint, she makes clear all that
occurred.

In return for this vivid outburst of devotion towards him, this charming
impatience to see him, what did Girard do? Scolded her! The flame that
would have caught another man and set him on fire, chilled Girard. His
tyrannous heart would tolerate only women whose will was dead within
them, unresisting playthings of his passions. And this girl, by the
vigorous initiative she had taken, had forced him to come to her!—the
scholar was leading the master. The irritable pedant treated the whole
situation as he would have done a barring-out at school. His libertine
severities, his selfish coldness, and the evident pleasure he felt in
inflicting pain horrified the unhappy girl, and left her with no other
feeling but remorse.

Another abomination! The very blood shed for him had no effect but to
suggest the idea he might utilise it to his own advantage. In this
interview, the last perhaps, he wished to bind over the poor creature at
any rate to discretion, to make her think herself, though deserted by
him, still under obligations towards him. He asked if he was to be less
favoured than the nuns who had witnessed the miracle. She made her
wounds bleed for him to see, and the water with which he washed off

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

this blood was then drunk between him and her, <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) by which odious communion he believed
himself to have bound her soul to his.

This took up two or three hours, and it was nearly midday. The abbess
was scandalised, and thought good to come herself with the dinner and
make them open the door. Girard drank tea; as it was a Friday, he
pretended he was fasting, having taken in good provision no doubt at
Toulon. Cadière asked for coffee. The lay Sister in charge of the
kitchen was surprised on such a day (p. 86). But without this stimulant
the girl would have fainted. It gave her a little strength, and she kept
Girard still by her side. He remained with her (it is true, the door was
not locked now) till four o'clock, wishing to efface the sinister
impression left by his behaviour of the forenoon. By dint of a string of
lies promising friendship and protection, he somewhat reassured the
excitable creature, and restored her to calmness. She conducted him to
the door on his leaving at last, and walking behind him, she took, like
the child she really was, two or three little jumps of joy. He said
drily, "Silly little madcap!" and that was all (p. 89).

 

She paid cruelly for her weakness. The same evening, at nine o'clock,
she had a fearful vision, and they heard her screaming, "Oh, my God,
begone! Leave me, leave me!" On the 8th, at the morning Mass, she did
not stay for the communion (no doubt deeming herself unfit), but took
refuge in her room. The scandal was great; but so great a favourite was
she, that a nun who had run after her invented a merciful lie and swore
she had seen Jesus communicating her with his own hand.

Mme. Lescot, with equal judgment and adroitness, wrote in the accredited
legendary form, as mystic ejaculations, pious sighs, holy tears, any
words they could drag from her torn and

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

bleeding heart. A very rare occurrence—there was a conspiracy of
kindness among women to shield a fellow-woman; and nothing could speak
more highly in the poor girl's favour or be a surer testimonial to her
powers of pleasing. In a month she was the spoiled child of all the
Sisters. Whatever she did, they defended her: innocent *in any case*,
they saw in her only a victim of the devil's wicked assaults. A worthy,
stout-hearted woman of the people, daughter of the locksmith of
Ollioules, and keeper of the turning-box at the convent, Matherone by
name, after surprising certain indecent liberties on Girard's part,
declared none the less, "It is nothing; she's a saint." Once when he was
speaking of withdrawing her from the convent, the woman cried out, "Take
away our Mademoiselle Cadière! . . . Why, I will have an iron door made,
to stop her going out of the house." Her brothers, who came to see her
every day, alarmed at the state of things they found and the advantage
the abbess and her monks might turn them to, plucked up courage, and in
an open letter, which they addressed to Girard in the name of Charlotte
Cadière, recalled the revelation she had had on June 25th as to the way
of life followed by the Observantine Fathers, telling him "it was high
time to carry out God's purposes in this matter,"—no doubt to demand an
inquiry being held, to accuse the accusers.

The challenge was over-bold and altogether injudicious. Almost dying as
she was, Charlotte Cadière was very far from any such ideas. Her friends
thought perhaps the man who had caused the mischief might possibly allay
it, and begged Girard to come and confess their protégée. The result was
a terrible scene. In the confessional she gave vent to screams and
lamentations, audible thirty yards away. The curious amongst the nuns
enjoyed a fine opportunity of eavesdropping, which they did not fail to
benefit by. Girard was in torment, and kept repeating, quite
unavailingly, "Calm yourself, calm yourself, mademoiselle!" (p. 95).—All
very well to give her absolution, but alas! she could not see her way to
absolve herself. On the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 12th she had so
sharp a pain below the heart she thought her ribs would burst. On the
14th she seemed at death's door, and her mother was summoned. She
received the Viaticum. The following day "she made a general apology,
the most touching and expressive ever heard," which "dissolved us in
tears" (pp. 330, 331). The 20th she fell into a sort of death agony that
was un-endurably pathetic. Then by a sudden and favourable change that
saved her life, she enjoyed a very soothing vision. She saw the penitent
Magdalene forgiven and transfigured in glory, holding the place in
heaven which Lucifer had lost (p. 332).

Still Girard could not make sure of her discretion except by corrupting
her yet further and stifling her remorse. Now and again he would come
(to the convent parlour) and kiss her, then regardless of appearances.
But more often still he would send his pious protégées to see her.
Madame Guiol and others visited her, overwhelming her with caresses and
embraces; when she confided her secret to them with tears of shame, they
only smiled, and told her all this was only part of the divine liberties
the elect enjoyed; that they had had their share too, and were in the
same case with her. Indeed, they openly boasted of the delights of such
an association amongst women. Nor did Father Girard disapprove of their
mutual confidences and their thus sharing the most disgraceful secrets.
So habituated was he to these abominations, and looked upon it all so
much as a matter of course, that he actually spoke to Charlotte about
Mlle. Gravier's pregnancy. He wanted her to have her invited to
Ollioules, calmed her irritation, and persuaded her her condition might
very well be an illusion of the Evil One that could be dissipated by
proper means (p. 395).

All this disgusting information made no impression on Charlotte Cadière,
though it could not but rouse her brothers' indignation, who knew how
true it all was. The letters written by them in her name are exceedingly
curious. Savage and furious in their inmost hearts, regarding Girard as
a consummate scoundrel, yet obliged to make their sister speak with
respect

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and tenderness, they yet write in such a way that here and there, to
anyone reading between the lines, their rage is evident.

As for Girard's letters, these are laboured productions, manifestly
composed in view of a possible trial to come. We will quote from the
only one he never had an opportunity of falsifying, one dated July 22.
It is bitter-sweet in tenor aid gallant in tone, the letter of a
reckless, hot-headed man. This is the gist of it:

"The Bishop arrived this morning at Toulon, and intends to visit
Cadière. . . . Arrangements will be made beforehand as to what can be
done and said. If the Vicar-in-Chief and *Father Sabatier* come to see
her and ask to see (her wounds), she will tell them she has been
forbidden to act or speak.

"I am hungry to see you again and to *see everything*. You know I only
ask *my rights*. It is long since I have *seen anything more than half*
(he means at the grating of the parlour). I shall tire you out? Well,
then! do not tire me out too"—and so on.

An extraordinary letter in every way. He is suspicious at one and the
same time both of the Bishop and even of the Jesuit, his own colleague,
old Father Sabatier. It is at bottom the letter of a guilty man in
terror of discovery. He knows perfectly well she has in her possession
his letter and papers, in a word stuff enough to ruin him outright.

The two young men answer in their sister's name by an animated letter,
the only one that rings true. They answer line by line, without
invective, but with a bitterness that is often ironic, and which
displays a concentrated fire of indignation. In it their sister promises
to obey her correspondent, *to say nothing either to the Bishop or the
Jesuit*. She congratulates him on having "so much courage to exhort
others to suffer." She throws his odious gallantry back in his face, but
in equally odious words,—in this part a man's hand is manifest, it is
the work of a couple of clumsy schoolboys.

The next day but one they went to tell him she wished to quit the
convent instantly. He was terribly startled, thinking

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

the papers were going to escape along with her. So profound was his
terror it robbed him of his presence of mind, and he was weak enough to
go weeping to the parlour at Ollioules, where he threw himself on his
knees before her, and asked her if she would have the courage to leave
him (p. 7). This touched the poor girl, who told him *no*, came forward
and allowed him to embrace her. And all the time the Judas only wanted
to deceive her and gain a few days' breathing space, time to get support
from high quarters.

By the 29th all is changed. Charlotte is still at Ollioules, asking his
pardon and promising submission (p. 339). It is very evident he has
brought powerful influence to work, that by this date they have received
threats,—perhaps from Aix, or later on from Paris. The bigwigs of the
Jesuit Order have written, and Court protectors from Versailles.

What were the two brothers to do in this dilemma? Doubtless they
consulted their chiefs, who probably warned them not to press Girard too
hard on the ground of immorality as a *confessor;* this would have been
to offend the whole of the clergy, whose dearest prerogative confession
is. On the other hand, they were to isolate him from the clerical body,
by insisting on the singularity of his tenets, and bring the *Quietist*
in him into prominence. With this weapon alone they could do great
execution. In 1698 a curé of a village near Dijon had been burned for
*Quietism*. They conceived the idea of composing (apparently from their
sister's dictation, who was really an entire stranger to the plan) a
memoir, in which Girard's *Quietism*, exaggerated and sublimated, should
be established, or as a matter of fact denounced. This consists in an
account of the series of visions she had had during Lent. In these the
name of Girard is already in the heavens; she sees it, united with her
own name, in the Book of Life.

They dared not carry the memoir in question directly to the Bishop; but
they got it stolen by their friend, his almoner, young Father Camerle.
The Bishop read it, and other copies

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

circulated in the town. On August 21st, Girard being at the palace, the
prelate said to him, laughing, "Well! well! Father, so your name's in
the Book of Life, is it?"

He was panic-stricken, and believed himself undone. He wrote to
Charlotte in terms of bitter reproach, once more tearfully demanding his
papers. Charlotte was greatly surprised, and swore the memoir had never
been out of her brothers’ hands. When she discovered this was untrue,
her despair knew no bounds (p. 363). The most cruel pains of mind and
body assailed her, and a moment came when she verily thought her flesh
was melting. "I became more than half mad. I felt such a craving for
pain! Twice I grasped the scourge, and so fiercely, I drew blood
abundantly" (p. 362). In the midst of this wild frenzy, which shows
equally the ill-balance of her brain and the infinite sensitiveness of
her conscience, Guiol put the finishing touch to her agony by describing
Girard to her as a man almost at death's door. Her pity rose to the
highest pitch (p. 361).

She was sure now to let the papers go; though it was only too plain they
were her only protection and defence, alone capable of proving her
innocence and the nature of the wiles to which she had fallen a victim.
To give them back was to run a serious risk of herself and her seducer
changing places. It might be said, and there would then be nothing to
disprove the lie, that it was she had led a holy man astray, and all the
odium would be concentrated on her unhappy head.

But, if the only alternative lay between perishing herself or ruining
Girard, she very much preferred the first. A demon (Guiol, no doubt)
tempted her with this very bait, the extraordinary sublimity of such a
sacrifice. She wrote to her saying God claimed of her a bloody sacrifice
(p. 28). She was able to quote saints for her example, who, when
accused, made no attempt at justification, but rather accused themselves
and died as meek as lambs. This was the course Charlotte Cadière
deliberately adopted. When charges were alleged against Girard

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

in her presence, she invariably justified him, saying, "He speaks the
truth; I told lies" (p. 32).

She might very well have returned merely Girard's own letters, but in
the generosity of her heart she was ready to do whatever she was asked;
so she gave him the drafts of her own into the bargain. He secured at
the same time both these drafts in the handwriting of the Jacobin and
the copies which the other brother made to send to him. After this he
had nothing to fear. No sort of control was possible; he could excise,
add, destroy, erase, falsify at his good pleasure. His task as a forger
was perfectly easy, and he worked with a will. Out of eighty letters
there remain sixteen, and even these appear to be elaborate
compositions, manufactured after the event.

Girard held all the cards, and could laugh at his enemies, whose turn it
now was to tremble. The Bishop, a man of the great world, knew his
Versailles far too well, and what influence the Jesuits wielded there,
not to treat them with consideration. He even thought it politic to say
a gracious word to Father Girard to make up for his malicious remark
about the Book of Life, and told him with an amiable smile he would like
to act as sponsor to a child of any of his relatives at the font.

The bishops of Toulon had always been great lords. The episcopal
register contains all the chief names of Provence, Baux, Glandèves,
Nicolai, Forbin, Forbin d’Oppède, as well as famous Italian names like
Fiesci, Trivuleio, La Rovere. From 1712 to 1737, under the Regency and
Fleury, the Bishop of Toulon was a La Tour du Pin. He was a very rich
man, holding *in commendam* the abbeys of Aniane and Saint Guilhem of
the Desert in Languedoc. He was said to have behaved well during the
Plague in 1721. Otherwise, he was an almost constant absentee, lived a
purely worldly life, never saying Mass, and having the reputation of
something more than gallantry.

He arrived at Toulon in July, and though Girard would gladly have
dissuaded him from going to Ollioules and visiting

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Charlotte Cadière,
his curiosity was too strong to resist the temptation. He saw her at one
of her good times, and was taken by her looks. He thought her a good,
saintly little personage, and was so far convinced of the reality of her
revelations from on high as, rather inconsiderately, to speak to her of
his affairs, and interests, and future, consulting her much as he might
have done a common fortune-teller.

Still he hesitated, in spite of her brothers’ prayers, to remove her
from Ollioules, and out of Girard's reach. Means, however, were found to
fix his resolution. The report was spread at Toulon that Charlotte had
shown a wish to fly to the desert, as her model St. Theresa had tried to
do as a child of twelve. This notion, so it was said, was put in her
head by Girard, in order to carry her off some fine morning, get her
beyond the bounds of the diocese, whose chief glory she was,—in a word,
to make a present of this treasure to some far-away religious house,
where the Jesuits, having an exclusive monopoly, would exploit for their
own benefit her miracles and her visions, and all the attractions she
exercised as a young and popular saint. The Bishop was much aggrieved,
and sent word to the abbess to deliver Mlle. Cadière to no one but her
mother, who was shortly to remove her from the convent and take her to a
*bastide* belonging to the family.

Not to offend Girard, they got Charlotte to write to him to the effect
that, if the change of residence was inconvenient to him, he could
procure a coadjutor, and so give her a second confessor. He understood
the hint, and preferred to disarm jealousy by giving up Cadière
altogether. He broke off relations (September 15th) by a very
judiciously worded, humble, and piteous epistle, in which he endeavoured
to leave her still his friend and well-wisher. "If I have committed
faults against you," he writes, "still you must always remember I had
every wish to help you. . . . I am and shall always be your devoted
friend in the Sacred Heart of Jesus."

Nevertheless the Bishop was far from being reassured. He

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

thought the three Jesuits—Girard, Sabatier, and Grignet—were for putting
his suspicions to sleep, and then one fine day, with an order from
Paris, carrying off the girl with them. He took the decisive step,
September 17th, of sending his carriage (a light, fashionable,
unclerical conveyance called a *phaeton*), and having her driven to her
mother's *bastide* in the near neighbourhood.

To calm her feelings and protect her person, and set her generally in
the right way, he sought a confessor for her, addressing himself in the
first instance to a Carmelite who had been her director before Girard.
But the monk, who was an old man, refused, and others in all probability
followed his example. The Bishop was obliged to take a stranger, a new
arrival three months before from Franche-Comté, one Father Nicholas,
Prior of the Barefooted Carmelites. He was a man of forty, at once able
and courageous, of a very determined, not to say obstinate character. He
showed himself well worthy of the confidence reposed in him by declining
the duty at first. It was not so much the Jesuits he was afraid of as
Charlotte Cadière herself. He expected little good of her, considering
the angel was likely enough to be an angel of darkness, and fearing the
foul fiend, under the gentle guise of a young girl, would only strike
the fouler blows.

But the mere sight of her reassured him not a little; she seemed
innocent enough, and only too glad to have found a man at last who was
sure and trustworthy, and able to give her firm support. She had
suffered sorely from the continual state of uncertainty Girard had
always kept her in. From the first day she talked more freely than she
had done for a month past, telling him about her life and sufferings,
her pieties and visions. Even the coming of night did not stop her—a hot
night of mid-September. All stood open in the chamber, the three doors
as well as the windows. She went on almost till dawn, by the side of her
sleeping brothers. Next day she began again, sitting in the
vine-trellised summer-house, speaking in the most edifying fashion of
God and the sublimest mysteries of religion.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Carmelite was
astounded, asking himself if the devil could possibly praise God so
eloquently.

Her innocence was self-evident. She seemed a good-hearted, docile girl,
meek as a lamb and frolicsome as a puppy. She was eager to play bowls (a
common amusement at the *bastides*), and he did not refuse to play too.

If a spirit dwelt in her, at any rate no one could say it was a "lying
spirit." Watching her long and closely, none could doubt that her wounds
really bled at times. Her new confessor, unlike Girard, carefully
avoided any indecent investigations to verify the fact, contenting
himself with what he saw of the stigmata on her feet. He was only too
frequently witness of her ecstasies. A violent heat would suddenly take
her at the heart and circulate all through her frame; then she would
lose consciousness, fall into convulsions, and begin talking wildly.

The Carmelite understood perfectly that in Charlotte Cadière there were
two distinct persons, the girl herself and the demon that possessed her.
The first was right-thinking, and even exceptionally innocent of heart,
ignorant of wrong, for all the wrong she had suffered, comprehending
little of the very things that had troubled her so sorely. Previous to
her confession, when she spoke of Girard's kisses, the Carmelite told
her roughly, "Why, they are very deadly sins." "Oh, God!" she replied,
weeping, "then I am undone, for he did many other worse things to me."

The Bishop often came to see her, the *bastide* making a convenient
object for his walks. When he questioned her, she answered simply and
unsuspiciously, and told him at any rate the beginning of what had
occurred. The Bishop was very angry, deeply mortified and indignant,
doubtless guessing what was left unsaid. He came within an ace of
raising a terrible hue-and-cry against Girard. Without a thought of the
dangers of provoking a struggle with the Jesuits, he entered completely
into the Carmelite's ideas, admitting she was bewitched,—*ergo* that
*Girard was a wizard*. He was for instantly inhibiting him formally,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

ruining and disgracing him. But Charlotte pleaded for the man who had so
deeply wronged her, and refused to be avenged. Throwing herself on her
knees before the Bishop, she conjured him to spare Girard, not to speak
of such severe measures. With touching humility, she declared, "Enough
that I am enlightened now, that I know how sinful I was" (p. 127). Her
brother, the Jacobin, seconded her prayers, foreseeing all the perils
involved in such a contest, and doubting if the Bishop had firmness
enough to carry it through.

She was now much calmer. The burning heats of summer were over, and the
gracious month of October come, when Nature at last showed a more kindly
face. The Bishop reaped a lively gratification from the fact of her
having been saved by his instrumentality. The poor girl, removed from
the stifling conditions of Ollioules, freed from all contact with
Girard, well guarded by her relatives and the good, brave-hearted monk,
last but not least protected by the Bishop, who grudged no trouble and
consistently gave her his countenance, she entirely recovered her
serenity. Like the parched grass that revives under the October showers,
she lifted up her drooping head and bloomed afresh.

For some seven weeks she appeared perfectly sensible and well behaved.
So delighted was the Bishop, he would fain have had the Carmelite, with
Cadière to second him, deal with the rest of Girard's penitents and
bring them to a similar condition of sweet reasonableness. They were to
come to the *bastide*,—one may guess how much against the grain and with
how ill a grace. Nothing, in fact, could well be more unseemly than thus
to confront women of the sort with the Bishop's protégée, a young girl
barely recovered from a state of ecstatic deliriousness.

The situation was critical, verging indeed on the ludicrous. Two
factions were brought face to face,—Girard's women on the one side, the
Bishop's on the other. On the Bishop's part Madame Allemand and her
daughter, partisans of Charlotte

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cadière's; on the
opposite the rebels, the Guiol woman at their head. The Bishop opened
negotiations with the latter to induce her to enter into relations with
the Carmelite and bring her friends to confess to him. He sent his
registrar to her, and later on a procurator, a former lover of Madame
Guiol's. Meeting with no success, the Bishop played his last card, and
summoned them all to the Palace. There they denied one and all the
reality both of ecstasies and stigmata, of which they had previously
boasted. One of the party, no doubt Guiol, with equal effrontery and
malicious artfulness, astounded his lordship yet more by offering to
show him there and then they had no mark whatever on any part of their
bodies. They had supposed him giddy-headed enough to fall into the
snare. He scored cleverly, however; he refused flatly, but expressed his
thanks to the ladies who, at the expense of their modesty, would have
made him Father Girard's imitator, setting all the town grinning at his
adroitness.

The Bishop's proceedings turned out a dead failure. On the one hand,
these insolent women merely laughed at him, while on the other, his
supposed success with Mlle. Cadière ended in disappointment. No sooner
back in gloomy Toulon and installed in the confined Ruelle de l’Hôpital,
than she suffered a relapse. She was again on the very scene, with all
its dangerous and sinister associations, that had witnessed the first
commencement of her malady, in the actual battlefield where the two
opposing factions were engaged. The Jesuits, with the Court of France,
as all could see, at their back, had on their side the politicians, the
diplomats, the *moderate men*. The Carmelite had only the Bishop, not
supported even by his own colleagues, or by the curés. However, he had a
weapon in reserve. On November 8th he extracted from Cadière a written
authorisation to make public her confession, if circumstances required
it.

This was a bold step that set Girard trembling by its very audacity. He
was not a brave man, and he would have been

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

undone if his cause had not been the Jesuits’ too. He lay *perdu* in the
recesses of their house. On the other hand, his colleague Sabatier, an
old man of a sanguine, choleric temperament, went straight to the Palace
and forced himself into the Bishop's presence, bearing in his gown, like
Popilius, peace or war. He put his back, so to speak, to the wall, and
gave the prelate to understand that an action at law with the Jesuits
meant his professional ruin, that he would remain Bishop of Toulon to
the end of his days, and never be Archbishop. More than that, with the
freedom of speech allowable to an apostle so influential at Versailles,
he told him plainly that if the business should prove a revelation of a
Jesuit Father's morals, it would throw no less searching a light on
those of a certain Bishop. A letter, obviously put together by Girard
(p. 334), would seem to show that the Jesuits lay all ready in ambush to
launch formidable countercharges against the prelate, declaring his life
"not merely unworthy of the episcopal dignity, but *abominable*."

The wily and perfidious Girard, the apoplectic Sabatier, bursting with
rage and spite, would have seconded the calumny with might and main.
Such men would not have failed to say all this ado was for a girl's
sake, that if Girard had tended her when sick, the Bishop had enjoyed
her favours when restored to health. What annoyance such a scandal must
occasion in the well-ordered life of a great nobleman and gentleman of
society! It would have been too ridiculous a piece of Quixotism to take
up arms to avenge the virtue of a little crack-brained invalid girl, and
for her sake to come to blows with all respectable men! Cardinal de
Bonzi died of disappointed love at Toulouse, but, at any rate, it was
for a fair and high-born lady, the Marquise de Ganges. Here his lordship
ran the risk of ruining himself, of being overwhelmed by shame and
ridicule for the daughter of an old-clothes-man in the Rue de l’Hôpital!

These menaces of Sabatier's produced the more effect, inasmuch as the
Bishop was already, for other reasons, less eager in Charlotte's behalf.
He was annoyed with her for falling ill

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

again, and thus spoiling his success. She was putting him in the wrong
by her inconsiderate relapse, and he could not help bearing her a grudge
for not getting well.

He told himself Sabatier was quite right; it would be a piece of silly
good-nature to compromise himself. The change was sudden and
instantaneous, like conversion by the grace of heaven. He saw the light
in a moment of time, like St. Paul on the road to Damascus, and
straightway went over to the Jesuits.

Sabatier stuck to his guns. He put pens and paper before him, and made
him write out and sign on the spot an interdiction directed against the
Carmelite, his agent with Charlotte Cadière, and another for her
brother, the Jacobin (Nov. 10, 1730).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[269:1](sor25.htm#fr_92) This was a custom of
the *Reiters*, the northern soldiery, to make themselves blood-brothers
by this sort of communion (see Michelet, *Origines du Droit*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. Trial of Charlotte Cadière (1730, 1731)](sor26)
