[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor22)  [Next](sor24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

### 21

### *SATAN TRIUMPHANT in the SEVENTEENTH CENTURY*

THE *Fronde* was essentially Voltairean. The Voltairean spirit, as old
as France really, though long kept in abeyance, breaks out in Politics,
and very soon afterwards in Religion. The King, with all his greatness,
tries in vain to impose a solemn and serious attitude on his subjects.
The undercurrent of mocking laughter is always audible.

Does it all mean nothing more then but laughter and derision? Far from
that; it is the beginning of the reign of Reason. Kepler, Galileo,
Descartes, and Newton triumphantly established the dogma of reason, of
faith in the *unchangeableness of the Laws of Nature*. The Miraculous
dares no more show its face on the stage, or if it does, it is promptly
hissed off.

To put it better still, the fantastic miracles of casual caprice have
had their day, and the great, universal, the standing Miracle of Nature
appears instead, the more divine from the very fact of its definite
subjection to law and order.

It marks the final victory of a general Revolt. So much may be seen in
the bold forms assumed by these earliest protests, in the irony of
Galileo, in the absolute scepticism from which Descartes starts to build
up his system. The Middle Ages would have said, "It is the Spirit of the
Wily One, the Foul Fiend."

No mere negative victory, however, but positive and firmly based.

*The Spirit of Nature and the Sciences of Nature*, those proscribed
outlaws of an earlier day,—there is no resisting their

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

restoration to power. It is Reality and hard fact chasing away the empty
shadows of mediæval darkness.

Foolishly men had said, "Great Pan is dead." Then presently, seeing he
was alive still, they had made him into a god of evil; and in the gloom
and chaos of those days the mistake was possible enough. But lo! he is
alive now, and with a life in harmony and sweet accord with the sublime
and immutable laws that guide the stars of heaven, and no less surely
govern the deep mystery of human life.

 

Two things may be predicated of this epoch, apparently, yet not really,
contradictory: the spirit of Satan has prevailed, but Witchcraft is
doomed.

Magic of every kind, whether diabolic or divine, is sick unto death.
Sorcerers and Theologians, both are equally impotent. They are reduced
to the condition of empirics, vainly imploring of some supernatural
accident or the caprice of a Gracious Providence, those marvels that
Science asks only from Nature, from Reason.

The Jansenists, with all their ardent zeal, obtain in a whole century
but one insignificant, rather ludicrous, miracle. More unfortunate
still, the Jesuits, rich and powerful as they are, cannot, at any price,
get even one, but must rest content with the visions of a hysterical
girl, Sister Marie Alacoque, a being of a quite abnormally sanguine
idiosyncrasy. In face of such a show of impotence, Magic and Sorcery may
well take heart of grace for their own failures.

Observe how in this decay of faith in the Supernatural, infidelity of
one kind ensues upon infidelity of the other. The two were bound
together in the thoughts and fears of the Middle Ages. They continued
closely bound together in ridicule and contempt. When Molière made fun
of the Devil and his "boiling cauldrons," the Clergy were sorely
disturbed: they felt instinctively that faith in Paradise was being
depreciated to a corresponding degree.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

A purely lay Government, that of the great Colbert (who for a long
period was king in all but name) takes no pains to conceal its contempt
for these outworn questions. It purges the gaols of the Sorcerers the
Parlement of Rouen still went on accumulating within their walls;
eventually *forbids the Courts to take cognisance of charges of
Witchcraft at all* (1672) . The said Parlement protests, and protests
with great plainness of speaking, that a repudiation of Sorcery implies
risk to a great many other things as well. Who throws doubt on the
nether mysteries, shakes belief in many a soul in the mysteries of
heaven.

 

The Witches’ Sabbath disappears; and why? The reason is, it is
*everywhere* henceforth; it is a part of men's ordinary habits; its
practices are those of everyday life.

It was said of the "Sabbath," "No woman ever returned from it in child."
The Devil and the Witch-wife were reproached with being sworn foes of
generation, of hating life and loving death and annihilation. And lo! it
is precisely in the sanctimonious seventeenth century, when Witchcraft
is a-dying, <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) that love of barrenness
and fear of giving birth form the most general of diseases.

If Satan is a reading man, he has good cause to laugh when he peruses
the Casuists, his successors and continuators. Yet a difference there is
between them. Satan in dread days of old was careful for the hungry, and
pitiful for the poor. But these others have pity only for the rich man.
Croesus with his vices and luxury and life at Kings’ Courts, is needy,
grievously poor, a beggar. He comes in Confession, humble, yet menacing,
to

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

extract from the learned Father a licence to sin, within the bounds of
conscience. Some day will be written (if anyone has the courage to write
it) the surprising history of the cowardly expedients of the Casuist
eager not to lose his penitent and the disgraceful subterfuges he is
ready to resort to. From Navarro to Eseobar, a strange bargaining goes
on at the expense of the wife, and some points are still left open to
dispute. But this is not enough; the Casuist is fairly beaten, and gives
up everything. From Zoccoli to Liguori (1670-1770), the defence of
Nature is abandoned altogether.

The Devil had, as everyone knows, when attending the Witches’ Sabbath,
two faces, one above, gloomy and terrible, the other behind, ludicrous
and grotesque. Nowadays, having no more use for it, he will of his
generosity give the latter to the Casuist.

What must vastly divert Satan is the fact that his most faithful
followers are to be found in those days among respectable folks, in
serious households, ruled and governed by the Church. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) The woman of the world, who raises the
fortunes of her house by means of the great resource of the period,
profitable adultery, laughs at prudence and boldly follows the
promptings of nature. The pious family follows merely its Jesuit
Confessor. To preserve and concentrate the family fortune, to leave a
rich heir, the crooked ways of the new spirituality are entered upon. In
shadow and secret, the proudest wife, at her *prie-Dieu*, ignores her
self-respect, forgets her true nature, and

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

follows the precept of Molinos: "We are set here below to suffer! One
thing only, a pious indifference, at long last, softens and lulls our
pain,—and wins us respite. What is this respite? It is not Death. We
feel to some extent what goes on beside us; without joining in it, or
responding to its stimulus, we yet hear an echo of its movement, vague
and gentle. ’Tis a sort of happy accident of Grace, which soothes and
thrills us, never more so than in those abasements where free will is
all eclipsed."

What refinement, what depth is here. . . . Poor Satan! how are you
outdone! Bow down, and admire, and own the sons of your own engendering.

 

The doctors, who are in an even more true sense his lawful sons, who
sprung from the popular empiricism known as Witchcraft, these his chosen
heirs, to whom he left his noblest patrimony, are far too ready to
forget the fact. They are basely ungrateful to the Witches who paved
their way for them.

They do more. On this fallen monarch, their father and the author of
their being, they inflict some sore lashes. . . . *Tu quoque, file mi!*
(You too, my son!) . . . They supply the mockers with some cruel weapons
to use against him.

Already the physicians of the sixteenth century derided the Spirit,
which in all ages, from Sibyls to Witches, tormented women and harassed
them with windy troubles. They maintained this is neither Devil nor God,
but even as the Middle Ages said, "the Prince of the Air." Satan, it
would seem from them, is simply a form of disease!

Satanic *possession*, they declared, was simply a result of the close,
sedentary life, dull and yet harassing and exasperating, of the
cloister. The 6,500 devils that dwelt in Gauffridi's Madeleine, the
legions of demons that fought and struggled in the bodies of the
tormented nuns of Loudun and of Louviers,—these doctors call them
physical disturbances and nothing more. "If Æolus makes the earth
shake," Yvelin asks, "why not a

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

girl's body?" The surgeon who attended La Cadière (the subject of our
next chapter) says drily, "Nothing else in the world but a choking of
the womb."

What a strange come-down! The terror of the Middle Ages put to rout by
the simplest of remedies, exorcisms *à la Molière*, in fact, flying
helter-skelter, to be seen no more!

Nay! this is assuming too much. The question is not so simple as all
that. Satan has other aspects besides, of which the doctors see neither
the highest nor the lowest,—neither his grand revolt in Science, or
those extraordinary combinations of pious intrigue and stark impurity he
contrives towards 1700, uniting in one conglomerate Priapus and
Tartuffe.

 

Historians suppose themselves to know the eighteenth century, and yet
they have never observed one of its most essential characteristics.

The more its surface, its higher levels, were civilised, illuminated,
saturated with light, the more hermetically sealed and closed was the
vast underlying region of the ecclesiastical world, of the convent, of
credulous womanfolk, morbidly ready to believe anything and everything.
In anticipation of Cagliostro, Mesmer and the magnetisers who will come
with the later years of the century, not a few priests make a profit out
of the Sorcery of a departed age. All their talk is of bewitchments, the
dread of which they spread broadcast, and undertake to drive out devils
by means of various indecent exorcisms. Many play the wizard, well
assured the risk is small and burnings henceforth an impossibility. They
know themselves sufficiently safeguarded by the civilisation of the
times, the toleration preached by their enemies the Philosophers, and
the light indifferentism of the scoffers, who think the last word has
been said, when they have raised a laugh. But it is just this laughing
attitude which enables such-like dark schemers to go on their way
unafraid. The new spirit is that of the Regent, sceptical and
good-naturedly tolerant. It is conspicuous in the *Lettres Persanes*,

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

and saturates through and through that all-powerful journalist who fills
the century, Voltaire. Once let human blood flow, and his whole heart
revolts; at all else he laughs. Little by little the guiding principle
of the world at large apparently comes to be, "Punish nothing, and make
fun of everything."

The spirit of toleration is such as to suffer Cardinal Tencin to live
openly as his own sister's husband; such as to ensure the ruling spirits
of the convents in peaceful, undisturbed possession of the nuns in their
charge, so completely so indeed that cases of pregnancy amongst the
latter were regularly announced, and births formally and legally
declared. <span id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79) The same spirit of
tolerance excuses Father Apollinaire, caught in a vile and shameful act
of exorcism, <span id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80) while Cauvrigny, the
*gallant* Jesuit, idol of the provincial nunneries, expiates his
intrigues merely by a recall to Paris, in other words by a summons to
higher preferment.

Similar was the punishment accorded the notorious Jesuit, Father Girard;
he deserved hanging, but was loaded with honours instead, and died in
the odour of sanctity. Indeed this is one of the most curious
occurrences of the century, marking exactly the characteristic methods
of the period, the rough-and-ready combination of the most contradictory
modes of procedure. The perilous suavities of the *Song of Songs*
formed, as usual, the preface, followed up by Marie Alacoque and her
ecstasies, by the wedlock of Bleeding Hearts, seasoned with

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

the morbid, unctuous phrases of Molinos. Girard supplemented all this
with the diabolic element and the terrors of bewitchment. He was the
Devil, and the Exorcist to boot. The dreadful conclusion of the whole
affair was that the unhappy woman he so barbarously immolated, far from
obtaining justice, was harried to her death. Eventually she disappeared,
probably imprisoned under a *lettre de cachet*, and cast for the rest of
her days into a living tomb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[223:1](sor23.htm#fr_77) I do not regard La
Voisin as a Sorceress, nor as a true Witches’ Sabbath the travesty she
performed to amuse *blasé* noblemen of high rank, Luxembourg and
Vendôme, her pupil, and the like. Reprobate priests, allies of La
Voisin's, would say the Black Mass secretly for their benefit,
undoubtedly with even more obscene details than it had ever included in
old days when celebrated before a multitude. In some wretched female
victim, a living altar, Nature was pilloried. A woman given up to vile
mockery! what an abomination! . . . a sport far less of men than of her
sister women's cruelty,—of a Bouillon, brazen, abandoned creature, or of
the dark Olympe, deep-dyed in crime and learned in poisons (1681).

<span id="fn_78"></span>[224:2](sor23.htm#fr_78) Voluntary sterility is
continually on the increase in the seventeenth century, especially among
the more carefully regulated families, subjected to the strictest
discipline of the Confessional. Take even the Jansenists. Follow the
history of the Arnaulds, and see the steady ratio of decrease among
them,—to begin with, twenty children, fifteen children; then five! and
eventually not one. Can it be this energetic race (their blood mingled
moreover with the gallant Colberts) finishes in enervation? Not so. The
fact is it has little by little limited its output, so to speak, in
order to make a rich eldest son, a great Lord and King's Minister. The
end is gained, and the race dies of its ambitious carefulness,
undoubtedly duly planned and purposed.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[227:3](sor23.htm#fr_79) For instance, the most
noble Chapter of the Canons of Pignan, who had the honour to be
represented in the "Estates" of Provence, were equally proud of their
recognised right to possess the nuns of that country. There were sixteen
canons; and the Provost's offices received in a single year from the
nuns sixteen declarations of pregnancy (*Histoire manuscrite de Besse*,
by M. Renoux). This publicity had at any rate this advantage, that the
especial crime of Religious Houses, to wit infanticide, was bound to be
less common. The nuns, quietly submitting to what they held to be a
necessary accident of their profession, at the cost of a trifle of
shame, were humane and good mothers. At any rate they did not kill their
children. The nuns of Pignan put theirs out to nurse with the peasants,
who were ready to adopt them, make what use they could of them and bring
them up with their own family. Thus it comes that not a few farmer folk
thereabouts are known down to the present day as descendants of the
ecclesiastical nobility of Provence.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[227:4](sor23.htm#fr_80) Garinet, p. 344.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. Father Girard and Charlotte Cadière](sor24)
