[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor27)  [Next](sor29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

### NOTES AND ELUCIDATIONS

Two only have been published in a complete form (see *Limburch*); the
originals are at Toulouse, and extend from 1307 to 1326. Magi has taken
extracts from two others (*Acad. de Toulouse*, 1790, 4to, vol. iv., p.
19). Lamothe-Langon has done the same for those of Carcassonne (*Hist.
de l’Inquisition en France*, vol. iii.), Llorente for the Spanish
Registers. These mysterious records were at Toulouse, and no doubt in
all other cases, enclosed in bags suspended very high up on the walls,
and, besides, sewn up on either margin in such a way that they could not
be consulted without unstitching the whole. They afford us a valuable
specimen, throwing precious light on all the Inquisitions throughout
Europe, for the methods of procedure were everywhere precisely similar
(see *Directorium Eymerici*, 1358). What especially strikes one in these
Registers is not merely the vast number of those punished, but the
multitude of persons *immured*, shut up, that is to say, in a tiny stone
cell (*camerula*), or in a dungeon *in pace*, on bread and water.
Another is the countless number of the *Crozats*, as they were called,
who had to wear the red cross in breast and back. They were the best
treated, and were allowed provisionally to live in their own houses.
Only every Sunday after Mass they had to go and be whipped by the Curé
of their parish (Ordinance of 1326, *Archives of Carcassonne*, quoted by
L.-Langon, iii., 191). The most cruel part, especially for women, was
that the common people and children used to jeer them unmercifully. They
were liable, apart from any fresh offence, to be taken into custody

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

again and *immured*. Their sons and grandsons were always suspect, and
very readily immured.

In the thirteenth century everything is heresy; in the fourteenth magic.
The transition is easy from one to the other. According to the
rough-and-ready theory of the period, heresy differs little from
diabolical possession; erroneous belief of every sort, as well as sin of
every sort, is a demon to be driven out by torture or the lash. For the
devils are very sensitive to pain (*Michael Psellus*). The *Crozats* and
all persons suspected of heresy are ordered to avoid any dealings with
sorcery (*D. Vaissette, Lang*). This change from heresy to magic is an
advance in terror in which the judge was bound to find his advantage. In
trials for heresy—trials of men for the most part—there are assessors
and others present. But in those for magic, almost invariably trials of
women, he has the right to be alone, tête-à-tête with the accused.

Observe further how under the dread name of Sorcery were included little
by little all the minor superstitions, the time-honoured poetry of
hearth and meadow, Robin Goodfellow, Brownies, and fairies. What woman
can be held innocent now? The most pious believed in all these things.
On retiring to rest, before making her prayer to the Virgin, every
housewife left out a drink of milk for her little friend. Maid and
goodwife offered at night a little bonfire to the fairies, by day a
bunch of flowers to the saints.

And for this she is charged as a sorceress,—brought up before the man in
black! He cross-questions her,—always the same questions, always the
same, those put to every secret society, to the Albigensians, the
Templars, all alike. Let her bethink her; the executioner is near by,
all ready in the vaulted chamber yonder, the strapado, the wooden horse,
the boots, the iron wedges. She faints for fear, and says she knows not
what, "It was not I. . . . I will never do it again. . . . It was my
mother, my sister, my cousin, forced me, led me on. . . . What was I to
do? I was afraid of her, I went there all trembling in

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

spite of my own wishes" (Trepidabat; sororia, sua Guilelma trahebat, et
metu faciebat multa,—"She was all a-tremble; her sister Wilhelmina
betrayed her, and she did many things out of mere terror."—*Reg. Tolos.*
1307, p. 10, in Limburch).

Few were able to resist. In 1329 a certain Jeanne perished for having
refused to denounce her father (*Reg. de Carcassonne*, *L.-Langon*, 3,
202). But with rebels of the sort other means were tried. A mother and
her three daughters had successfully held out against the question. Then
the inquisitor gets hold of the second daughter, makes love to her, and
in this way reassures her to such a degree that she tells him
everything, and betrays her mother and sisters (*Limburch*,
*Lamothe-Langon*). The result is, all were burned together!

What broke down the spirit more even than torture was horror of the *in
pace*. Women died of the terror of being walled up in the little black
hole. In Paris could be seen the public spectacle of a dog-kennel in the
courtyard of the *Filles Repenties* (Magdalen Refuge), where the Dame
d’Escoman was kept immured (except for a slit through which her daily
bread was thrown to her), lying amid her own excrements. In some cases
their fears were worked upon till epilepsy supervened. For instance, the
poor, weak, fair-haired fifteen-year-old child, Madeleine de la Palud,
whom Michaëlis himself admits having terrified into denouncing her
friends, by putting her in an ancient ossuary to lie on dead men's
bones. In Spain, more often than not, the *in pace*, far from being a
place of peace, had a door by means of which they could come every day
at a certain hour to *work* the victim, for the good of her soul, by
applying the lash. A monk condemned to the *in pace* begs and prays for
death in preference to such a doom (*Llorente*).

As to the *auto-da-fés*, read in Limburch what eye-witnesses say of
their horrors. In particular consult Dellon, who himself once wore the
san-benito (*Inquisition de Goa*, 1688).

From the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries downwards such was the
reign of terror that we find persons of the highest condition

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

abandon rank, fortune, everything, the moment they were accused, and
take to flight. This is what Dame Alice Kyteler, mother of the Lord
Seneschal of Ireland, did when charged with sorcery by a mendicant friar
who had been made bishop (1324). She escaped, but her confidante was
burned. The Seneschal made apology, and was degraded permanently. (Th.
Wright, *Proceedings against Dame Alice*, etc., 4to, London, 1843.)

The whole system takes shape from 1200 to 1300. It was in 1233 the
mother of St. Louis founded the great prison of the *Immuratz* at
Toulouse. What happens? Folk begin to give themselves to the Devil. The
first mention of the *Covenant with Satan* dates from 1222 (Cæsar
Heisterbach). People are no longer heretics, *half*-Christians, but
satanic, *anti*-Christians. The wild *Sabbatic Round* makes its
appearance in 1353 (*Procès de Toulouse*, in L.-Langon, 3, 360), on the
eve of the Jacquerie.

<span class="smallcaps">Note</span> 2. *Method of Procedure*.

The first two chapters, which are abstracts of my *Lectures on the
Middle Ages*, explain by *the general condition of society* why humanity
despaired, while chapters 3, 4, and 5 explain by *the moral condition of
the soul* why women in especial despaired, and were led to sell
themselves to the devil and become Sorceresses.

It was only in 553 A.D. that the Church adopted the atrocious resolution
of damning the *spirits* or *demons* (the words are synonymous in
Greek), inexorably, without room for repentance of any sort whatsoever.
In this she followed the African harshness of St. Augustine against the
more lenient advice of the Greeks, Origen, and antiquity generally
(Haag, *Hist. des Dogmes*, i., 80-3). From that time on, theologians
study and determine the temperament, the physiology of spirits. They
possess or do not possess bodies, vanish in smoke, but are fond of heat,
fear the rod, etc. Every detail is perfectly well known, and agreed upon
in 1050 (Michael Psellus, *Energie des esprits ou* 

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

*démons*). This Byzantine writer gives precisely the same idea of them
as that afforded by the Western legends (see numerous passages in
Grimm's *Mythologie*, Maury's *Les Fées*, etc.). It is not till the
fourteenth century all spirits are declared in so many words to be
devils. Nodier's *Trilby*, and the majority of similar stories, are
spoiled by the fact that they all stop short of the tragic instant when
the goodwife finds her Robin Goodfellow or friendly Brownie suddenly
transformed into a satanic lover.

In chapters 5-12, and onwards, from p. 41, I have endeavoured to
investigate the question, *How did women become Sorceresses or Witches?*
It is a difficult and delicate inquiry, and one that none of my
predecessors have attempted. They pay no heed to the successive steps by
which this humble state of things was reached. Their witch rises full
grown, as if from the bowels of the earth, but human nature is not made
that way. The investigation involved the most arduous work. The ancient
texts are few and far between, and such as can be unearthed in the
made-up books of 1500-1600 are hard to distinguish and identify. Having
found the texts, how to date them, to say definitely, "This is of the
twelfth, that of the thirteenth, the fourteenth century"? I should never
have ventured on the ground at all if I had not already had in my favour
a long familiarity with those times, my persistent studies in Grimm,
Ducange, etc., and my book *Origines du Droit* (1837). All this has
helped me enormously. In these formulas, the *Usages* that vary so very
little, in the *Customs* that seem fixed everlastingly, nevertheless the
historic sense must have its say. Other periods, other forms; these we
learn to recognise, to date them psychologically. We can perfectly
distinguish the sombre gravity of older times from the pedantic gossipy
narrative of periods comparatively modern. If archæology can decide from
the shape of such and such a Gothic arch that a building is of such and
such a date, with how much more certainty can historical psychology
demonstrate that a particular moral circum-

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

stance belongs to a particular century and to no other, that a
particular idea, a particular passion, equally impossible in more
ancient ages and in more modern epochs, was precisely what was to be
expected at a particular date? Indeed, in this latter case the criterion
is less liable to be misunderstood. Archæologists have on occasion been
mistaken as to some pointed arch which has been cleverly reconstructed.
Moreover, in the chronology of art certain forms may very well be
repeated. But in the history of morals and manners this is impossible.
The cruel record of the past which I here reproduce will never recreate
its monstrous dogmas, its appalling dreams. In bronze, in iron, they are
fixed in one and the same place for ever in the fatality of the ages.

Now for my especial sin, where criticism will be down on me. In my long
analysis, historical and psychological, of the evolution of the
Sorceress down to 1300, in preference to indulging in long-drawn prolix
explanations, I have frequently taken a minor thread, biographical and
dramatic, the lip of one and the same woman, as it were, down the course
of three hundred years. This, please note, only applies to six or seven
chapters altogether, and even in this short section it will easily be
realised how everything is based on a firm foundation of historical
fact. To give a single instance,—if I have given the word *Toledo* as
the sacred name of the capital city of the magicians, I had on my side
not only the weight of M. Soldan's deliberate opinion, not only the long
passage in Lancre, but two very ancient texts to boot. We read in Cæsar
von Heisterbach how the students of Bavaria and Suabia go to Toledo to
learn necromancy. It is a master of Toledo who originates the crimes of
Sorcery prosecuted by Conrad of Marburg.

However, after all, the Saracen superstitions, which came from Spain or
from the East (as Jacques de Vitry alleges), exerted only an indirect
influence, as did the old Roman cult of Hecate or Dianom. The mighty cry
of pain, which is the true and inward meaning of the Witches’ Sabbath,
reveals quite a

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

different state of things. It expresses not only material sufferings,
voices, old miseries and wretchedness, but a very abyss of agony. The
lowest depths of moral suffering are not sounded till towards the days
of St. Louis, Philippe le Bel, particularly among certain classes which
felt and suffered even more keenly than the old-time serf. Such must
have been in especial the *good* (well-to-do) *peasants*, rich villeins,
serfs who were mayors of villages, whose existence I have noted as early
as the twelfth century, and who in the fourteenth, under the new system
of imposts, became responsible (like the *Curiales* of antiquity) for
the taxes, and are doubly martyrised by the king and by the barons,
crushed under extortions,—their lives, in fact, made a living hell.
Hence the fits of despair that send them hastening to the spirit of
hidden treasures, the devil of money. Add in mockery and insult, who do
still more perhaps towards producing the "Bride of Satan."

A trial at Toulouse, making in 1353 the first mention of the *Sabbatical
Round*, enabled me to put my finger on the exact date. And what date
more likely in the nature of things? The Black Death is heavy on the
world, "killing the third part of all mankind." The Pope is degraded.
The barons, beaten by the English and prisoners, are extorting their
ransom from the unhappy serf, stripping him to the very shirt. Epilepsy
is the great scourge of the time, succeeded by the Civil War, the
*Jacquerie*. . . . The folk are so mad with misery, they set to dancing.

<span class="smallcaps">Note</span> 3. *Satan as Physician,
Love-philtres, etc*.

Reading the admirable works composed in our own day on the history of
the sciences, I am surprised by one circumstance. The authors seem to
think everything was discovered by the doctors, those half-schoolmen,
who at every step were hindered by their cloth, their dogmas, the
deplorable habits of mind due to their scholastic training. And others,
who walked free of these fetters,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

the sorceresses and witches, did they find out nothing? It were
unreasonable to think so; and Paracelsus states the very opposite. In
the little we know of their recipes, a remarkably good sense is
apparent. To the present moment the *Solanaceæ*, so freely employed by
them, are considered the especial remedy of the dread disease which
threatened the world in the fourteenth century. I have been surprised to
see in M. Coste (*Hist. du Développement des Corps*, vol. ii., p. 55)
that the opinion of M. Paul Dubois as to the effects of iced water at a
certain moment was in precise conformity with the practice of the
witches at their Sabbaths. Consider, on the other hand, the idiotic
prescriptions of the great and learned doctors of those times,—the
marvellous effects to be expected from mule's urine, and the like
(Agrippa, *De Occulta Philosophia*, vol. ii., p. 24, Lyons edition,
8vo.).

With regard to their love-potions, philtres, etc., it has not been
noticed how closely the *covenants between lovers* resembled those
between friends and brothers in arms. For the latter consult Grimm
(*Rechts Alterthümer*) and my *Origines;* for the first,
[Calcagnini](errata.htm#10.md), Sprenger, Grillandus, and a host of other
writers. In all cases they follow identically the same lines. It is
invariably either Nature called upon and taken to witness, or the
employment, more or less blasphemous, of the sacraments and holy things
of the Church, or a feasting in common, such and such a drink, such and
such a loaf or cake, shared between the contracting parties. To this add
certain forms of communion, by blood, by this or that excretion.

But, no matter how intimate and closely personal these may appear, the
sovereign communion of love is always a *confarreatio*, the sharing of
bread which has absorbed magic virtue. It does so, sometimes in virtue
of the Mass pronounced over it (Grillandus, 316), sometimes by contact
with, and emanations from, the beloved object. On the marriage night, in
order to arouse love, the *bride's pasty* is eaten (Theirs,
*Superstitions*, iv., 548). To rouse a similar feeling in the breast of
the man *to be* 

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

*tied* (such is the phrase), the woman makes him consume a particular
sweetmeat she has prepared for him, etc.

<span class="smallcaps">Note 4</span>. *The Last Act of the Witches’
Sabbath*.

When mankind has completely awakened from its prodigious dream of two
thousand years, and can coolly and quietly take stock of Christian
society in the Middle Ages, two astounding facts will become apparent,
facts unique in the history of the world, viz. 1: *Adultery was one of
its recognised institutions*, normal, established, esteemed, sung and
celebrated in all the monuments of literature, noble and bourgeois
alike, in every poem and every *fabliau*, and 2: *Incest* is the
ordinary condition of serfs, a condition of things clearly manifested at
the Witches’ Sabbath, which is their one and only opportunity of
freedom, the expression of their true life, where they show themselves
for what they are.

I have questioned whether incest was officially and publicly displayed
at these functions, as Lancre maintains. But I make no question as to
the fact itself.

Economic in the main this state of things,—a result of the wretched
state in which the serfs were kept. Women being less efficient workers,
were regarded as so many useless mouths. One was enough for a family.
The birth of a girl was lamented as a calamity (see my *Origines*); and
the child received next to no attention. But many could possibly
survive. The eldest only of the brothers married, so hiding under a
Christian mask the polyandry that was the actual fact. Between them, a
thorough understanding and conspiracy of infertility. This is the bottom
of the mournful mystery, which so many witnesses attest without
comprehending what it really implied.

One of the most weighty of these, in my eyes, is Boguet, serious,
upright, and conscientious, who in his remote Jura country, in his
mountain district of Saint-Claude, was bound to find the customs of
older days better preserved than elsewhere,

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

and faithfully followed with all the obstinate tenacity of peasant
routine. Boguet also affirms two important facts: 1, incest, even incest
between mother and son; 2, unfruitful, undelightful pleasure,
child-bearing made an impossibility.

It is appalling,—whole nations of women submitting to such sacrilege. I
say *nations* advisedly; these *Sabbaths* were enormous
assemblages,—12,000 souls in one small Basque canton (see Lancre); 6,000
in one pretty hamlet, La Mirandole (see Spina).

A terrible revelation indeed of the insignificant moral influence the
Church exerted. It has been supposed that with its Latin, its Byzantine
metaphysics, barely comprehensible to its clergy themselves, it was
Christianising the people. And lo! at the only moment when the people is
free and can manifest its true nature, it shows itself worse than pagan.
Self-interest, calculation, family consolidation, have more effect than
all the empty teaching of clerics. Incest of father and daughter would
have been comparatively useless in this direction, and less is heard of
it. That of mother and son is specially enjoined by Satan. Why? Because
among these uncivilised races the young labourer, on the first awaking
of his passions, would have escaped from the family control, would have
been lost for the common household, just when he was becoming of
precious value to it. It was hoped to keep him to bounds, to nail him to
the home, at any rate for a long while, by means of this strongly
constraining tie, "That his mother incurred damnation for him."

But how could she ever consent to such a thing? We can only say, look at
the cases, happily rare, which occur at the present day. The thing
happens only under conditions of the extremity of destitution. It is a
hard saying, but a true one: excess of evil fortune demoralises and
depraves. The spirit once broken has small power of resistance left, it
is weak and flaccid. The poor, in their half-savage life, so bare of
everything as it is, spoil their children excessively. In the home of
the destitute widow and the forsaken wife or mistress, the child is
"monarch

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

of all he surveys," and the mother has no strength, when he grows up, to
oppose his will. How much more so in the Middle Ages! The woman was
crushed to the earth on three several sides.

The Church keeps her down at the lowest level of degradation,—she is
Eve, and sin incarnate. In the house she is beaten; at the *Sabbath*
immolated, we have read how. At bottom she is neither of Satan nor of
Jesus; she is nothing, and has nothing. She would die in her child. But
they should beware of making a creature so unhappy, for under this hail
of agony, what is not pain, what is sweetness and tenderness, may in
revenge turn into the frenzy of despair. This is the horror of the
Middle Ages. For all its spiritual aspects, it lifts from the hidden
depths incredible things that should have never left them; it goes
searching and scrutinising the muddy under-regions of the soul.

Still the poor suffering creature would fain stifle all this. Very
different from the high-born lady, she can sin only out of
submissiveness. Her husband will have it so, and Satan will have it so.
She is afraid, and weeps at the idea; but her reluctance goes for
little. But, for all the constraint she is under, the result is not less
terrible in the way of perversion of the senses and degradation of the
mind. It is a hell on earth. She is left horrorstricken, half wild with
remorse and passionate revolt. The son, if success has been realised,
sees an enemy in his own father; a breath of parricidal fury haunts the
house, tainted with this abomination. One is horrified to picture what a
society such as this must have been, a society where the family, so
fatally corrupted and divided against itself, went on its way in gloomy
dumbness, wearing a heavy mask of lead, under the rod of a witless
authority that saw nothing and believed in nothing but its own
supremacy. What a flock of spiritless sheep! What senseless, brainless
shepherds! They had there before their very eyes a monstrous spectacle
of calamity, grief, and sin, a spectacle unheard of before or since. But
they only looked in the pages

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

of their books, learned their lesson there, and repeated vain words by
rote. Words! words! this resumes all their history. Their whole meaning
was *a tongue;* phrasing and phrases, and nothing else. One name will be
theirs for ever—*Talkmongers*.

<span class="smallcaps">Note</span> 5. *Literature of Sorcery and
Witchcraft*.

Its beginning dates from about 1400. The books composing it are of two
kinds and of two periods—(1) those of the monkish inquisitors of the
fifteenth century; (2) those of the lay judges of the days of Henri IV.
and Louis XIII.

The huge Lyons compilation, composed and dedicated to the inquisitor
Nitard, reproduces a crowd of these monkish treatises. I have compared
them one with another, and sometimes with the old editions. At bottom
there is very little in them; and the everlasting repetitions are
wearisome to the last degree. The earliest in date (about 1440) is the
prince of fools, a genuine Teutonic dullard, the Dominican Nider. In his
*Formicarius* each chapter begins by drawing out a parallel between ants
and heretics or sorcerers, the deadly sins, etc. This comes very near
the confines of mere idiocy. He explains most satisfactorily the
necessity there was to burn Jeanne d’Arc. This book possessed such
attractions that the majority of the rest copied from it—Sprenger in
particular, the great Sprenger, whose merits have elsewhere been
insisted on. But how say all there is to be said, how exhaust this mine
of asininities? "*Fe-mina* comes from *fe* and *minus;* because a woman
has *less faith* than a man." And a few lines further—"She is indeed
light-minded and credulous, always ready to believe." Solomon was right
when he said, "As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman
which is without discretion. . . . Her mouth is smoother than oil: but
her latter end is bitter as wormwood" (Prov. xi. 22, v. 3, 4). But
there, what cause for wonder? Was she not made out of a crooked rib,
that is to say, a rib which is distorted, turned against man?

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

The *Marteau* (Hammer) of Sprenger is the representative work, the type,
followed as a rule by the other manuals, the *Marteaux*, *Fouets*,
*Fustigations* (Hammers, Whips, Cudgellings), issued later by the
Spinas, Jacquiers, Castro, Grillandus, etc. The last-named, a Florentine
and inquisitor at Arezzo (1520), has some curious particulars as to
philtres, and gives some interesting stories. It comes out quite clearly
from what he says that there was, over and above the actual objective
Witches’ Sabbath, an imaginary *Sabbath*, which many terrified
individuals believed themselves to attend, especially women
somnambulists, who would get up in the night and scour the country. A
young man, crossing the fields at the first peep of dawn, and following
the course of a brook, hears a very soft voice hailing him, but in
timid, trembling accents. Looking, he sees a pitiful sight—a woman's
white body almost naked, save for a scanty pair of drawers. Shuddering
and shamefaced, she was hiding among the brambles. He recognises a
neighbour; and she begs him to rescue her. "What were you doing there?"
"I was looking for my donkey." He expresses incredulity, whereupon she
bursts into tears. The poor woman, who had very likely in her
somnambulism slipped out of her husband's bed and wandered away, starts
accusing herself. The Devil took her to the Witches’ Sabbath; while
conducting her home again he heard a church bell, and let her fall. She
tried to ensure the youth's discretion by giving him a cap, a pair of
boots, and three cheeses, but the silly fellow could not hold his
tongue, and bragged of what he had seen. She was arrested. Grillandus,
being away at the time, could not conduct her trial, but she was burned,
for all that. He speaks of it complacently, and says, the carnal-minded
butcher, "She was a fine woman and plump" (pulchra et satis pingeris).

From monk to monk the snowball goes on, ever growing. About 1600, the
compilers being themselves subjected to compilation, and supplemented by
the later recruits, we arrive at an enormous book, the *Disquisitiones
Magicæ*, of the Spaniard Del Rio. In his *Auto-da-fé* de Logroño
(reprinted by Lancre),

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

he gives a detailed description of a *Sabbath*, very curious, but one of
the silliest productions to be found in writing. At the banquet, for
first course, they eat children hashed: for the second, dead wizards'
flesh. Satan, who understands his guests' little ways, conducts the
company to the door, holding as a candle the arm of a child who has died
unbaptised, etc., etc.

Does this exhaust the absurdities? Not a bit of it. The prize and crown
of folly belong to the Dominican Michaëlis—in the Gauffridi affair,
1610. His *Sabbath* is undoubtedly the most improbable of all. To begin
with, they assemble "by sound of horn"—surely an excellent way of
securing their own capture. The *Sabbath* is celebrated "every day."
Each day has its own particular crime, as well as each class of the
hierarchy. Those of the lowest class, novices and folk of small account,
get their hand in as a beginning by killing babies. Those of the upper
class, the gentlemen magicians, are assigned the part of blaspheming,
defying, and insulting God. They do not condescend to the trouble of
evil spells and bewitchments; these they perform by means of their
valets and waiting-maids, who constitute the intermediate class between
the well-bred sorcerers and the clodhoppers.

In other descriptions of the same date Satan applies the nice
grammatical tests of the Universities, making aspirants undergo severe
examinations. After assuring himself of their scholarship, he inscribes
them on the registers, and gives them diploma and patent. Sometimes he
requires a lengthy preliminary initiation, a sort of semi-monastic
noviciate. Or else, again, following the regulations of guilds and
corporations of trades, he imposes an apprenticeship, the presentation
of a masterwork, etc.

<span class="smallcaps">Note</span> 6. *Decadence, etc*.

A fact deserving attention is that the Church, the enemy of Satan, far
from vanquishing him, twice over gives him his success.

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After the
extermination of the Albigensians in the thirteenth century, *did she
triumph?* Just the opposite: Satan is found predominant in the
fourteenth. After the St. Bartholomew, and during the massacres of the
Thirty Years’ War, *does she triumph? Just the opposite:* Satan is once
more in the ascendant under Louis XIII.

The object of my book was purely to give, not a history of Sorcery, but
a simple and impressive formula of the Sorceress's way of life, which my
learned predecessors darken by the very elaboration of their scientific
methods and the excess of detail. My strong point is to start, *not from
the devil, from an empty conception, but from a living reality*, the
Sorceress, a warm, breathing reality, rich in results and possibilities.
The Church had only the demons. She did not rise to Satan; this was the
witch's dream.

I have essayed to epitomise her biography of a thousand years, her
successive periods, her chronology. I have described (1) *how she comes
into existence* by the excess of her wretchedness and destitution; how
the simple peasant wife, served by her familiar spirit, transforms this
spirit in the progressive advance of her despair, is assailed,
possessed, bedevilled by him, continually reproduces and incorporates
him with herself, at last grows one with Satan. I have described (2)
*how the Sorceress reigns paramount, but undoes and destroys herself*.
The Sorceress, full of pride and fierce with hate, becomes, under
success, the foul, malignant witch, who heals but yet corrupts, her
hands more and more busied, her empiricism more and more in vogue, the
agent of love and of abortion; (3) she disappears from the scene,
lingering on, however, in country places. What remains, in evidence from
famous trials, is no longer the witch, but the bewitched—as at Aix,
Loudun, Louviers, in the case of Charlotte Cadière, etc.

This chronology was not yet firmly established in my own mind, when I
attempted in my history to reconstitute the Witches’ Sabbath in its
several acts. I was mistaken about the

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

fifth. The true Sorceress of the original type is an isolated being, a
devil's nun, having neither love nor family ties. Even the witches of
the decadence do not love men. They submit to unfruitful, licentious
embraces, and show it in their persons (*Lancre*), but their personal
predilections are solely those common to nuns and female prisoners. She
attracts weak-minded, credulous women, who allow themselves to be
enticed to their little clandestine feasts (*Wyer*, chap. 27). The
husbands of these women are jealous, interrupt the pretty mystery, beat
the Sorceresses and inflict on them the punishment they most dread, viz.
to be got with child. The Sorceress scarcely ever conceives except in
her own despite, as the result of outrage and derisive insult. But if
she has a son, it is an essential point, so it is said, of the Satanic
cult that he become her husband. Hence, in the later periods, hideous
family groups and generations of little wizards and witches, one and all
cunning and malignant, ever ready to beat or denounce their mother. In
Boguet is to be found a horrible scene of the sort.

What is less well known, but not less atrocious, is the fact that the
great folk who made use of these perverted races for their personal
crimes, keeping them in a continual state of dependence by means of
their terror of being delivered over to the priests, extorted heavy
revenues from them (*Sprenger*, p. 164, Lyons edition).

For the decay of sorcery and witchcraft, and the latest persecutions of
which it was the object, I refer the reader to two excellent works by
Soldan and Thomas Wright respectively. In connexion with its relation to
magnetism, spiritualism, table-turning, etc., copious details will be
found in that curious book, *L’Historie du Merveilleux* (History of the
Marvellous), by M. Figuier.

<span class="smallcaps">Note</span> 7.

I have twice spoken of Toulon; but I can never speak enough of a place
which has brought me such happiness.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It meant much for
me to finish this gloomy history in the land of light. Our works feel
the influence of the country where they were wrought. Nature labours
with us; and it is a duty to render gratitude to this mysterious
comrade, to thank the *Genius loci*.

At the foot of Fort Lamelgue, which rises commandingly, though unseen,
above, I occupied a small and very retired house situated on a sharply
descending slope of healthy, rocky ground. The man who built himself
this hermitage, a doctor, wrote within its walls a very original book,
*L’Agonie et la Mort* (Death and the Death Agony). He died himself quite
recently. Hot of head and volcanic of heart, he used to come thither
every day from Toulon to pour out his troublous thoughts. They are
strongly impressed on the locality. Inside the enclosure, a large one,
of vines and olive-trees, in order to shut himself in within a double
isolation, he had constructed an inner garden, narrow in dimensions,
with encircling walls in the African fashion, and containing a tiny
fountain. He is still present there by virtue of the exotic plants he
loved, and the white marble slabs inscribed with Arabic characters which
he saved from the ruined tombs of Algiers. His thirty years old
cypresses have shot up into giants, his aloes and cactuses grown into
immense, formidable trees. The whole very lonely, not at all luxurious,
but with a great charm of its own. In winter-time the sweetbriar in
flower everywhere, and wild thyme and aromatic scents of all kinds.

The roadstead of Toulon is, as everybody knows, one of the wonders of
the world. There are some even greater in extent, but none so beautiful,
so finely designed. It opens to the sea by an entrance two leagues
across, this narrowed by two peninsulas, curved like crab's claws. All
the interior, varied and diversified by capes, rocky peaks, sharp
promontories, moorlands, vines, pinewoods, shows a singular charm,
nobility, and severity of aspect.

I could not distinguish the inner portion itself of the roadstead, but
only its two enormous arms—to right, Tamaris

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (henceforth
immortal), to left, the fantastic horizon of Gien and the Iles d’Or,
where the great Rabelais would have loved to die.

Behind, beneath the lofty circuit of the bare mountains, the gaiety and
brilliance of the harbour, with its blue waters and its ships that come
and go in never-ceasing movement, afford a striking contrast. Flapping
flags and waving pennants, swift-flying despatch boats carrying admirals
and other officers to and fro, all is animating and interesting. Every
day at midday I would climb on my way to the town from the sea up to the
highest point of my fort, whence opens a vast panorama, the mountains
beyond Hyères, the sea, the roads, and in the middle of all the town
which, as seen from thence, looks charming. Anyone seeing the sight for
the first time, exclaims, "Ah! what a pretty woman Toulon is!" What an
agreeable welcome I met with there, what devoted friends I found! The
public institutions, the three libraries, the courses held in the
sciences, offer numerous resources little suspected by the flying
traveller, the passing visitor who is merely on his way to take ship.
For myself, settled there for a length of time, and grown into a true
Toulonnais, it formed a never-ending source of interest to compare
together old Toulon and new, and note the happy progress of the
centuries, a progress I never felt more acutely anywhere. The gloomy
affair of Charlotte Cadière, the documents relating to which the learned
librarian placed at my disposal, brought only this contrast for me in
lively colours.

A certain building in particular daily arrested my attention, the
Hôpital de la Marine (Naval Hospital), formerly a seminary of the
Jesuits, founded by Colbert for the ships’ almoners, and which, during
the decadence of the French Navy, had occupied public attention in so
odious a fashion.

It was well done to preserve so instructive a monument of the contrast
between the two periods the former marked by ennui and emptiness
disfigured by hateful hypocrisy, the present, bright with sincerity,
ardent with activity, research, science,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

and science purely benevolent in this case, directed solely and entirely
towards the relief of suffering and the consolation of human life!

Going inside, we shall find the house has been somewhat changed. If the
decriers of the present say such progress is of the Devil, they must
admit that to all appearance the Devil has altered his methods.

His magic nowadays is, on the first floor, a fine and well-selected
medical library, which these young surgeons, with their own money and at
the expense of their pleasures, are incessantly adding to, less dancing
and fewer mistresses, more science and brotherly love.

Destructive of old, constructive now, in the chemical laboratory, the
Devil is hard at work preparing what is to alleviate the poor sailor's
pain and cure his ills. If the knife becomes needful, the insensibility
the witches sought, and towards which their narcotics were the first
essay, is afforded by the art magic of the immortal discovery made by
Jackson in America (1847), and Simpson at Edinburgh.

Those days pondered and aspired; these realise. Their spirit is a
Prometheus. In that mighty Satanic arsenal, I mean the well-equipped
physical installation possessed by this hospital, I see realised in
practice the dreams and longings of the Middle Ages, the most apparently
chimerical fantasies of former days.—To traverse space, they say, "I
would have force. . . ." And behold steam, which is now a flying wing,
now a Titan's arm. "I would wield the lightning. . . ." And lo! it is in
your land, docile, obedient. It is stored in a bottle, increased,
diminished; sparks are drawn from it, it is called here and sent
there.—We do not ride on a broomstick, it is true, through the air; but
the demon Montgolfier has created the balloon. Last, but not least, the
sublimest wish of all, the sovereign desire to communicate afar off, to
make one from pole to pole men's thoughts and hearts, this miracle is
accomplished. More than that, the whole round world is united by a vast
electrical network.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Humanity as a
whole possesses for the first time from minute to minute the full
consciousness of itself, a complete communion of soul with soul. . . .
This is divine sorcery indeed! . . . If Satan does this, we are bound to
pay him homage, to admit he may well be after all one of the aspects of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Principal Authorities](sor29.md)
