[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sor23)  [Next](sor25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCMUG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Sorceress*, by Jules Michelet, \[1939\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### 22

### *FATHER GIRARD and CHARLOTTE CADIÈRE*

THE Jesuits were much to be pitied. So favourably regarded at
Versailles, "masters of all they surveyed" at Court, they had not the
smallest prestige in the eyes of Heaven, not the most insignificant
miracle to show. The Jansenists enjoyed an abundance at any rate of
moving legends. Unnumbered crowds of sick folk, of the afflicted, the
lame, the paralytic, found at the tomb of the Deacon Pâris a moment's
healing and relief. The unhappy French people, bowed down under an
appalling succession of scourges,—the Grand Monarque, in the first
place, then the Regency and Law's wondrous system, which between them
reduced such multitudes to beggary,—this unhappy people came to implore
salvation of a poor man of righteousness, virtuous if weak-witted, a
saint in spite of his many ridiculous attributes. And when all is said
and done, why jeer? His life is indeed far more touching than ludicrous.
No need for wonder if these good folks were moved to awe and veneration
at their benefactor's tomb, and straight forgot their ills. True the
cure was hardly ever permanent; still, what matter? The miracle had
actually occurred, the miracle of genuine devotion, and loving faith,
and heartfelt gratitude. Later on, an alloy of charlatanry was infused
in it all; but at that time (in 1728) these extraordinary scenes of
popular enthusiasm were still perfectly sincere.

The Jesuits would have given their ears to own the smallest of these
miracles which they refused to credit. For more than

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

half a century they had been at work decking with fables and pretty
tales their legend of the Sacred Heart, the story of Marie Alacoque. For
five-and-twenty or thirty years they had been striving to persuade the
world that their ally, James II., not content with curing the King's
evil (in his quality as King of France, which he never was), amused
himself after his death in making the dumb to speak, the halt to run,
the squint-eyed to see straight. Unfortunately, after cure, their
outlook was more oblique than ever; and as for the dumb, it was
discovered, alas! that the individual who played this part was a known
and proved impostor, a woman who had been caught red-handed in cheatery.
Her habit was to travel the countryside, and at every chapelry renowned
for the holiness of its patron saint, to be miraculously healed and
receive the alms of the edified worshippers,—going through the same
performance at each successive shrine.

For miracle-working, give us the South for choice,—a land abounding in
superstitious women, quickly stirred to nervous excitement, good
subjects for somnambulism, miraculous manifestations, the holy stigmata,
and the like.

The Jesuits had at Marseilles a Bishop of their own kidney, Belzunce, a
man of good heart and courage, famous ever since the date of the Great
Plague, but credulous and extremely narrow-minded, under shelter of
whose authority much might be attempted that would otherwise have been
over-risky. As his right-hand man they had established a certain Jesuit
from Franche-Comté, a man of keen intelligence and no little ability,
who for all his austerity of external demeanour was yet an agreeable
preacher in the florid, somewhat worldly style ladies admire. A true
Jesuit, competent to win success in either of two ways, whether by
feminine intrigue or by the most straight-laced piety, Father Girard had
otherwise neither youth nor good looks to recommend him. He was a man of
forty-seven, tall, dry-as-dust, tired-looking; he was rather deaf, had a
squalid look about him,

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

and was for ever spitting (pp. 50, 69, 254). <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) He had been a teacher up to the age of
thirty-seven, and still retained some of the tastes he had learned among
schoolboys. For the last ten years—since the Great Plague, that is to
say—he had been a confessor in nunneries. He had been highly successful,
and had acquired a large measure of ascendency over his penitents by
imposing on them the very regimen that seemed *primâ facie* most
diametrically opposed to the temperament of these Provençal nuns, viz.
the doctrine and discipline of mystic self-annihilation, passive
obedience, and the absolute and utter abnegation of self. The fearful
incidents of the Plague had broken their spirit, enervated their heart,
and affected them with a sort of morbid languor. The Carmelites of
Marseilles, under the direction of Girard, carried this species of
mysticism to great lengths,—at their head a certain Sister Rémusat, who
was reputed a veritable saint.

The Jesuits, in spite of all this success, or perhaps just because of
it, removed Girard from Marseilles. They were anxious to employ him in
the task of raising the status of their House at Toulon, which sorely
needed it. Colbert's magnificent Foundation, *The Seminary of Naval
Almoners*, had been entrusted to the Jesuits to gradually wean the young
priests attached to it from the mischievous ascendency of the Lazarist
Fathers, to whose spiritual superintendence they were in almost every
instance subject. But the two Jesuits appointed were far from competent
for the task. One was a fool, the other one (Father Sabatier) a man of a
singularly violent temper, notwithstanding his years. He had all the
blunt insolence of the old type of naval martinet, and scorned any sort
of moderation. He was blamed by people at Toulon, not for keeping a
mistress or even going with a married woman, but with doing so openly,
insolently,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

and outrageously, in such sort as to drive the injured husband to
despair. His chief wish was that the latter should before all things
realise his shame and feel all the pangs of marital jealousy. Eventually
things were pushed so far that the poor man died of chagrin. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82.md)

However, the rivals of the Jesuits afforded even greater cause for
scandal. The Observantine Fathers, who acted as spiritual directors to
the nuns of Saint Claire of [Ollioules](errata.htm#8.md), lived in open
concubinage with their penitents; nay! they were not satisfied with this
iniquity, but even failed to respect the little girls who were pupils at
the nunnery. The Father Superintendent, one Aubany, had violated one, a
child of thirteen, afterwards flying to Marseilles to escape the
vengeance of her relatives.

Girard, now nominated director of the *Seminary* of Toulon, was
destined, by his apparent austerity of character and his very real
dexterity of management, soon to regain ascendency for the Jesuits over
a body of monks so deeply compromised and of parish priests of small
education and of a very common stamp.

In this land where men are rough and hasty, often harsh in speech and
rugged in appearance, women appreciate highly the gentle gravity of men
of the North, liking and admiring them for speaking the aristocratic,
the official language, French. <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83.md)

Girard on his arrival at Toulon must have known the ground thoroughly
well already. He already possessed a devoted ally there, a certain
Madame Guiol, daughter of a cabinet-maker in a small way of business;
she was in the habit of paying occasional visits to Marseilles, where
she had a daughter in a Carmelite convent. This woman put herself
absolutely at his disposal, as much as and more than he wished; she was
well on in years (forty-seven), extremely hot-spirited, utterly corrupt

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

and unscrupulous, ready to serve him in any capacity, whatever he did or
whatever he was, be he saint or sinner.

Besides her daughter in the Carmelite convent at Marseilles, she had
another who was a lay sister with the Ursulines of Toulon. The
Ursulines, a society of teaching nuns, constituted in all localities a
nucleus of social intercourse; their parlour, which was frequented by
their pupils’ mothers, formed a halfway house between the cloister and
the world outside. Here by the Sisters’ complacence, no doubt, Father
Girard came in contact with the ladies of the town, amongst the rest
with a lady of forty, and unmarried, a certain Mlle. Gravier, daughter
of a former Contractor of Government Works in the Royal Arsenal. This
lady had a friend and familiar, a sort of shadow accompanying her
wherever she went, Mlle. Reboul, her cousin, daughter of a ship's
captain, who was her heir and who, though of pretty near the same age
(thirty-five), quite expected to succeed to her property. Round these
two grew up by degrees a little coterie of Father Girard's female
admirers, who chose him as their Confessor. Young girls were sometimes
admitted, for instance, Mlle. Cadière, a tradesman's daughter, Mlle.
Laugier, a sempstress, Mlle. Batarelle, daughter of a waterman of the
port. Books of devotion were perused, and occasionally little suppers
indulged in. But nothing interested them so strongly as a series of
letters in which were recounted the miracles and ecstasies of Sister
Rémusat, who was still living at the time. (She died in February, 1730.)
What a crown of glory for good Father Girard, who had led her so near to
Heaven! The letters were read and admired with tears and exclamations of
delighted wonder. If not literally ecstatic as yet, these women were
surely not far from the confines of ecstasy. And indeed, Mlle. Reboul,
in order to gratify her kinswoman, was already in the habit occasionally
of producing strange phenomena in herself by the familiar device of
quietly holding her breath and pinching her nose with her fingers. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

Of this band of women, old and young, the most serious-minded was
undoubtedly Mlle. Catherine Cadière, a delicate, invalidish young girl
of seventeen, entirely devoted to piety and works of charity, and
showing a sad, thin face, which seemed to declare that young as she was
she had felt more deeply than any the great misfortunes of the time, the
calamities of Provence and her native Toulon. This is easily accounted
for. She was born during the terrible famine of 1709, while just at the
epoch when a girl is growing into a woman, she witnessed the appalling
scenes of the Great Plague. These two sinister events, quite beyond the
range of ordinary experience, seemed to have left a permanent mark on
her personality.

This melancholy blossom was a pure product of Toulon, of the Toulon of
that date. To understand its genesis, it is indispensable to recall what
this town is now, and was then.

Toulon is a thoroughfare, a place of embarkation, the gateway of a vast
harbour and a gigantic naval arsenal. This is what first strikes a
traveller's eye and prevents him seeing Toulon itself. Still there is a
town there, a city of venerable antiquity. It contains two distinct
populations, officials and functionaries from other parts, and the
genuine Toulonnais, the latter not over well-disposed towards the
former, envious of the government employé and not unfrequently disgusted
at the arrogance of naval men,—all this concentrated within the gloomy
streets of a place still shut in and half strangled by the narrow girdle
of its fortifications. The most striking feature of the little
black-browed town is its situation midway between two great oceans of
brilliancy, the wondrous mirror of the roadstead and the majestic
amphitheatre of its bare mountains of a dazzling grey that well-nigh
blinds your eyes at midday. All the more gloomy seem the streets. Except
such as run directly to the harbour and derive some light from its
expanse, these are in deep shadow all day long. Grimy alleyways of small
hucksters’ shops, poorly set out, and the goods all but invisible to
anyone coming from the glare of daylight,—such is the general aspect.
The centre of the town

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

is a labyrinth of intricate lanes, hiding a number of churches and old
monastic buildings, now turned into barracks. Turbulent brooks, heavy
and foul with household refuse, rush fiercely down the middle of the
narrow ways. The air is stagnant, and you are surprised, in so dry a
climate, to find so much damp everywhere. In front of the new theatre an
alley known as the *Rue de l’Hôpital* connects the Rue Royale, itself a
narrow thoroughfare, with the still narrower Rue des Canonniers (St.
Sebastian), seeming at the first glance to be a *cul-de-sac*. Still the
sun does cast one look into it at high noon, but finds the spot so
dismal he instantly passes overhead and restores the lane to the shadowy
dimness proper to it.

Among its black-browed houses the smallest was that inhabited by the
Sieur Cadière, huckster and second-hand dealer. The only entrance was
through the shop, and there was one room on each floor. The Cadières
were honest, pious folks, and Madame Cadière a very mirror of
perfection. Nor were these good people in absolute poverty; not only was
the little house their own property, but like most of the *bourgeois* of
Toulon city, they possessed a *bastide*. This generally includes a
building of sorts and a small rocky messuage producing a trifle of wine.
In the great days of the French navy, under Colbert and his son, the
prodigious activity of the port was highly profitable to the town. The
wealth of France poured thither in a constant stream. All the great
lords who passed that way were accompanied by their household and
domestic servants, a wasteful crew that left many fine pickings behind.
But all this came to an abrupt conclusion, and an activity artificially
fostered came to a dead stop. There was not money enough even to pay the
Arsenal artificers’ wages, while the ships of war under repair were left
indefinitely on the stocks, and the hulls eventually sold for what they
would fetch. <span id="fr_85"></span>[5](#fn_85.md) Toulon suffered
severely under the effects of all this. During the siege of 1707 the
place seemed only half alive. But how much worse the dreadful year of
1709, the ’93 of Louis

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> XIV., when all
calamities, a cruel winter, plague and famine, were concentrated
simultaneously on the ruin of fair France! The trees of Provence
themselves were not spared. Intercommunication ceased entirely, and the
roads swarmed with starving mendicants! Toulon shuddered, ringed round
with robbers who intercepted all traffic.

To cap all, Madame Cadière found herself pregnant in this terrible year.
She had three boys already. Of these the eldest remained at home to help
his father in the shop. The second was a pupil at the Preachers’
College, being intended for a Dominican monk, or Jacobin, as the name
was. The third was studying for the priesthood at the Jesuit Seminary.
Husband and wife both desired a girl, while the latter prayed God she
might turn out a saint. She spent her nine months in constant prayer,
fasting or else eating nothing but rye bread. Eventually she bore a
daughter, Catherine, who was an extremely delicate and, like her
brothers, a rather unhealthy child. No doubt the damp, ill-ventilated
house, as well as the insufficient diet of a saving and more than
abstemious mother, had something to say to this. Her brothers suffered
from glandular swellings, which sometimes broke out into open sores, and
little Catherine had the same in her childish days. Without being
exactly ill, she showed the invalidish prettiness common with sickly
children. She grew tall without growing strong. At an age when other
girls feel their strength and activity overflowing, and experience all
the exhilaration of youth, she was already declaring, "I have not long
to live."

She had the small-pox, which left her somewhat marked. We do not know if
she was pretty, but it is very certain she was dainty and charming,
possessing all the engaging contrasts of young Provençal maidens and
their twofold nature. At once vivacious and dreamy, gay and melancholy,
a well-conducted, pious child, with harmless interludes of frivolity. At
intervals between the long church services, if she was taken to visit
the *bastide* with other girls of her own age, she raised no
difficulties

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

about doing as they did, singing, dancing, or touching the tambourine.
But such days were rare. More often her great pleasure was to climb to
the very top of the house (p. 24), to get nearer the sky and catch a
glimpse of daylight, perhaps to see a little bit of sea, or a pointed
summit of the great waste of surrounding mountains. These were solemn
then as now, but at that date somewhat less forbidding in aspect, less
bare and denuded of trees, sparsely clothed in the refreshing green of
arbute trees and larches.

This dead city, at the time of the Plague, numbered 26,000 inhabitants,
an enormous mass of humanity to be crowded into so minute a space.
Besides, from this space must be subtracted the ground occupied by a
ring of great monasteries and convents built up against the town walls,
Minims, Oratorians, Jesuits, Capuchins, Recollets, Ursuline Sisters,
Visitandines, Bernardines, Refuge, Good Shepherd, and right in the
centre of the town the enormous House of the Dominicans. Add in the
parish churches, presbyteries, episcopal palace, etc., and it will be
evident the clergy filled all the room, while the people had next to
nothing.

Easy to see how fiercely the disease, concentrated in so small a focus,
must have burned. Moreover, its own good nature was fatal to the town,
which magnanimously took in refugees from the stricken city of
Marseilles. These were just as likely to bring the Plague with them as
certain bales of wool which were held responsible for the introduction
of the contagion. The notables were panic-stricken and on the point of
flight; they were for scattering over the country, when the chief of the
Consuls, M. d’Antrechaus, a brave-hearted hero, stopped them, sternly
asking, "And the people, gentlemen, what is to become of them, if, in
this poverty-stricken town, the rich desert the place and take their
purses with them?" <span id="fr_86"></span>[6](#fn_86.md) He succeeded in
staying the panic and forced everybody to remain. The horrors of
Marseilles

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

were attributed to the free communication permitted between the
inhabitants; so D’Antrechaus tried an exactly opposite system, viz. to
isolate the citizens, to shut each household up in its own domicile. At
the same time two enormous hospitals were established, one in the
roadstead, one on the mountainside. Whoever did not go to one or the
other of these was bound to remain within doors under penalty of death.
D’Antrechaus for seven long months kept his stupendous wager, performing
the seemingly impossible task of keeping and feeding in their own houses
a population of 26,000 souls. For all this time Toulon was a sepulchre,
nothing stirring all day long after the morning distribution of bread
and the removal of the dead that followed it. The doctors most of them
perished, and all the magistrates except D’Antrechaus. The gravediggers
died to a man, and were replaced by deserters under sentence of death.
These wretches displayed a savage haste and brutality; the bodies of the
dead were thrown from the fourth story, head downwards, into the carts.
A mother had just lost her daughter, a little girl. Horrified at the
thought of seeing the poor little corpse treated in this violent
fashion, she gave the men money to carry it decently downstairs. On the
way the child came to itself and opened its eyes. She was taken upstairs
again, and recovering completely, actually became the grandmother of the
learned M. Brun, already referred to as the author of the admirable
History of the Port of Toulon.

The poor little Cadière girl was then precisely the same age as this
rescued victim of the Plague, viz. twelve, an age abounding with so many
perils for her sex. The universal closing of the churches, the
suppression of all Feasts and Holy Days (Christmas above all, so merry a
time at Toulon), all this was for the child the end of the world. She
seems never to have really recovered the shock, and the same is true of
the town. It never lost its deserted look; all was ruin and mourning, a
city of widows and orphans and crowds of desperate men. In the midst of
all, a grand, a gloomy spectre, D’Antrechaus, who had witnessed

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

the death of all he cared for, sons, brothers, and fellow-magistrates,
and who had nobly ruined himself,—so much so that he had to live at his
neighbours' tables, the poor disputing among themselves the honour of
feeding him.

The child informed her mother she would never wear the fine clothes she
had again, and they were sold. All she cared for now was to tend the
sick, and she was for ever enticing her mother to the Hospital situated
at the bottom of their street. A neighbour, a little girl of fourteen,
Laugier by name, had lost her father, and was living in great poverty
with her widowed mother. Catherine went to see her constantly, taking
her her food and clothes and everything she could. She asked her parents
to pay the expenses of apprenticing Laugier to a sempstress, and such
was her ascendency over their minds they did not refuse this heavy
outlay. Her piety, her loving little heart, made her all-powerful. Her
charity was a passion; she not only gave money, but affection as well.
She would fain have made Laugier as perfect a character as herself, and
took delight in having her near her, and often sharing her bed with her.
Both had been received among the *Daughters of St. Theresa*, a tertiary
order which the Carmelites had organised. Mlle. Cadière was the shining
light of the affiliation, and at thirteen seemed a fully trained
Carmelite Sister. She had borrowed from a Visitandine certain books of
mysticism which she devoured eagerly. The girl Laugier, at fifteen,
offered a marked contrast, showing no predilection for anything but
eating, and looking pretty. She was this, and for this reason had been
made sacristaness of the Chapel of St. Theresa,—an appointment which
gave great opportunities for familiarities with the priests. So much so
that when her behaviour earned her a well-deserved threat of expulsion
from the congregation, a higher authority, a Vicar-General, was so
indignant as to declare that, if this were done, he would lay an
interdict on the chapel (pp. 36, 37).

Both the girls shared the temperament of their native Provence, one of
excessive nervous excitability, and from very early

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

years had been subject to what were locally styled *vapours of the
womb*. But the effects were quite different in each,—to the last degree
carnal in Laugier, a greedy, indolent, violent-tempered creature, purely
cerebral in the case of the pure, gentle-minded Catherine, who as the
result of her ill-health or her vivid imagination absorbing her whole
nature, had no conception of sex whatever. "At twenty, she was like a
child of seven." All her thoughts turned to prayer and almsgiving, and
she refused to entertain the idea of marriage. The mere word set her
weeping, as if she had been asked to desert God.

Someone had lent her the Life of her Patron Saint, St. Catherine of
Genoa, and she had bought a copy of the *Château de l’Ame* (Fortress of
the Soul) of St. Theresa. Few Confessors cared to follow her in this
excursion into mysticism, and those who talked ineptly of these holy
things offended her. She could find satisfaction neither in her mother's
Confessor, a priest attached to the cathedral, nor in a Carmelite
Father, nor yet in the old Jesuit Sabatier. At sixteen she had as her
Director a priest of St. Louis, a man of high-strung piety. She spent
whole days in church, till her mother, by this time a widow and who
required her help, pious woman as he was herself, used to punish her
when she came home at last. But it was no fault of hers; she forgot
everything in her ecstatic trances. The girls of her own age looked upon
her as so saintly a being that sometimes at Mass they believed they saw
the Holy Wafer, drawn by the attraction of her love and longing
exercised, fly to her and enter in between her lips of its own accord.

Her two younger brothers entertained widely divergent sentiments towards
Girard. The elder of the two, the one at the Preachers' College, felt
for the Jesuit the antipathy characteristic of the Dominican Order. The
other, who was studying for the priesthood with the Jesuits, regarded
Girard as a saint and a great man, and had made him his peculiar hero.
Catherine loved her youngest brother, who was a weakling in health like
herself. His never-ending praises of Girard were bound to take

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

effect. One day she encountered him in the street, and seeing him so
grave and serious and yet so kind and benignant-looking, an inner voice
cried within her, *Ecce homo* (behold the man, predestined to direct
your conscience). The following Saturday she went to confess to him;
"and he told me, 'Mademoiselle, I have been expecting you.'" She was
filled with wonder and emotion, never dreaming her brother might have
warned him, but thinking the mysterious voice had spoken to him as well,
and that both shared this celestial boon of heavenly admonitions (pp.
81, 383).

Six summer months rolled by without Girard, who confessed her every
Saturday, having made any advances. The scandal attaching to the old
Jesuit Sabatier was sufficiently deterrent. It would have been his more
prudent course to be content with the more obscure attachment, and stick
to the Guiol woman, a very mature charmer it is true, but a very devil
incarnate for ardour and enterprise.

It was Charlotte herself who, in all innocence, made the first advances
toward her Father Confessor. Her brother, the hotheaded Jacobin, had
thought good to lend to a lady of his acquaintance, and circulate
through the town, a satiric piece entitled, *La Morale des Jésuites*
(Morals of the Jesuits). The latter soon got wind of it, and Sabatier
swore he would write to Court to demand a *lettre de cachet* to clap the
obnoxious Jacobin in prison. His sister is anxious and alarmed, and goes
with tears in her eyes to beg and implore Father Girard's intervention.
On her coming to him again after a short interval, he tells her,
"Courage, mademoiselle; your brother has nothing to fear; I have
arranged the matter." She was melted by his kindness, and Girard was not
slow to perceive his advantage. A man of such influence, the King's
friend, and God's favoured instrument, and who had shown himself so good
and kind! What more moving for a young and generous heart? He took his
courage in both hands, and said (but still in his usual equivocal
phraseology), "Put yourself in my hands; give yourself up wholly and
entirely

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

to me." Without a blush, in her angelic purity of mind, she promised "I
will," understanding merely that she was to have him henceforth for sole
and only director of her conscience.

What did he propose to do with the girl? Would he make her his mistress,
or his tool for charlatanry? Doubtless Girard was drawn both ways, but I
believe his inclination was to adopt the second alternative. He had a
wide choice, and could find sensual gratification elsewhere without the
same risk. Mlle. Cadière was protected by a God-fearing mother; she
lived with her relations, a married brother and the two Churchmen, in a
house of the most confined dimensions, the only means of entering which
was through the elder brother's shop. She scarcely ever went abroad
except to church. Great as was her simplicity, she divined by a sort of
instinct anything that was impure and houses of a dangerous character. A
band of women, penitents of the Jesuit Fathers, were fond of meeting at
the top of a certain house, where they indulged in little gormandisings
and foolishness of other sorts, shouting in their Provençal dialect,
"Long live the Jesuiticals!" A neighbour, disturbed by the noise, came
on the scene and surprised them lying flat on their bellies (p. 56),
singing and eating fritters,—the expenses, it was said, being all
defrayed from the alms-box. Mlle. Cadière was invited to join this
coterie, but was disgusted by what she saw, and never came again.

She was only open to attack on the spiritual side, and Girard's designs
seemed limited to getting the mastery of her soul. To win her
subjection, to make her accept the doctrines of passive obedience he had
taught at Marseilles, such apparently was all he wanted. He thought
example would be more efficacious than precept, and instructed the woman
Guiol, his familiar spirit and abject servant, to carry the young saint
to that town, where Mlle. Cadière had a friend of her girlhood, a
Carmelite nun, daughter of Madame Guiol. The astute schemer pretended,
by way of inspiring her companion with confidence, that she too
experienced ecstatic stirrings of spirit, and fed her with a string

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

of ridiculous tales. She told her, for instance, how on one occasion
finding a cask of wine turned sour in her cellar, she fell to her
prayers, and instantly the wine grew good again. Another time she felt a
crown of thorns wounding her brow, but to comfort her the angels had
served up a good dinner, which she enjoyed along with Father Girard.

Charlotte secured her mother's permission to visit Marseilles with her
good friend, the excellent Madame Guiol, Madame Cadière paying expenses.
It was in the hottest month of that blazing climate, in August (1729), a
season when the whole countryside is burnt up, and offers a landscape of
bare rocks and gravel reflecting the fierce sunlight. The poor girl's
brain, parched by the heat and weakened by the fatigues of travelling,
received only too readily the sinister impressions of conventual
mortification. The most striking type of this was afforded by the
afore-mentioned Sister Rémusat, little better than a corpse already, and
who actually died shortly afterwards. Charlotte was lost in admiration
of such high perfections, while her artful companion plied her with the
alluring suggestion of following in her steps and succeeding to her
prestige.

During her temporary absence, Girard, left behind in the hot, stifling
oven of Toulon, had lamentably deteriorated. He was constantly visiting
the little Laugier girl, who also thought she had ecstasies, to
*comfort* her,—which he did so effectually that all of a sudden she
found herself enciente! When finally Mlle. Cadière came back to him all
spirituality and mystic ecstasy, Girard, whose feelings were widely
different, entirely carnal in fact and pleasure-seeking, "cast over her
a breath of desire" (pp. 6, 383). She was kindled by it, but (it is
evident) in her own peculiar fashion, in a spirit of purity, holiness,
and generosity, anxious to spare him from a fall, devoting herself to
save him to the point of being ready to die for him (September, 1729).

One of the privileges attaching to her sanctity was a gift of seeing to
the bottom of men's hearts. It had several times been her lot to
discover the secret life and private morality of her

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

confessors, and warn them of their faults,—rebukes which some of them,
astounded and disconcerted, had taken in a contrite spirit. One day
during this summer, seeing Madame Guiol on her way home, she suddenly
accosted her with the words, "Ah! bad woman, what have you been doing?"
"And she was quite right," Guiol admitted subsequently herself. "I *had*
just been doing a sinful act." What was this act? Probably the betrayal
of Laugier to Father Girard's passion. We are strongly tempted to think
so, seeing how ready she was next year to do the same with the girl
Batarelle.

Laugier, who often shared Charlotte Cadière's bed, may very likely have
made her the confidante of her happiness and described the holy man's
love-making and fatherly caresses,—surely a harsh trial for the good
child and a cause of much searching of heart. True she was thoroughly
well acquainted with Girard's great axiom, That with holy men every act
is holy. But on the other hand her innate sense of right and wrong and
all her previous upbringing compelled her to believe that an inordinate
complacency towards any created being was a mortal sin. This agonising
perplexity between two contradictory doctrines was too much for the poor
girl; she suffered fearful storms of doubt, and firmly believed herself
*possessed* of the Devil.

Here again she showed the goodness of her heart. Without humiliating
Girard, she told him she had the vision of a soul tormented by the lusts
of the flesh and in peril of mortal sin, that she felt in her an
imperative need to save this soul, to offer the Evil One victim for
victim, to acquiesce in diabolic *possession* and sacrifice herself in
lieu of the other. He raised no objection, but permitted her to be
*possessed*, but for a year only (November, 1729).

She was aware, like everybody else in the place, of the scandalous
intrigues of the old Jesuit, Father Sabatier, a reckless, insolent
transgressor, without a trace of Girard's judicious prudence. She saw
the contempt into which the Jesuits (whom she

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

counted as the pillars of the Church) could not but fall. One day she
said to Girard, "I have had a vision,—a storm-tost sea, a ship full of
souls, beaten about by the tempest of unclean thoughts, and on the deck
two Jesuit priests. I cried to the Redeemer, whom I saw in Heaven,
'Lord! save them, and drown me . . . I take all the shipwreck on
myself.' And Almighty God granted my prayer."

Never once, during the course of her trial and when Girard, now her
bitterest enemy, was seeking her death by every means, did she recur to
these visions. Never did she condescend to expound these parables, whose
meaning was so plain, her nobility of spirit shrinking from all speech
of the kind. She had vowed herself, according to her own conviction, to
certain damnation. Shall we say that, out of pride, deeming herself
virtually dead and unaffected by carnal emotions, she defied the
uncleanness the Demon was staining the man of God with. One fact is
beyond doubt, she had no precise knowledge of sensual concerns, that in
all this mystery she foresaw nothing but pain and demoniac tortures.
Girard was cold and cruel, utterly unworthy of such devotion. Instead of
being melted, he played on her credulity by means of an ignoble trick.
He slipped into the box where she kept her papers one in which God
informed her that for her sake He would in very deed save the ship. But
the wily priest took care not to leave this ridiculous document there;
by repeated study of it she might have discovered it was a forgery. The
same angel that had brought the paper carried it off again next day.

With the same want of proper feeling Girard, seeing her agitated and
unable to pray, gave her unconditional leave, without a thought of
possible consequences, to communicate as often as she chose, every day,
in different churches. The result was to make her worse; bursting with
the Demon already, she was but setting the two enemies side by side
within her distracted body, where they fought an evenly matched battle.
She felt as if she must die under the horrid strain; she fell in a dead

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

faint, remaining in this condition for several hours. By December she
hardly left the house at all, being indeed pretty much confined to her
bed.

Girard had only too good excuses for visiting her, and he observed
considerable prudence, always getting her young brother to conduct him
to her room, at any rate as far as the door. The sick-room was at the
top of the house, and the girl's mother always remained discreetly in
the shop downstairs. He could be alone with her as much as he pleased,
and if he chose might turn the key in the lock. By this time she was
very ill, and he treated her like a child, leaning forward a little over
the head of the bed, taking her face between his hands and kissing her
as a father might,—a caress which she invariably received with respect
and affectionate gratitude.

Pure as she was, she was intensely sensitive. The slightest contact,
which another girl would never have noticed, produced a condition of
unconsciousness,—a mere touch near the bosom was enough. Girard observed
the fact, and it suggested bad thoughts. He threw her at will into this
sort of sleep, without her entertaining a thought of stopping him. Her
confidence was complete; her only feeling was one of reluctance and
something of shame to take such freedoms with so holy a man and waste so
much of his precious time. His visits grew longer and longer, and the
result to be foreseen soon followed. The poor girl, ill as she was,
intoxicated Girard beyond all power or self-control. Once, on awaking,
she found herself in a highly ridiculous and highly indecent posture;
another time she caught him caressing her person.

She blushed, groaned, remonstrated. But he told her with the utmost
effrontery, "I am your master, your God. . . . You are bound to endure
all things in the name of obedience." Towards Christmas, in the festal
season, he laid aside his last scruples. On waking she exclaimed, "Great
God! how I have suffered!"

"I am sure you have, poor child!" he answered in a tone of pity.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Henceforth she
complained less, but was never able to account to herself for what she
felt in her sleep. <span id="fr_87"></span>[7](#fn_87.md)

Girard understood better, but not without terror, what he had done. In
January or February an only too significant sign warned him she was with
child. To cap his difficulties, Laugier also found herself in the same
condition. The religious meetings and picnics, so to speak, above
mentioned, accompanied as they were by a somewhat indiscreet indulgence
in the cheap but seductive wine of the country, had been followed
primarily by a state of mental excitation naturally to be expected among
so inflammable a race, by a condition of contagious ecstasy. With the
more cunning and experienced it was all pretence; but with Laugier, a
young girl of a sanguine and headstrong temperament, the ecstasy was
real. She exhibited in her little room at home veritable excesses of
delirium and swooning fits, particularly when Father Girard came to see
her. Her pregnancy began a little after that of Charlotte Cadière, no
doubt about the time of the Twelfth Night celebrations. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[8](#fn_88.md)

The danger was imminent. The girls did not live in a desert; they were
not buried in a convent, where everybody was concerned to hush the
matter up, but in the glaring light of an inhabited quarter,—Laugier
surrounded by inquisitive friends and neighbours of her own sex, Cadière
in the bosom of her own family. Her brother, the Jacobin, began to look
suspiciously on the lengthy visits her confessor paid her. One day he
insisted on staying by her, when Girard arrived; but the latter put him
out of the room, and his mother indignantly turned her son out of the
house.

Things were ripening for an explosion. No doubt but the young man, so
harshly treated, driven from home, bursting with resentment, would go to
complain loudly to his masters, the Preaching Fathers. The latter, quick
to seize so excellent an

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

opportunity, would hasten to repeat the scandal, and set to work
surreptitiously to rouse the town against the Jesuit. This latter took a
sudden and extraordinary resolution, to retaliate by a bold stroke and
save his skin by crime. The man of pleasure was turned into a man of
sin.

He knew his victim intimately. He had seen on her person the traces left
by the scrofulous sores she had suffered from as a child. These do not
heal cleanly like an incised wound, the skin always remains reddened at
the spot, exceptionally thin and tender. Such marks she had on her feet,
and another in a sensitive, dangerous place, just under the breast. He
conceived the devilish idea of reopening these wounds, and giving them
out as stigmata, like those of St. Francis and other saints had received
from Heaven, holy men who, aspiring to *imitation* of the Crucified and
complete conformity with His blessed body, came to bear the mark of the
nails and of the lance-thrust in the side. Were not the Jesuits in
despair at having nothing to offer in opposition to the miracles of the
Jansenists? Girard felt sure of delighted acceptation of so unexpected a
miracle, and he could hardly fail to be supported by the members of his
own order and their house at Toulon. One, the old Sabatier, was ready to
believe anything; he had already been Charlotte's confessor, and the
fact had redounded to his honour. Another, Father Grignet, was a pious
fool, who would see whatever he was told to. If the Carmelite Fathers
thought good to entertain any doubts, why, they should have a hint from
such high quarters that they would deem it prudent to keep these to
themselves. Even the Jacobin Cadière, hitherto his persistent and
jealous enemy, would find it best to change his attitude, and credit a
circumstance that would redound so much to the glory of his family and
constitute him the brother of a saint.

"But surely," it will be objected, "the thing may be explained on
natural grounds. Countless examples, perfectly well authenticated, are
known of genuine stigmata." <span id="fr_89"></span>[9](#fn_89.md)

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

Probability points the other way. Directly she noticed what had
occurred, she was vexed and ashamed, fearing Girard would be annoyed at
this revival of her childish complaint. She hurried to consult a
neighbour, a Madame Truc, who dabbled in medicine, and bought of her
(pretending it was for her young brother) an ointment that cauterised
the wounds.

What method did the cruel priest employ to make the wounds? Did he use
his nails? did he resort to a small knife he always had with him? Or
else did he draw the blood to the surface in the first instance, as he
undoubtedly did afterwards, by vigorous sucking? The victim was
unconscious, but not insensible to pain; there cannot be a doubt she
felt the pangs in her sleep.

She would have deemed it a deadly sin not to tell Girard everything, and
however much afraid of displeasing and disgusting her friend, she
informed him of the facts. He looked, saw, and began the comedy he had
resolved to play, reproaching her for wishing to get cured and so
opposing the will of God. "’Tis the celestial stigmata," he cried, and
dropping on his knees, fell to kissing the wounds on the girl's feet.
For her part, she crosses herself, bows to the earth, cannot credit the
thing. Girard is only the more earnest and scolds her for her
incredulity; then he makes her show him her side and is lost in
admiration of the wound there. "I, too, am marked," he tells her, "but
my stigmata are eternal."

Thus is she constrained to believe herself a living miracle. What helped
her to acquiesce in so strange a marvel was the circumstance that Sister
Rémusat had just died. She had seen her in glory, and her heart borne
aloft by angels. Who was to be her successor on earth? Who was to
inherit the sublime gifts that had been hers, the celestial privileges
she had been so richly endowed with? Girard offered Charlotte Cadière
this succession, and corrupted her by appealing to her pride.

Henceforth she was a changed woman. In a spirit of vainglory she
sanctified all she experienced in the way of bodily

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

derangements. Repulsions and shudderings natural to pregnancy, but the
meaning of which she utterly failed to grasp, she put down to violent
activities of the Spirit within her. The first day of Lent, being at
table with her family, she suddenly beholds the Lord. "I would fain lead
you to the Desert," he tells her; "to have you share in the ineffable
ardours of the Forty Days, to have you share in my pain and agony. . .
." The vision left her trembling, afraid to think of the sufferings she
must undergo. But she, and she only, can be sacrifice in herself for a
whole world of sinners. She dreams of blood, sees nothing but blood,
beholds Jesus as it were a sieve distilling blood. She spat blood
herself, and lost still more in another way. But simultaneously her
nature seemed transformed, and the more she suffered, the more she began
to feel the pricks of love. On the twentieth day of Lent she sees her
own name joined with Girard's. Then at last pride, stirred and
stimulated under the new feeling that had come over her, pride teaches
her comprehension of the *especial domination* Mary (Womanhood) has over
God.

She knows *how much the angel is* inferior to the least and lowliest
saint, whether male or female. She sees the palace of the Almighty's
glory, and is joined in union with the Lamb of God! . . . To cap her
illusion, she feels herself lifted from the ground, rises several feet
in the air. She can scarce believe it, but a credible witness, Mlle.
Gravier, assures her of the fact. All the neighbours come to marvel and
adore, Girard bringing with him his colleague Grignet, who drops on his
knees and weeps for joy.

Not venturing to see her every day at home, Girard would have her pay
frequent visits to the Church of the Jesuit Fathers. Thither she would
drag her feeble limbs at one o'clock, after the morning services were
over, during the dinner hour. No one was in the building at that time,
and Girard gave himself up, before the altar, in front of the cross, to
transports which the abominable sacrilege only made more ardent. Did his
victim feel no scruples? Can she really have been hoodwinked? Her
conscience

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

would seem, with all her exalted enthusiasm, which was still sincere and
genuine enough, to have already grown somewhat dulled and darkened.
Underlying the bleeding stigmata, the cruel favours of the celestial
bridegroom, she began to find mysterious compensations. Her swoons were
blissful periods, in which she declared she enjoyed agonies of ineffable
delight and a mystic flood of grace, culminating "at last in perfect and
complete consent" (p. 425).

At first she was surprised and agitated at these novel experiences, and
spoke of them to Madame Guiol. But the latter only smiled, telling her
she was a little fool to make so much of nothing, and adding cynically
that she felt just the same things herself.

Thus did these faithless friends do their best to corrupt a young girl
of great natural goodness, and whose belated senses only awoke at last
under the odious, overmastering constraint of religious authority
misapplied.

Two things stir our sympathy in her pious dreams. The first is the pure
and holy ideal she formed in her own mind of a union of faithful hearts,
firmly believing she saw the name of Girard and her own united together
for all eternity in the Book of Life. Another touching feature is the
way her kind heart, her pretty childish ways, show through all her
aberrations. On Palm Sunday, seeing all assembled round the merry
domestic board, she wept for three hours without stopping to think that
"on the same day nobody invited Jesus to dinner."

Nearly all through Lent she was all but unable to eat, her stomach
rejecting even the little food she did take. During the last fortnight
of the time she fasted rigorously, and reached the last degree of
weakness. Will it be believed that Girard, far from leaving the dying
girl to breathe her last breath in peace, actually began to practise
fresh violence upon her? He had prevented her wounds from closing; and
now a new one made its appearance in her right side. Finally, on Good
Friday, to crown the cruel farce, he made her wear a crown of iron wire,
which,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

piercing her forehead, set drops of blood coursing down her face. It was
all done with hardly an attempt at secrecy. First of all he cut off her
long hair, which he carried away with him. The crown he had ordered of a
certain Bitard, a tradesman of the port, who made bird-cages. She never
showed herself to those who came to see her wearing this crown; only the
effects were visible, the drops of blood staining her face red. The
marks of these were imprinted on napkins, and the *Veronicas* thus
manufactured were taken away by Girard to be presented no doubt to pious
clients of his.

The girl's mother was involved in spite of herself in the imposture.
Nevertheless she began to be afraid of Father Girard, becoming more and
more convinced the man was capable of anything, while someone (very
likely Madame Guiol), very much in his secrets, had told her that, if
she said one word, her daughter would not have twenty-four hours to
live.

As for Charlotte herself, she never spoke anything but the truth on this
point. In the account she dictated of the events of this Lenten season
she says expressly it was a crown with sharp points, which was pressed
down on her head, and so caused the bleeding.

Nor did she make any concealment where the little crosses she was in the
habit of giving her visitors came from. According to a pattern Girard
supplied her with, she ordered these from one of her relatives, a
carpenter in the Arsenal.

She lay, on Good Friday, for four-and-twenty hours in a swoon (which
they called an ecstasy), given up to Girard's tender mercies, and
various debilitating and dangerous practices on his part. Already he saw
this saint and martyr, this miraculous and transfigured being, showing
more and more evident marks of pregnancy. He desired, yet feared, the
violent solution of the difficulty by means of abortion. This he tried
to provoke by a daily administration of perilous potions and certain
reddish-brown powders.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

Her death would have been most satisfactory to him, and the best
solution of his embarrassments. Failing this, he would like to have
removed her from her mother's influence, and buried her in a convent. He
was well acquainted with these establishments, and like Picart (*see
above in the Louviers affair*), with what adroitness and discretion
things of the sort are hushed up within their walls! He wanted to send
her either to the Carthusian nunnery of Prémole, or to the house of St.
Claire of Ollioules. He even broached the subject on Good Friday but she
seemed so feeble they dared not let her leave her bed. Eventually, four
days after Easter, Girard being present in her bedroom, she had a
painful evacuation, and was suddenly relieved of a heavy lump of what
appeared to be coagulated blood. Girard took up the vessel, went to the
window, and carefully examined it. But the girl, who had no suspicions
about what had occurred, called the serving-maid, and gave her the
vessel to empty. "What foolish rashness!" Girard could not help
exclaiming, and he was imprudent enough to repeat the same remark again
afterwards (pp. 54, 388, etc.).

We do not possess equally precise details with regard to Laugier's
miscarriage. She first noticed the fact of her pregnancy during this
same Lent, having previously experienced strange convulsions and the
beginnings of stigmata of a ludicrous sort, one being a small wound she
had given herself with a pair of scissors when working at her trade as a
seamstress, the other an open cutaneous sore in the side (p. 38).
Suddenly her pious ecstasies turned into blasphemous despair. She spat
on the crucifix; she cried out against Girard, screaming, "Where is he,
that devilish father, who has brought me to this pass? . . . It was easy
enough to abuse a poor girl of twenty-two! . . . Where is he? He should
come here, and not leave me in the lurch like this." The women about her
were themselves Girard's mistresses. They went in search of him, but he
was afraid to face the angry transports of the girl he had betrayed.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The good dames,
whose interest it was to minimise the scandal, could surely find some
means of settling the matter quietly without his interfering.

Was Girard a wizard, as was alleged at a later stage? Really the
hypothesis would seem almost credible when we see how easily the man,
without being either young or handsome, had fascinated so many female
hearts. But strangest of all was the fact that, after compromising
himself so deeply, he could still defy public opinion. For the time
being he seemed to have bewitched the whole town.

As a matter of fact, the Jesuits were recognised as being immensely
powerful, so that no one cared to join issue with them. It was even
deemed a trifle dangerous to speak ill of them in whispers. The main
body of ecclesiastics consisted of comparatively insignificant monks
belonging to Mendicant Orders, possessing neither influential
connections nor high-placed protectors. Even the Carmelites, for all
their jealousy and the chagrin they felt at losing Charlotte Cadière,
even they said nothing. The girl's brother, the young Jacobin, moved by
his mother's scared remonstrances, fell back on measures of politic
circumspection, made friends with Girard, and eventually became his
creature as completely as the other brother had done,—going so far even
as to second him in carrying out an extraordinary manœuvre calculated to
foster a belief that Girard was possessed of the gift of prophecy.

 

Any small opposition he had to fear was from the very individual he
seemed to have the most completely subjugated. Charlotte, though still
his obedient servant, yet began to exhibit some faint signs of an
independence soon to assert itself. On April 30th, during a country
expedition which Girard had politely organised for his lady friends, and
to which, in company with Madame Guiol, he sent his band of young
devotees, Charlotte Cadière fell into a state of profound reverie. Moved
by the beauties of springtide, so especially delightful in these parts,
she

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

lifted up her heart to God, declaring with an accent of genuine piety,
"You only, my Lord and Saviour! . . . I want no one but you only! . . .
Your angels cannot content me." Then presently, one of her companions,
and a very light-hearted young woman, having in Provençal fashion hung a
little tambourine round her neck, Charlotte did as the rest did, romped,
danced, threw a rug round her by way of girdle, played the strolling
gipsy, and generally indulged in a hundred innocent frivolities.

She was strangely moved. In May she got her mother's leave to make a
journey to La Sainte-Baume to visit the church of the Magdalene, the
saint *par excellence* of penitent young women. Girard allowed her to
go, but only under escort of two trusty emissaries to look after her,
viz. Guiol and Reboul. On the road, however, though still falling
occasionally into the old ecstasies, she was evidently grown weary of
being the passive instrument of the fierce spirit (infernal or divine)
which troubled her peace. The termination of her year of diabolical
*possession* was now approaching; and, indeed, she appeared to have
regained her emancipation already. Once outside the gloomy streets of
her native Toulon, which cast so strong a spell over her spirit, and
restored to the free air of the country, to the sights of Nature and the
light of the sun, the captive recovered her own soul, made head against
the alien soul indwelling in her, dared to be herself and exercise her
own free will. This was far from edifying the two spies Girard had set
over her, who immediately on returning from this brief expedition (from
May 17th to 22nd) warned him of the alteration. This he was able to
verify for himself; for she struggled now against the state of ecstasy,
reluctant it would seem to obey any impulses but those of reason and
common sense.

He had supposed her his, by his personal fascination, by his authority
as a priest, last but not least by the fact of possession and carnal
habit. Now he found his hold was gone; the tender soul, which after all
had not so much been conquered as surreptitiously

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

surprised, was reasserting its natural bent. This wounded him to the
quick; his old trade of schoolmaster, the despotism he had wielded over
children whom he could chastise at will, and subsequently over nuns not
less at his mercy, had left deep in his heart a harsh, jealous love of
domineering. He made up his mind to regain his power over Charlotte
Cadière at any cost, and punish her first essay at revolt,—if revolt it
can be called, this timid aspiration of a downtrodden soul to lift its
head again.

On May 22nd, when, as her habit was, she confessed to him, he refused
her absolution, saying she was so much to blame he must next day inflict
a great, a very great penance on her.

What penance was it to be? Fasting? But she was already weak and
exhausted. Long prayers, another usual form of penance, were not
approved of by the Quietists; in fact, directors holding their tenets
actually forbade them. There only remained corporal punishment, the
discipline of the rod. This was very generally, indeed lavishly
employed—in convents no less than in schools, being short, sharp, and
easy of application. In rude and simple times the church itself was
often the scene of such executions; and we see in the old *Fabliaux*,
those naïve records of mediæval manners and customs, how the priest,
after confessing husband and wife, would proceed without more ado on the
spot, behind the confessional box, to lay the lash across their backs.
Schoolboys, monks, nuns, all were chastised in the same homely
fashion. <span id="fr_90"></span>[10](#fn_90.md)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

Girard felt sure a girl like Charlotte Cadière, unused to humiliation,
and modest in the highest degree (all she had undergone was in her sleep
and unconsciously to herself ), would suffer excessively from a shameful
chastisement, which would infallibly break her spirit and destroy
whatever spring was yet left her. She was bound perhaps to be even more
deeply mortified than another would have been, to suffer (if the truth
must be told) in her vanity as a woman. She had borne so much, fasted so
rigorously!—and then her miscarriage had come as a climax. Her body,
naturally delicate, seemed little better than a shadow. The more certain
was she to dread letting any part of her poor emaciated, marred, and
aching person be seen. Her legs were swollen, and she suffered from a
little infirmity of the flesh that could not but humiliate her
extremely.

We have not the heart to relate in detail what followed. It may be read
in the three depositions she made, so naïve and so manifestly sincere.
Not being under oath, she makes it a duty to declare even matters which
it was for her own interest to conceal, even such as might be most
cruelly abused to her own disadvantage.

*First Deposition, made in reply to unexpected questioning before the
Ecclesiastical Judge*, who was sent to pay her a surprise visit; here we
have throughout words springing naturally from a young and innocent
heart, speaking as in face of God Himself.

*Second Deposition, before the King*, that is to say, before the
magistrate representing him, the King's "Lieutenant Civil and Military"
at Toulon.

*Third and Last Deposition, before the High Court of the Parlement of
Aix* (pp. 5, 12, 384 of the "Trial" folio).

Observe that all three, in remarkably close agreement, are printed at
Aix, under the eyes of her enemies, in a volume, the intention of which
is (as I shall prove later on) to minimise Girard's criminality and draw
the reader's mind to every circumstance unfavourable to Charlotte
Cadière. And yet whoever

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

issued it has found himself unable to help giving these depositions,
which tell so crushingly against the man he favours.

With monstrous inconsistency, Girard first terrorised the unhappy child,
then with a brusque change of front, shamefully and barbarously took
foul advantage of her panic fear. <span id="fr_91"></span>[11](#fn_91.md)

There is no question here of love as an extenuating circumstance. Far
from it; he did not love her, which adds to the horror of it all. We
have seen the cruel drugs he administered, and shall presently see how
he abandoned her in her need. He begrudged her  her superiority to the
other degraded women he had to do with; he hated her for having (how
innocently!) tempted him and compromised his reputation. Above all, he
could never forgive her for keeping her soul her own. His only wish was
to break her spirit; yet he was filled with hope to hear her say, "I
feel I shall not live long,"—a phrase she often made use of now.
Scoundrel and libertine!—showering dishonouring kisses on her poor
broken body, longing she were well dead all the while!

How did he account to her for these atrocious contrasts of caresses and
cruelty? Did he represent them as trials of her patience and tests of
obedience? Or did he appeal boldly to the real basis, the fundamental
doctrine, of Molinos’ teaching, "That it is by dint of sinning sin must
be killed?" Did she believe it all? Did she not realise at all that
these pretensions of justice, expiation, penitence, were nothing more
nor less than a cloak for licentiousness?

After a while she preferred not to realise it, in the extraordinary
crisis of moral deterioration she underwent after May 23rd, and in June,
under the effects of the hot, enervating time of year. She owned him her
master, partly from fear of him, partly out of a strange, slavish sort
of love, persisting in the farce of receiving at his hands day by day
light penances for her

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

lapses. Girard treated her very cavalierly, not even taking the trouble
to hide from her his relations with other women. He was for sending her
to a convent. Meantime she was his plaything; and knowing this, she yet
suffered him to have his will of her. Weaker and weaker, more and more
debilitated by repeated shame and suffering, a prey to ever-increasing
melancholy, she had little left to live for, and would often repeat the
words (no ill tidings to Girard), "Ah! I feel, I feel I shall die before
very long!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[231:1](sor24.htm#fr_81.md) Dealing with a matter
which has been the subject of so much controversy, I shall quote
freely,—especially from a folio volume entitled, *Procédure du P. Girard
et de la Cadière*, Aix, 1733. To avoid a multiplicity of footnotes, I
merely give in my text the page of the book in question.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[232:2](sor24.htm#fr_82.md) Bibliothèque de la
ville de Toulon, *Pièces et Chansons manuscrites*, 1 vol. folio,—an
extremely curious collection.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[232:3](sor24.htm#fr_83.md) That is the tongue of
Northern and Central France, descended from the old Langue d’Oïl, as
contrasted with the Langue d’Oc, still spoken in the South. The latter
is often called a *patois*, but it is really a distinct language.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[233:1](sor24.htm#fr_84.md) See the *Trial;* also
Swift, *Mechanical Operations of the Spirit*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[235:5](sor24.htm#fr_85.md) See an excellent MS.
dissertation by M. Brun.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[237:6](sor24.htm#fr_86.md) See M. d’Antrechaus’
book, and the excellent little pamphlet by M. Gustave Lambert.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[247:7](sor24.htm#fr_87.md) pp. 5, 12, etc.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[247:8](sor24.htm#fr_88.md) pp. 37, 113.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[248:9](sor24.htm#fr_89.md) See in particular A.
Maury, *Magie*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[256:10](sor24.htm#fr_90.md) The Dauphin himself
was whipped cruelly. The young Boufflers (a boy of fifteen) died of
chagrin at having suffered the same indignity (Saint-Simon). The
prioress of the Abbaye-aux-Bois, threatened by her superior "*with
disciplinary chastisement*," appealed to the King; for the credit of the
convent she was relieved of the disgrace of a public whipping, but sent
back to the superior for proper measures to be taken, and doubtless the
punishment was duly inflicted on the quiet. By degrees it came to be
recognised more and more how dangerous and immoral the practice was.
Fear and shame led to degrading supplications and unworthy compromises.
This had come out only too clearly in the famous trial which under the
Emperor Joseph revealed the secret places of the Jesuit colleges, the
report of which trial was reprinted later under Joseph II., and again in
our own day.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[258:11](sor24.htm#fr_91.md) This is put in Greek
in the book of Depositions, and falsified twice over, on p. 6 and again
on p. 389, in order to extenuate Girard's guilt. The most exact version
here is that of her deposition before the "Lieutenant-Criminal" of
Toulon, pp. 12 *sqq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. Charlotte Cadière at the Convent of Ollioules](sor25.md)
