[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste02)  [Next](ste04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

## CONTENTS

##### OF THE

# CHAPTERS

### THE FIRST BOOK

#### CHAPTER I

*THE Introduction; An account of the whole Work, of the extent and
general Order of it*.

#### CHAPTER II

*A general account of Noah's Flood. A computation what quantity of Water
would be necessary for the making of it; That the common Opinion and
Explication of that Flood is not intelligible*.

#### CHAPTER III

*All Evasions concerning the Flood answered; That there was no new
Creation of Waters at the Deluge; and that it was not particular or
National, but extended throughout the whole Earth. A prelude and
preparation to the true account and explication of it. The method of the
first Book*.

#### CHAPTER IV

*That the Earth and Mankind had an Original, and were not from Eternity;
Prov’d against Aristotle. The first proposition of our Theory laid down,
viz. That the Ante-diluvian Earth was of a different Form and
Construction from the present. This is prov’d from Divine Authority, and
from the Nature and Form of the Chaos, out of which the Earth was made*.

#### CHAPTER V

*The Second Proposition is laid down, viz. That* the face of the Earth
before the Deluge was smooth, regular and uniform; without Mountains,
and without a Sea*. The Chaos out of which the World rise is fully
examin’d, and all its motions observ’d, and by what steps it wrought it
self into an habitable World. Some things in Antiquity relating to the
first state of the Earth are interpreted, and some things in the Sacred
Writings. The Divine Art and Geometry in the construction of the first
Earth is observ’d and celebrated*.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

#### CHAPTER VI

*The Dissolution of the First Earth: The Deluge ensuing thereupon. And
the form of the present Earth rising from the Ruines of the First.*

#### CHAPTER VII

*That the Explication we have given of an Universal Deluge is not an*
IDEA *only, but an account of what really came to pass in the Earth, and
the true explication of* Noah's Flood. *An examination of* Tehom-Rabba,
*or the Great Abysse, and that by it the Sea cannot be understood, nor
the Subterraneous Waters as they are at present; What the true Notion
and Form of it was, collected from Moses and other Sacred Writers.
Observations on* Deucalion's *Deluge*.

#### CHAPTER VIII

*The particular History of* Noah's *Flood is explain’d in all the
material parts and circumstances of it, according to the preceding
Theory. Any seeming difficulties remov’d, and the whole Section
concluded with a Discourse how far the Deluge may be lookt upon as the
effect of an Ordinary Providence, and how far of an Extraordinary*.

#### CHAPTER IX

*The Second Part of this Discourse, proving the same Theory from the
Effects and the present Form of the Earth. First, by a general Scheme of
what is most remarkable in this Globe, and then by a more particular
induction; beginning with an account of Subterraneous Cavities and
Subterraneous Waters*.

#### CHAPTER X

*Concerning the Chanel of the Sea, and the Original of it; The causes of
its irregular form and unequal depths: As also of the Original of
Islands, their situation, and other properties*.

#### CHAPTER XI

*Concerning the Mountains of the Earth, their greatness and irregular
Form, their Situation, Causes and Origin*.

#### CHAPTER XII

*A short review of what hath been already treated of, and in what
manner. All methods, whether Philosophical or Theological, that have
been offer’d by others for the explication of the Form of the Earth, are
examin’d and refuted. A conjecture concerning the other Planets, their
Natural Form and State compar’d with ours; Especially concerning*
Jupiter *and* Saturn.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### THE SECOND BOOK

#### CHAPTER I

*THE Introduction and Contents of the Second Book. The general state of
the Primæval Earth, and of Paradise*.

#### CHAPTER II

*The great change of the World since the Flood from what it was in the
first Ages. The Earth under its present Form could not be Paradisiacal,
nor any part of it*.

#### CHAPTER III

*The Original differences of the Primitive Earth from the present
Post-diluvian. The three Characters of* Paradise *and the Golden Age
found in the Primitive Earth. A particular explication of each
Character*.

#### CHAPTER IV

*A Digression, concerning the Natural Causes of Longævity. That the
Machine of an Animal consists of Springs, and which are the two
principal. The Age of the Ante-diluvians to be computed by* Solar, *not*
Lunar *Years*.

#### CHAPTER V

*Concerning the Waters of the Primitive Earth: What the state of the
Regions of the Air was then, and how all Waters proceeded from them. How
the Rivers arose, what was their Course, and how they ended. Several
things in Sacred Writ that confirm this Hydrography of the first Earth,
especially the Post-diluvian Origin of the Rain-bow*.

#### CHAPTER VI

*A Recollection and review of what hath been said concerning the
Primitive Earth, with a more full Survey of the state of the first
World, Natural and Civil, and the comparison of it with the present
World.*

#### CHAPTER VII

*Concerning the place of Paradise; It cannot be determin’d from the
Theory only, nor from Scripture only; What the sense of Antiquity was
concerning it, as to the Jews and Heathens, and especially as to the
Christian Fathers; That they generally plac’d it out of this Continent,
in the Southern Hemisphere*.

#### CHAPTER VIII

*The uses of this Theory for the illustration of Antiquity; The Chaos of
the Ancients explain’d; The inhabitability of the Torrid Zone; The
change of the Poles of the World; The Doctrine of the Mundane Egg; How*
America *was first peopled; How* Paradise *within the Circle of the
Moon*.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

#### CHAPTER IX

*A general Objection against this Theory*, *viz*. *That if there had
been such a* Primitive Earth, *as we pretend, the fame of it would have
sounded throughout all Antiquity. The Eastern and Western Learning
consider’d, the most considerable Records of both are lost; what foot
steps remain relating to this subject. The Jewish and Christian Learning
consider’d, how far lost as to this Argument, and what Notes or
Traditions remain. Lastly, How far the Sacred Writings bear witness to
it. The Providential conduct of Knowledge in the World. A Recapitulation
and state of the Theory*.

#### CHAPTER X

*Concerning the AUTHOR of NATURE*.

#### CHAPTER XI

Concerning Natural Providence. *Several misrepresentations of it, and
false methods of Contemplation; Preparatives to the true Method, and a
true representation of the Universe. The Mundane* Idea, *and the
Universal System of Providence; Several subordinate Systems, That of our
Earth and Sublunary World; The Course and Periods of it; How much of
this is already treated of, and what remains. Conclusion*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Introduction](ste04)
