[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste05)  [Next](ste07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

*All Evasions answered; That there was no new Creation of waters at the
Deluge: And that it was not particular or National, but extended
throughout the whole Earth. A prelude and preparation to the true
Account and Explication of it: The method of the first Book*.

THOUGH in the preceeding Chapter we may seem to have given a fair trial
1 to the common opinion concerning the state of the Deluge, and might
now proceed to sentence of condemnation; yet having heard of another
plea, which some have us’d in its behalf, and another way found out by
recourse to the Supream Power, to supply all defects, and to make the
whole matter intelligible, we will proceed no further till that be
consider’d; being very willing to examine whatsoever may be offer’d, in
that or any other way, for resolving that great difficulty which we have
propos’d, concerning *the quantity of water requisite for such a
Deluge*. And to this they say in short, that *God Almighty created
waters on purpose to make the Deluge, and then annihilated them again
when the Deluge was to cease*; And this, in a few words, is the whole
account of the business. This is to cut the knot when we cannot loose
it; They show us the naked arm of Omni-potency; such Arguments as these
come like lightning, one doth not know what Armour to put on against
them, for they pierce the more, the more they are resisted: We will not
therefore oppose any thing to them that is hard and stubborn, but by a
soft answer deaden their force by degrees.

And I desire to mind those persons in the first place of what St.
*Austin* hath said upon a like occasion, speaking concerning those that
disprov’d the opinion of waters above the Heavens (which we mentioned
before) by natural Reasons. "We are not, saith he, to refute those
persons, by saying, that according to the Omnipotence of God, to whom
all things are possible, we ought to believe there are waters there as
heavy as we know and feel them here below; for our business is now to
enquire according to his Scripture, how God hath constituted the Nature
of things, and not what he could do or work in these things by a miracle
of Omnipotency." I desire them to apply this to the present argument for
the first answer.

Secondly, let them consider, that *Moses* hath assign’d causes of the
Deluge; *Forty days Rain, and the disruption of the Abysse*; and speaks
nothing of a new

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

creation of water upon that occasion. Those were causes in Nature which
Providence had then dispos’d for this extraordinary effect, and those
the Divine Historian refers us to, and not to any productions out of
nothing. Besides, *Moses* makes the Deluge increase by degrees with the
Rain, and accordingly makes it cease by degrees, and that the waters
*going and returning*, as the waves and great commotions of the Sea use
to do, retied leisurely from the face of the Earth, and setled at length
in their Chanels. Now this manner of the beginning or ceasing of the
Deluge doth not at all agree with the instantaneous actions of Creation
and Annihilation.

Thirdly, let them consider, that<span class="margnote">2 Pet. 3.
6.</span> St. *Peter* hath also assign’d Causes of the Deluge; namely
the particular constitution of the Earth and Heavens before the Flood;
"by *reason whereof*, he saith, *the World that was then, perisht in a
Deluge of water*." And not by reason of a new creation of water. His
words are these, "The Heavens and the Earth were of old, consisting of
water, and by water; whereby, or by reason whereof, the World that then
was, being overflowed with water, perished."

Fourthly, they are to consider, that as we are not rashly to have
recourse to the Divine Omnipotence upon any account, so especially not
for new Creations; and least of all for the creation of new matter. The
matter of the Universe was created many Ages before the Flood, and the
Universe being full, if any more was created, then there must be as much
annihilated at the same time to make room for it; for Bodies cannot
penetrate one anothers dimensions, nor be two or more within one and the
same space. Then on the other hand, when the Deluge ceas’d, and these
waters were annihilated, so much other matter must be created again to
take up their places: And methinks they make very bold with the Deity,
when they make him do and undo, go forward and backwards by such
countermarches and retractions, as we do not willingly impute to the
wisdom of God Almighty.

Lastly, I shall not think my labour lost, if it be but acknowledg’d,
that we have so far clear’d the way in this controversie, as to have
brought it to this issue; That either there must be new waters created
on purpose to make a Deluge, or there could be no Deluge, as ’tis
vulgarly explain’d; there not being water sufficient in Nature to make a
Deluge of that kind. This, I say, is a great step, and, I think, will
satisfie all parties, at least all that are considerable; for those that
have recourse to a new Creation of waters, are of two sorts, either such
as do it out of laziness and ignorance, or such as do it out of
necessity, seeing they cannot be had otherwise; as for the first, they
are not to be valu’d or gratifi’d; and as for the second, I shall do a
thing very acceptable to them, if I free them and the argument from that
necessity, and show a way of making the Deluge fairly intelligible, and
accountable without the creation of new waters; which is the design of
this Treatise. For we do not tye this knot with an Intention to puzzle
and perplex the Argument finally with it, but the harder it is ty’d, we
shall feel the pleasure more sensibly when we come to loose it.

It may be when they are beaten from this new Creation of water, they
will say the Element of Air was chang’d into water, and that was the
great storehouse for the Deluge. Forty days Rain we allow, as Moses
does, but if they suppose any

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

other transelementation, it neither agrees with *Moses*'s Philosophy,
nor St. *Peter*'s; for then the *opening of the Abysse* was needless,
and the form and constitution of the Ante-diluvian *Heavens* and
*Earth*, which St. *Peter* refers the Deluge to, bore no part in the
work; it might have been made, in that way, indifferently under any
Heavens or Earth. Besides, they offend against St. *Austin*'s rule in
this method too; for I look upon it as no less a miracle to turn Air
into Water, than to turn Water into Wine. *Air*, I say, for Vapours
indeed are but water made volatile, but pure Air is a body of another
Species, and cannot by any compression or condensation, so far as is yet
known, be chang’d into water. And lastly, if the whole Atmosphere was
turn’d into water, ’tis very probable it would make no more than 34 foot
or thereabouts; for so much Air or Vapours as is of the same weight with
any certain quantity of water, ’tis likely, if it was chang’d into
water, would also be of the same bulk with it, or not much more: Now
according to the doctrine of the Gravitation of the Atmosphere, ’tis
found that 34 foot of water does counterbalance a proportionable
Cylinder of Air reaching to the top of the Atmosphere; and consequently,
if the whole Atmosphere was converted into water, it would make no more
than eleven or twelve yards water about the Earth; Which the cavities of
the Earth would be able in a good measure to suck up, at least this is
very inconsiderable as to our eight Oceans. And if you would change the
higher Regions into water too, what must supply the place of that Air
which you transform into water, and bring down upon the Earth? There
would be little but Fire and Æther betwixt us and the Moon, and I am
afraid it would endanger to suck down the Moon too after it. In a word,
such an explication as this, is both purely imaginary, and also very
operose, and would affect a great part of the Universe; and after all,
they would be as hard put to’t to get rid of this water, when the Deluge
was to cease, as they were at first to procure it.

Having now examin’d and answered all the pleas, from first to last, for
the vulgar Deluge, or the old way of explaining it, we should proceed
immediately to propose another method, and another ground for an
universal Deluge, were it not that an opinion hath been started by some
of late, that would in effect supplant both these methods, old and new,
and take away in a great measure the subject of the question. Some
modern Authors observing what straits they have been put to in all Ages,
to find out water enough for *Noah*'s Flood, have ventur’d upon an
expedient more brisk and bold, than any of the Ancients durst venture
upon: They say, *Noah*'s Flood was not Universal, but a National
Inundation, confin’d to *Judæa*, and those Countries thereabouts; and
consequently, there would not be so much water necessary for the cause
of it, as we have prov’d to be necessary for an Universal Deluge of that
kind. Their inference is very true, they have avoided that rock, but
they run upon another no less dangerous; to avoid an objection from
reason, they deny matter of fact, and such matter of fact as is well
attested by History, both Sacred and prophane. I believe the Authors
that set up this opinion, were not themselves satisfied with it: but
seeing insuperable difficulties in the old way, they are the more
excusable in chusing, as they thought, of two evils the less.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

But the choice, methinks, is as bad on this hand, if all things be
considered; *Moses* represents the Flood of *Noah* as an overthrow and
destruction of the whole Earth; and who can imagine, that in sixteen or
seventeen hundred years time (taking the lower Chronology) that the
Earth had then stood, mankind should be propagated no further than
*Judæa*, or some neighbouring Countries thereabouts. After the Flood,
when the World was renew’d again by eight persons, they had made a far
greater progress in *Asia*, *Europe* and *Africa*, within the same space
of years, and yet ’tis likely they were more fruitful in the first Ages
of the World, than after the Flood; and they liv’d six, seven, eight,
nine hundred years a piece, getting Sons and Daughters. Which longevity
of the first Inhabitants of the Earth seems to have been providentially
design’d for the quicker multiplication and propagation of mankind; and
mankind thereby would become so numerous within sixteen hundred years,
that there seems to me to be a greater difficulty from the multitude of
the people that would be before the Flood, than from the want of people.
For if we allow the first couple at the end of one hundred years, or of
the first Century, to have left ten pair of Breeders, which is no hard
supposition, there would arise from these, in fifteen hundred years, a
greater number than the Earth was capable of; allowing every pair to
multiply in the same decuple proportion the first pair did. But because
this would rise far beyond the capacities of this Earth, let us suppose
them to increase, in the following Centuries, in a quintuple proportion
only, or, if you will, only in a quadruple; and then the Table of the
multiplication of mankind from the Creation to the Flood, would stand
thus;

<div align="center">

|           |     |     |        |     |     |             |
|-----------|-----|-----|--------|-----|-----|-------------|
| *Century* | 1   | ..  | 10     | 9   | ..  | 655360      |
|           | 2   | ..  | 40     | 10  | ..  | 2621440     |
|           | 3   | ..  | 160    | 11  | ..  | 10485760    |
|           | 4   | ..  | 640    | 12  | ..  | 41943040    |
|           | 5   | ..  | 2560   | 13  | ..  | 167772160   |
|           | 6   | ..  | 10240  | 14  | ..  | 671088640   |
|           | 7   | ..  | 40960  | 15  | ..  | 2684354560  |
|           | 8   | ..  | 163840 | 16  | ..  | 10737418240 |

</div>

\[paragraph continues\] This product is too excessive high, if compar’d
with the present number of men upon the face of the Earth, which I think
is commonly estimated to be betwixt three and four hundred millions; and
yet this proportion of their increase seems to be low enough, if we take
one proportion for all the Centuries; for, in reality, the same measure
cannot run equally through all the Ages, but we have taken this as
moderate and reasonable betwixt the highest and the lowest; but if we
had taken only a triple proportion, it would have been sufficient (all
things consider’d) for our purpose. There are several other ways of
computing this number, and some more particular and exact than this is,
but which way soever you try, you will find the product great enough for
the extent of this Earth; and if you follow the Septuagint Chronology it
will still be far higher. I have met with three or four different
Calculations, in several Authors, of the number of mankind before the
Flood, and never met with any yet, but what exceeded the number of the
people that are at present upon the face of the Earth. So as it seems to

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

me a very groundless and forc’d conceit to imagine, that *Judæa* only,
and some parts about it in *Asia*, were stor’d with people when the
Deluge was brought upon the old World. Besides, if the Deluge was
confin’d to those Countries, I do not see but the Borderers might have
escap’d, shifting a little into the adjoining places where the Deluge
did not reach. But especially what needed so much a-do to build an Ark
to save *Noah* and his family, if he might have sav’d himself, and them,
only by retiring into some neighbouring Countrey; as *Lot* and his
family sav’d themselves, by withdrawing from *Sodom*, when the City was
to be destroyed? Had not this been a far easier thing, and more
compendious, than the great preparations he made of a large Vessel, with
Rooms for the reception and accommodation of Beasts and Birds? And now I
mention Birds, why could not they at least have flown into the next dry
Country; they might have pearch’d upon the Trees and the tops of the
Mountains by the way to have rested themselves if they were weary, for
the waters did not all of a sudden rise to the Mountains tops.

I cannot but look upon the Deluge as a much more considerable thing than
these Authors would represent it, and as a kind of dissolution of
Nature. Moses calls it a destroying of the *Earth*, as well as of
mankind, *Gen*. 6. 13. And the Bow was set in the Cloud to seal the
Covenant, *that he would destroy the Earth no more*, *Gen*. 9. 11. or
that there should be no more a Flood *to destroy the Earth*. And ’tis
said, *verse* 13. that the Covenant was made between God and the Earth,
or this frame of Nature, that it should perish no more by water. And the
Rain-bow, which was a token and pledge of this Covenant, appears not
only in *Judæa*, or some other *Asiatick* Provinces, but to all the
Regions of the Earth, who had an equal concern in it. *Moses* saith also
the Fountains of the great Abysse were burst asunder to make the Deluge,
and what means this Abysse and the bursting of it, if restrain’d to
*Judæa*, or some adjacent Countries? What appearance is there of this
disruption there more than in other places? Furthermore, <span
class="margnote">2 Epist. c. 5. 6.</span>St. *Peter* plainly implies,
that the Antediluvian Heavens and Earth perisht in the Deluge; and
opposeth the present Earth and Heavens to them, as different and of
another constitution: and saith, that these shall perish by Fire, as the
other perisht by water. So he compares the Conflagration with the
Deluge, as two general dissolutions of Nature, and one may as well say,
that the Conflagration shall be only National, and but two or three
Countries burnt in that last Fire, as to say that the Deluge was so. I
confess that discourse of St. *Peter*, concerning the several States of
the World, would sufficiently convince me, if there was nothing else,
that the Deluge was not a particular or National Inundation, but a
*mundane* change, that extended to the whole Earth, and both to the
Heavens and the Earth.

All Antiquity, we know, hath spoke of these mundane Revolutions or
Periods, that the World should be successively destroy’d by Water and
Fire; and I do not doubt but that this Deluge of *Noah*'s, which *Moses*
describes, was the first and leading instance of this kind: And
accordingly we see that after this Period, and after the Flood, the
blessing for multiplication, and for replenishing the Earth with
Inhabitants, was as solemnly pronounc’d by God Almighty, as at the first
Creation of man, *Gen*. 9. 1. with *Gen*. 1. 28. These considerations, I
think, might

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

be sufficient to give us assurance from Divine Writ of the universality
of the Deluge, and yet *Moses* affords us another argument as
demonstrative as any, when in the History of the Deluge, he saith,
[*Gen*.](errata.htm#0) 7. 19. *The waters exceedingly prevailed upon the
Earth, and all the high Hills that were under the whole Heavens were
covered*. All the high Hills, he saith, under the whole Heavens, then
quite round the Earth; and if the Mountains were cover’d quite round the
Earth, sure the Plains could not scape. But to argue with them upon
their own grounds; Let us suppose only the *Asiatick* and *Armenian*
Mountains covered with these waters, this they cannot deny; then unless
there was a miracle to keep these waters upon heaps, they would flow
throughout the Earth; for these Mountains are high enough to make them
fall every way, and make them joyn with our Seas that environ the
Continent. We cannot imagine Hills and Mountains of water to have hung
about *Judæa*, as if they were congeal’d, or a mass of water to have
stood upon the middle of the Earth like one great drop, or a trembling
jelly, and all the places about it dry and untouch’d. All liquid bodies
are diffusive; for their parts being in motion have no tye or connexion
one with another, but glide and fall off any way, as gravity and the Air
presseth them; so the surface of water doth always conform into a
Spherical convexity with the rest of the Globe of the Earth, and every
part of it falls as near to the Center as it can; wherefore when these
waters began to rise at first, long before they could swell to the
heighth of the Mountains, they would diffuse themselves every way, and
thereupon all the Valleys and Plains, and lower parts of the Earth would
be filled throughout the whole Earth, before they could rise to the tops
of the Mountains in any part of it: And the Sea would be all raised to a
considerable heighth before the Mountains could be covered. For let's
suppose, as they do, that this water fell not throughout the whole
Earth, but in some particular Country, and there made first a great
Lake; this Lake when it begun to swell would every way discharge it self
by any descents or declivities of the ground, and these issues and
derivations being once made, and supplied with new waters pushing them
forwards, would continue their course till they arriv’d at the Sea; just
as other Rivers do, for these would be but so many Rivers rising out of
this Lake, and would not be considerably deeper and higher at the
Fountain than in their progress or at the Sea. We may as well then
expect that the *Leman*-Lake, for instance, out of which the *Rhone*
runs, should swell to the tops of the *Alpes* on the one hand, and the
Mountains of *Switzerland* and *Burgundy* on the other, and then stop,
without overflowing the plainer Countries that lie beyond them; as to
suppose that this Diluvian Lake should rise to the Mountains tops in one
place, and not diffuse it self equally into all Countries about, and
upon the surface of the Sea: in proportion to its heighth and depth in
the place where it first fell or stood.

Thus much for Sacred History. The universality of the Deluge is also
attested by profane History; for the fame of it is gone through the
Earth, and there are Records or Traditions concerning it, in all parts
of this and the new-found World. <span class="margnote">*Mart*.  
*Mart*.</span>The *Americans* do acknowledge and speak of it in their
Continent, as *Acosta* witnesseth, and *Laet* in their Histories of
them. The *Chineses* have the Tradition of it, which is the farthest
part of our Continent; and the nearer and Western

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

parts of *Asia* is acknowledg’d the proper seat of it. Not to mention
*Deucalion*'s Deluge in the European parts, which no question is the
same under a disguise: So as you may trace the Deluge quite round the
Globe in profane History; and which is remarkable, every one of these
people have a tale to tell, some one way, some another, concerning the
restauration of mankind; which is an argument that they thought all
mankind destroy’d by that Deluge. In the old dispute between the
*Scythians* and the *Ægyptians* for Antiquity, which *Justin* mentions,
they refer to a former destruction of the World by Water or Fire, and
argue whether Nation first rise again, and was original to the other. So
the *Babylonians*, *Assyrians*, *Phœnicians* and others, mention the
Deluge in their stories. And we cannot without offering violence to all
Records and Authority, Divine and Humane, deny that there hath been an
universal Deluge upon the Earth; and if there was an universal Deluge,
no question it was that of *Noah*'s, and that which Moses describ’d, and
that which we treat of at present.

These considerations I think are abundantly sufficient to silence that
opinion, concerning the limitation and restriction of the Deluge to a
particular Country or Countries. It ought rather to be lookt upon as an
Evasion indeed than Opinion, seeing the Authors do not offer any
positive argument for the proof of it, but depend only upon that
negative argument, that an universal Deluge is a thing unintelligible.
This stumbling-stone we hope to take away for the future, and that men
shall not be put to that unhappy choice, either to deny matter of fact
well attested, or admit an effect, whereof they cannot see any possible
causes. And so having stated and propos’d the whole difficulty, and
try’d all ways offer’d by others, and found them ineffectual, let us now
apply our selves by degrees to unty the knot.

The excessive quantity of water is the great difficulty, and the removal
of it afterwards. Those eight Oceans lay heavy upon my thoughts, and I
cast about every way to find an expedient, or to find some way whereby
the same effect might be brought to pass with less water, and in such a
manner, that that water might afterwards conveniently be discharg’d. The
first thought that came into my mind upon that occasion, was concerning
the form of the Earth, which I thought might possibly at that time be
different from what it is at present, and might come nearer to plainness
and equality in the surface of it, and so might the more easily be
overflow’d, and the Deluge perform’d with less water. This opinion
concerning the plainness of the first Earth, I also found in Antiquity,
mention’d and refer’d to by several Interpreters in their Commentaries
upon *Genesis*, either upon occasion of the Deluge, or of that Fountain
which is said, *Gen*. 2. 6. to have watered the face of the whole Earth:
And a late eminent person, the honour of this profession for Integrity
and Learning, in his discourse concerning the *Origination of mankind*,
hath made a like judgment of the State of the Earth before the Deluge,
that the face of it was more smooth and regular than it is now. But yet
upon second thoughts, I easily see that this alone would not be
sufficient to explain the Deluge, nor to give an account of the present
form of the Earth, unequal and Mountainous as it is. ’Tis true this
would give a great advantage to the waters, and the Rains that fell for
forty days together would

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

have a great power over the Earth, being plain and smooth; but how would
these waters be dispos’d of when the Deluge ceas’d? or how could it ever
cease? Besides, what means the disruption of the great *Deep*, or the
*great Abysse*, or what answers to it upon this supposition? This was
assuredly of no less consideration than the Rains, nay I believe the
Rains were but preparatory in some measure, and that the violence and
consummation of the Deluge depended upon the disruption of the great
Abysse. Therefore I saw it necessary, to my first thought, concerning
the smoothness and plainness of the Ante-diluvian Earth, to add a
second, concerning the disruption and dissolution of it; for as it often
happens in Earthquakes, when the exteriour Earth is burst asunder, and a
great Flood of waters issues out, according to the quantity and force of
them, an Inundation is made in those parts, more or less; so I thought,
if that Abysse lay under ground and round the Earth, and we should
suppose the Earth in this manner to be broken, in several places at
once, and as it were a general dissolution made, we might suppose that
to make a general Deluge, as well as a particular dissolution often
makes a particular. But I will not anticipate here the explication we
intend to give of the universal Deluge in the following Chapters, only
by this previous intimation we may gather some hopes, it may be, that
the matter is not so desperate as the former representation might
possibly make us fancy it.

Give me leave to add farther in this place, that it hath been observ’d
by several, from the contemplation of Mountains and Rocks and
Precipices, of the Chanel of the Sea, and of Islands, and of
Subterraneous Caverns, that the surface of the Earth, or the exteriour
Region which we inhabit, hath been broke, and the parts of it
dislocated: And one might instance more particularly in several parcels
of Nature, that retain still the evident marks of fraction and ruine;
and by their present form and posture show, that they have been once in
another state and situation one to another. We shall have occasion
hereafter to give an account of these *Phænomena*, from which several
have rightly argu’d and concluded some general rupture or ruine in the
superficial parts of the Earth. But this ruine, it is true, they have
imagin’d and explain’d several ways, some thinking that it was made the
*third day* after the foundation of the Earth; when they suppose the
Chanel of the Sea to have been form’d, and Mountains and Caverns at the
same time; by a violent depression of some parts of the Earth, and an
extrusion and elevation of others to make them room. Others suppose it
to have come not all at once, but by degrees, at several times, and in
several Ages, from particular and accidental causes, as the Earth
falling in upon Fires under ground, or water eating away the lower
parts, or Vapours and Exhalations breaking out, and tearing the Earth.
’Tis true, I am not of their opinion in either of these Explications;
and we shall show at large hereafter, when we have propos’d and stated
our own Theory, how incompetent such causes are to bring the Earth into
that form and condition we now find it in. But in the mean time, we may
so far make use of these Opinions in general, as not to be startled at
this Doctrine, concerning the breaking or dissolution of the exteriour
Earth; for in all Ages the face of Nature hath provok’d men to think of
and observe such a thing. And who can do otherwise, to see the Elements
displac’d and disordered, as they seem to lie

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

at present; the heaviest and grossest bodies in the highest places, and
the liquid and volatile kept below; an huge mass of Stone or Rock rear’d
into the Air, and the water creeping at its feet; whereas this is the
more light and active body, and by the law of Nature should take place
of Rocks and Stones? So we see, by the like disorder, the Air thrown
down into Dungeons of the Earth, and the Earth got up among the Clouds;
for there are the tops of the Mountains, and under their roots in holes
and Caverns the Air is often detain’d. By what regular action of Nature
can we suppose things first produc’d in this posture and form? not to
mention how broke and torn the inward substance of the Earth is, which
of it self is an uniform mass, close and compact: but in the condition
we see it, it lies hollow in many places, with great vacuities
intercepted betwixt the portions of it; a thing which we see happens in
all ruines more or less, especially when the parts of the ruines are
great and inflexible. Then what can have more the figure and mien of a
ruine, than Crags and Rocks and Cliffs, whether upon the Sea shore, or
upon the sides of Mountains; what can be more apparently broke, than
they are; and those lesser Rocks, or great bulky Stones that lie often
scatter’d near the feet of the other, whether in the Sea, or upon the
Land, are they not manifest fragments, and pieces of those greater
masses? Besides, the posture of these Rocks, which is often leaning or
recumbent, or prostrate, shows to the eye, that they have had a fall, or
some kind of dislocation from their Natural site. And the same thing may
be observed in the Tracts and Regions of the Earth, which very seldom
for ten miles together have any regular surface or continuity one with
another, but lie high and low, and are variously inclin’d sometimes one
way, sometimes another, without any rule or order. Whereas I see no
reason but the surface of the Land should be as regular as that of the
water, in the first production of it. This I am sure of, that this
disposition of the Elements, and the parts of the Earth, outward and
inward, hath something irregular and unnatural in it, and manifestly
shews us the marks or footsteps of some kind of ruine and dissolution;
which we shall shew you, in its due place, happen’d in such a way, that
at the same time a general Flood of waters would necessarily over-run
the face of the whole Earth. And by the same fatal blow, the Earth fell
out of that regular form, wherein it was produc’d at first, into all
these irregularities which we see in its present form and composition;
so that we shall give thereby a double satisfaction to the mind, both to
shew it a fair and intelligible account of the general Deluge, how the
waters came upon the Earth, and how they return’d into their Chanels
again, and left the Earth habitable; and likewise to shew it how the
Mountains were brought forth, and the Chanel of the Sea discover'd: Flow
all those inequalities came in the body or face of the Earth, and those
empty Vaults and Caverns in its bowels; which things are no less matter
of admiration than the Flood it self.

But I must beg leave to draw a Curtain before the work for a while, and
to keep your patience a little in suspence, till materials are prepar’d,
and all things ready to represent and explain what we have propos’d. Yet
I hope in the mean time to entertain the mind with scenes no less
pleasing, though of quite another face and order: for we must now return
to the beginning of the World, and look

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

upon the first rudiments of Nature, and that dark, but fruitful womb,
out of which all things sprang, I mean the *Chaos*: For this is the
matter which we must now work upon, and it will be no unpleasing thing
to observe, how that rude mass will shoot it self into several forms,
one after another, till it comes at length to make an habitable World.
The steddy hand of Providence, which keeps all things in weight and
measure, being the invisible guide of all its motions. These motions we
must examine from first to last, to find out what was the form of the
Earth, and what was the place or situation of the Ocean, or the great
Abysse, in that first state of Nature: Which two things being
determin’d, we shall be able to make a certain judgment, what kind of
dissolution that Earth was capable of, and whether from that dissolution
an Universal Deluge would follow, with all the consequences of it.

In the mean time, for the ease and satisfaction of the Reader, we will
here mark the order and distribution of the first Book, which we divide
into three Sections; whereof the first is these three Chapters past: In
the second Section we will shew, that the Earth before the Deluge was of
a different frame and form from the present Earth; and particularly of
such a form as made it subject to a dissolution: And to such a
dissolution, as did necessarily expose it to an universal Deluge. And in
this place we shall apply our discourse particularly to the explication
of Noah's Flood, and that under all its conditions, of the height of the
waters, of their universality, of the destruction of the World by them,
and of their retiring afterwards from the Earth; and this Section will
consist of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Chapters. In the
third Section we prove the same dissolution from the effects and
consequences of it, or from the contemplation of the present face of the
Earth: And here an account is given of the Origin of Mountains, of
subterraneous Waters and Caverns, of the great Chanel of the Sea, and of
the first production of Islands; and those things are the Contents of
the Ninth, Tenth and Eleventh Chapters. Then, in the last Chapter, we
make a general review of the whole Work, and a general review of Nature;
that, by comparing them together, their full agreement and
correspondency may appear. Here several collateral arguments are given
for confirmation of the preceeding Theory, and some reflections are made
upon the state of the other Planets compar’d with the Earth. And lastly,
what accounts soever have been given by others of the present form and
irregularities of the Earth, are examin’d and shew’d insufficient. And
this seemeth to be all that is requisite upon this subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](ste07)
