[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste17)  [Next](ste19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

*The great Change of the World since the Flood, from what it was in the
first Ages. The Earth under its present form could not be Paradisiacal,
nor any part of it*.

*THE Scheme of this World passeth away*, saith an holy Author; The mode
and form, both of the Natural and Civil World, changeth continually more
or less, but most remarkably at certain Periods, when all Nature puts on
another face; as it will do at the Conflagration, and hath done already
from the time of the Deluge. We may imagine how different a prospect the
first World would make from what we see now in the present state of
things, if we consider only those generals by which we have describ’d it
in the foregoing Chapter, and what their influence would be upon mankind
and the rest of Nature. For every new state of Nature doth introduce a
new Civil Order, and a new face and Oeconomy of Humane affairs: And I am
apt to think that some two Planets, that are under the same state or
Period, do not so much differ from one another, as the same Planet doth
from it self, in different periods of its duration. We do not seem to
inhabit the same World that our first fore-fathers did, nor scarce to be
the same race of Men. Our life now is so short and vain, as if we came
into the World only to see it and leave it; by that time we begin to
understand our selves a little, and to know where we are, and how to act
our part, we must leave the stage, and give place to others as meer
Novices as we were our selves at our first entrance. And this short life
is imploy’d, in a great measure, to preserve our selves from necessity,
or diseases, or injuries of the Air, or other inconveniences; to make
one man easie, ten must work and do drudgery; The Body takes up so much
time, we have little leisure for Contemplation, or to cultivate the
mind. The Earth doth not yield us food, but with much labour and
industry, and what was her freewill offering before, or an easie
liberality can scarce now be extorted from her. Neither are the Heavens
more favourable, sometimes in one extream, sometimes in another; The Air
often impure or infectious, and, for a great part of the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

year, Nature her self seems to be sick or dead. To this vanity the
external Creation is made subject as well as Mankind, and so must
continue till the restitution of all things.

Can we imagine, in those happy Times and Places we are treating of, that
things stood in this same posture? are these the fruits of the Golden
Age and of *Paradise*, or consistent with their happiness? And the
remedies of these evils must be so universal, you cannot give them to
one place or Region of the Earth, but all must participate: For these
are things that flow from the course of the Heavens, or such general
causes as extend at once to all Nature. If there was a perpetual Spring
and perpetual Æquinox in *Paradise*, there was at the same time a
perpetual Æquinox all the Earth over; unless you place *Paradise* in the
middle of the Torrid Zone. So also the long lives of the Ante-diluvians
was an universal Effect, and must have had an universal Cause. ’Tis
true, in some single parts or Regions of the present Earth, the
Inhabitants live generally longer than in others, but do not approach in
any measure the Age of their Ante-diluvian fore-fathers; and that degree
of longævity which they have above the rest, they owe to the calmness
and tranquility of their Heavens and Air; which is but an imperfect
participation of that cause which was once Universal, and had its effect
throughout the whole Earth. And as to the fertility of this Earth,
though in some spots it be eminently more fruitful than in others, and
more delicious, yet that of the first Earth was a fertility of another
kind, being spontaneous, and extending to the production of Animals,
which cannot be without a favourable concourse from the Heavens also.

Thus much in general; We will now go over those three foremention’d
Characters more distinctly, to show by their unsuitableness to the
present state of Nature, that neither the whole Earth, as it is now, nor
any part of it, could be *Paradisiacal*. The perpetual Spring, which
belong’d to the Golden Age, and to *Paradise*, is an happiness this
present Earth cannot pretend to, nor is capable of, unless we could
transfer the Sun from the Ecliptick to the Æquator, or, which is as
easie, perswade the Earth to change its posture to the Sun. If
*Archimedes* had found a place to plant his Machines in for removing of
the Earth, all that I should have desir’d of him, would have been only
to have given it an heave at one end, and set it a little to rights
again with the Sun, that we might have enjoy’d the comfort of a
perpetual Spring, which we have lost by its dislocation ever since the
Deluge. And there being nothing more indispensably necessary to a
*Paradisiacal* state than this unity and equality of Seasons, where that
cannot be, ’tis in vain to seek for the rest of *Paradise*.

That spontaneous fruitfulness of the ground was a thing peculiar to the
primigenial soil, which was so temper’d, as made it more luxuriant at
that time than it could ever be afterwards; and as that rich temperament
was spent, so by degrees it grew less fertile. The Origin or production
of Animals out of the Earth, depended not only upon this vital
constitution of the soil at first, but also upon such a posture and
aspect of the Heavens, as favour’d, or at least permitted, Nature, to
make her best works out of this prepar’d matter, and better than could
be made in that manner, after the Flood. *Noah*, we see, had orders
given him to

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

preserve the Races of living Creatures in his Ark, when the Old World
was destroy’d, which is an argument to me, that Providence foresaw that
the Earth would not be capable to produce them under its new form; and
that, not only for want of fitness in the soil, but because of the
diversity of Seasons which were then to take place, whereby Nature would
be disturb’d in her work, and the subject to be wrought upon would not
continue long enough in the same due temper. But this part of the second
Character concerning the Original of Animals, deserves to be further
examin’d and explain’d.

The first principles of life must be tender and ductile, that they may
yield to all the motions and gentle touches of Nature; otherwise it is
not possible that they should be wrought with that curiosity, and drawn
into all those little fine threds and textures, that we see and admire
in some parts of the Bodies of Animals. And as the matter must be so
constituted at first, so it must be kept in a due temper till the work
be finisht, without any excess of heat or cold; and accordingly we see,
that Nature hath made provision in all sorts of Creatures, whether
Oviparous or Viviparous, that the first rudiments of life should be
preserv’d from all injuries of the Air, and kept in a moderate warmth.
Eggs are enclos’d in a Shell, or ffilm, and must be cherisht with an
equal and gentle heat, to begin formation and continue it, otherwise the
work miscarries: And in Viviparous Creatures, the materials of life are
safely lodg’d in the Females womb, and conserv’d in a fit temperature
’twixt heat and cold, while the Causes that Providence hath imploy’d,
are busie at work, fashioning and placing and joyning the parts, in that
due order which so wonderful a Fabrick requires.

Let us now compare these things with the birth of Animals in the
new-made World, when they first rose out of the Earth, to see what
provision could be made there for their safety and nourishment, while
they were a-making, and when newly made; And though we take all
advantages we can, and suppose both the Heavens and the Earth
favourable, a fit soil and a warm and constant temper of the Air, all
will be little enough to make this way of production feasible or
probable: But if we suppose there was then the same inconstancy of the
Heavens that is now, the same vicissitude of seasons, and the same
inequality of heat and cold, I do not think it at all possible that they
could be so form’d, or being new-form’d, preserv’d and nourisht. ’Tis
true, some little Creatures that are of short dispatch in their
formation, and find nourishment enough wheresoever they are bred, might
be produc’d and brought to perfection in this way, notwithstanding and
inequality of Seasons; because they are made all at a heat, as I may so
say, begun and ended within the compass of one Season; But the great
question is concerning the more perfect kinds of Animals, that require a
long stay in the womb, to make them capable to sustain and nourish
themselves when they first come into the World. Such Animals being big
and strong, must have a pretty hardness in their bones, and force and
firmness in their Muscles and Joynts, before they can bear their own
weight, and exercise the common motions of their body: And accordingly
we see Nature hath ordain’d for these a longer time of gestation, that
their limbs and members might have time to acquire strength and
solidity. Besides the young ones of these Animals have commonly the milk

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

of the Dam to nourish them after they are brought forth, which is a very
proper nourishment, and like to that which they had before in the womb;
and by this means their stomachs are prepar’d by degrees for courser
food: Whereas our Terrigenous Animals must have been wean’d as soon as
they were born, or as soon as they were separated from their Mother the
Earth, and therefore must be allow’d a longer time of continuing there.

These things being consider’d, we cannot in reason but suppose that,
these Terrigenous Animals were as long, or longer, a-perfecting, than
our Viviparous, and were not separated from the body of the Earth for
ten, twelve, eighteen, or more months, according as their Nature was;
and seeing in this space of time they must have suffer’d, upon the
common *Hypothesis*, all vicissitudes and variety of seasons, and great
excesses of heat and cold, which are things incompatible with the tender
principles of life and the formation of living Creatures, as we have
shown before; we may reasonably and safely conclude, that Nature had
not, when the World began, the same course she hath now, or that the
Earth was not then in its present posture and constitution: Seeing, I
say, these first spontaneous Births, which both the holy Writ, Reason,
and Antiquity seem to allow, could not be finisht and brought to
maturity, nor afterwards preserv’d and nourisht, upon any other
supposition.

Longævity is the last Character to be consider’d, and as inconsistent
with the present state of the Earth as any other. There are many things
in the story of the first Ages that seem strange, but nothing so
prodigy-like as the long lives of those Men; that their houses of Clay
should stand eight or nine hundred years and upwards, and those we build
of the hardest Stone and Marble will not now last so long. This hath
excited the curiosity of ingenious and learned men in all Ages to
enquire after the possible Causes of that longævity; and if it had been
always in conjunction with innocency of life and manners, and expir’d
when that expir’d, we might have thought it some peculiar blessing or
reward attending that; but ’twas common to good and bad, and lasted till
the Deluge, whereas mankind was degenerate long before. Amongst natural
Causes, some have imputed it to the sobriety and simplicity of their
diet and manner of living in those days, that they eat no flesh, and had
not all those provocations to gluttony which Wit and Vice have since
invented. This might have some effect, but not possibly to that degree
and measure that we speak of. There are many Monastical persons now that
live abstemiously all their lives, and yet they think an hundred years a
very great age amongst them. Others have imputed it to the excellency of
their Fruits and some unknown vertue in their Herbs and Plants in those
days; But they may as well say nothing, as say that which can neither be
prov’d nor understood. It could not be either the quantity or quality of
their food that was the cause of their long lives, for the Earth was
curst long before the Deluge, and probably by that time was more barren
and juiceless (for the generality) than ours is now; yet we do not see
that their longævity decreast at all, from the beginning of the World to
the Flood. *Methusalah* was *Noah*'s Grandfather, but one intire remove
from the Deluge, and he liv’d longer than any of his Fore-fathers. That
food that will nourish the parts and keep us in health, is also capable

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

to keep us in long life, if there be no impediments otherwise; for to
continue health is to continue life; as that fewel that is fit to raise
and nourish a flame, will preserve it as long as you please, if you add
fresh fewel, and no external causes hinder: Neither do we observe that
in those parts of the present Earth where people live longer than in
others, that there is any thing extraordinary in their food, but that
the difference is chiefly from the Air and the temperateness of the
Heavens; And if the Ante-diluvians had not enjoy’d that advantage in a
peculiar manner, and differently from what any parts of the Earth do
now, they would never have seen seven, eight, or nine hundred years go
over their heads, though they had been nourisht with *Nectar* and
*Ambrosia*.

Others have thought that the long lives of those men of the old World
proceeded from the strength of their *Stamina*, or first principles of
their bodies; which if they were now as strong in us, they think we
should still live as long as they did. This could not be the sole and
adæquate cause of their longævity, as will appear both from History and
Reason. *Shem*, who was born before the Flood, and had in his body all
the vertue of the Ante-diluvian *Stamina* and constitution, fell three
hundred years short of the age of his fore-fathers, because the greatest
part of his life was past after the Flood. That their *Stamina* were
stronger than ours are, I am very ready to believe, and that their
bodies were greater; and any race of strong men, living long in health,
would have children of a proportionably strong constitution with
themselves; but then the question is, How was this interrupted? We that
are their posterity, why do not we inherit their long lives? how was
this constitution broken at the Deluge, and how did the Stamina fail so
fast when that came? why was there so great a *Crisis* then and turn of
life, or why was that the period of their strength?

We see this longævity sunk half in half immediately after the Flood, and
after that it sunk by gentler degrees, but was still in motion and
declension till it was fixt at length, before *David*'s time, <span
class="margnote">*Ps*. 90. 10. *call’d a Psalm of* Moses.</span> in that
which path been the common standard of man's age ever since: As when
some excellent fruit is transplanted into a worse Climate and Soil, it
degenerates continually till it comes to such a degree of meanness as
suits that Air and Soil, and then it stands. That the age of Man did not
fall all on a sudden from the Ante-diluvian measure to the present, I
impute it to the remaining *Stamina* of those first Ages, and the
strength of that pristine constitution which could not wear off but by
degrees. We see the Blacks do not quit their complexion immediately by
removing into another Climate, but their posterity changeth by little
and little, and after some generations they become altogether like the
people of the Country where they are. Thus by the change of Nature that
happened at the Flood, the unhappy influence of the Air and unequal
Seasons weaken’d by degrees the innate strength of their bodies and the
vigour of the parts, which would have been capable to have lasted
several more hundreds of years, if the Heavens had continued their
course as formerly, or the Earth its position. To conclude this
particular, If any think that the Antediluvian longævity proceeded only
from the *Stamina*, or the meer strength of their bodies, and would have
been so under any constitution of the Heavens, let them resolve
themselves these Questions; first, why these *Stamina*, or this strength

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

of constitution fail’d? Secondly, why did it fail so much and so
remarkably at the Deluge? Thirdly, why in such proportions as it hath
done since the Deluge? And lastly, why it hath stood so long immovable,
and without any further diminution? Within the compass of five hundred
years they sunk from nine hundred to ninety; and in the compass of more
than three thousand years since they have not sunk ten years, or scarce
any thing at all. Who considers the reasons of these things, and the
true resolution of these questions, will be satisfi’d, that to
understand the causes of that longevity something more must be
consider’d than the make and strength of their bodies; which, though
they had been made as strong as the *Behemoth* or *Leviathan*, could not
have lasted so many Ages, if there had not been a particular concurrence
of external causes, such as the present state of Nature doth not admit
of.

By this short review of the three general Characters of *Paradise* and
the Golden Age, we may conclude how little consistent they are with the
present form and order of the Earth. Who can pretend to assign any place
or Region in this Terraqueous Globe, Island or Continent, that is
capable of these conditions, or that agrees either with the descriptions
given by the ancient Heathens of their *Paradises*, or by the Christian
Fathers of Scripture-*Paradise*. But where then, will you say, must we
look for it, if not upon this Earth? This puts us more into despair of
finding it than ever; ’tis not above nor below, in the Air or in the
subterraneous Regions: no, doubtless ’twas upon the surface of the
Earth, but of the Primitive Earth, whose form and properties as they
were different from this, so they were such as made it capable of being
truly *Paradisiacal*, both according to the fore-mentioned Characters,
and all other qualities and priviledges reasonably ascrib’d to
*Paradise*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](ste19)
