[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste14)  [Next](ste16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XII

*A short review of what hath been already treated of, and in what
manner. The several faces and Schemes under which the Earth would appear
to a Stranger, that should view it first at a distance, and then more
closely, and the Application of them to our subject. All methods,
whether Philosophical or Theological, that have been offer’d by others
for the Explication of the Form of the Earth, are examin’d and refuted.
A conjecture concerning the other Planets, their Natural Form and State
compared with ours*.

WE have finisht the Three Sections of this Book, and in this last
Chapter we will make a short review and reflection upon what hath been
hitherto treated of, and add some further confirmations of it. The
Explication of the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Universal Deluge was the first proposal and
design of this Discourse, to make that a thing credible and intelligible
to the mind of Man: And the full Explication of this drew in the whole
Theory of the Earth: Whose original we have deduc’d from its first
Source, and shew’d both what was its Primæval Form, and how it came into
its present Form. The summ of our *Hypothesis* concerning the Universal
Deluge was this; That it came not to pass, as was vulgarly believ’d, by
any excess of Rains, or any Inundation of the Sea, nor could ever be
effected by a meer abundance of Waters; unless we suppose some
dissolution of the Earth at the same time, namely when the *Great Abyss*
was broken open. And accordingly we shewed that without such a
dissolution, or if the Earth had been always in the same form it is now,
no mass of water, any where to be found in the World, could have equal’d
the height of the Mountains, or made such an universal Deluge. Secondly,
we shewed that the form of the Earth at first, and till the Deluge, was
such as made it capable and subject to a Dissolution: And thirdly, that
such a dissolution being suppos’d, the Doctrine of the universal Deluge
is very reasonable and intelligible; And not only the doctrine of the
Deluge, but the same supposition is a Key to all Nature besides, shewing
us how our Globe became Terraqueous, what was the original of Mountains,
of the Sea-chanel, of Islands, of subterraneous Cavities; Things, which
without this supposition, are as unintelligible as the universal Flood
it self. And these things reciprocally confirming one another, our
*Hypothesis* of the Deluge is arm’d both breast and back, by the causes
and by the effects.

It remains now, that, as to confirm our Explication of the Deluge, we
shew’d all other accounts that had been given of it to be ineffectual or
impossible, so to confirm our doctrine concerning the dissolution of the
Earth, and concerning the original of Mountains, Seas, and all
inequalities upon it, or within it, we must examine what causes have
been assign’d by others, or what accounts given of these things: That
seeing their defectiveness, we may have the more assurance and
satisfaction in our own method.

And in order to this, let us observe first the general forms under which
the Earth may be consider’d, or under which it doth appear accordingly
as we view it more nearly or remotely; And the first of these and the
most general is that of a *Terraqueous Globe*. If a Philosopher should
come out of another World out of curiosity to see our Earth, the first
discovery or observation he would make would be this, that it was a
Terraqueous Globe; Thus much he might observe at a great distance when
he came but near the borders of our World. This we discern in the Moon
and most of the Planets, that they are divided into Sea and Land, and
how this division came, would be his first remark and inquiry concerning
our Earth; and how also those subdivisions of Islands, or little Earths
which lie in the Water, how these were form’d, and that great Chanel
that contains them both.

The second form that the Earth appears under, is that of an uneven and
*Mountainous Globe*. When our Traveller had got below the Circle of the
Moon, he would discern the bald tops of our Mountains, and the long
ranges of them upon our Continents. We cannot from the Earth discern
Mountains and Valleys

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

in the Moon, directly, but from the motion of the light and shadows
which we see there, we easily collect that there are such inequalities:
And accordingly we suppose that our Mountains would appear at a great
distance, and the shady Valleys lying under them; and that this curious
person that came to view our Earth, would make that his second Enquiry,
how those Mountains were form’d? and how our Globe came to be so rude
and irregular? for we may justly demand how any irregularity came into
Nature, seeing all her first motions and her first forms are regular,
and whatsoever is not so is but secondary, and the consequence of some
degeneracy, or of some decay.

The third visible form of our Earth is that of *a broken Globe*; not
broken throughout, but in the outward parts and Regions of it. This, it
may be, you will say, is not a visible form; it doth not appear to the
eye, without reasoning, that the surface of the Earth is so broken.
Suppose our new Visitant had now pass’d the middle Region of the Air,
and was alighted upon the top of Pick *Teneriffe* for his first resting
place, and that sitting there he took a view of the great Rocks, the
wide Sea, and of the shores of *Africk* and *Europe*; for we'll suppose
his piercing Eye to reach so far; I will not say that at first sight he
would pronounce that the surface of this Globe was broken, unless he
knew it to be so by comparison with some other Planet like to it; but
the broken form and figure of many parts of the Rocks, and the posture
in which they lay, or great portions of them, some inclin’d, some
prostrate, some erected, would naturally lead him to that thought, that
they were a ruine; He would see also the Islands tore from the
Continents, and both the shores of the Continents and their in-land
parts in the same disorder and irregular situation. Besides, he had this
great advantage in viewing the Earth at a distance, that he could see a
whole Hemisphere together, which, as he made his approaches through the
Air, would have much what the same aspect and countenance as ’tis
represented with in the great Scheme;<span class="margnote">*Pag*. {prr.
118</span>} And if any man should accidentally hit upon that Scheme, not
knowing or thinking that it was the Earth, I believe his first thought
of it would be, that it was some great broken body, or ruin’d frame of
matter; and the original, I am sure, is more manifestly so. But we'll
leave our Strange-Philosopher to his own observations, and with him good
Guides and Interpreters in his Survey of the Earth, and that he would
make a favourable report at his return home, of our little dirty Planet.

In the mean time, let us pursue, in our own way, this Third *Idea* of
the Earth a little further, as it is a *broken Globe*. Nature I know
hath dissembled and cover’d this form as much as may be, and time hath
helpt to repair some of the old breaches, or fill them up; besides, the
changes that have been made by Art and Humane industry, by Agriculture,
Planting, and Building Towns, hath made the face of the Earth quite
another thing from what it was in its naked rudeness. As mankind is much
alter’d from its Pristine state, from what it was four thousand years
ago, or towards the first Ages after the Flood, when the Nations liv’d
in simplicity or barbarousness; So is the Earth too, and both so
disguis’d and transform’d, that if one of those Primitive Fathers should
rise from the dead, he would scarce know this to be the same World which
he liv’d in before. But to discern

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the true form of the Earth, whether intire or broken, regular or
disorder’d, we must in the first place take away all those ornaments or
additions made by Art or Nature, and view the bare carcass of the Earth,
as it hath nothing on it but Rocks and Mountains, Desarts and Fields,
and hollow Valleys, and a wide Sea. Then secondly, we must in our
imagination empty this Chanel of the Sea, take out all the Waters that
hinder the sight of it, and look upon the dry Ditch, measure the depth
and breadth of it in our mind, and observe the manner of its
construction, and in what a wild posture all the parts of it lie;
according as it hath been formerly represented. <span
class="margnote">*Chap*. 10</span>And lastly, we must take off the cover
of all Subterraneous places and deep Caverns, to see the inside of the
Earth; and lay bare the roots of Mountains, to look into those holes and
Vaults that are under them, fill’d sometimes with Fire, sometimes with
Water, and sometimes with thick Air and Vapours. The object being thus
prepar’d, we are then to look fix’dly upon it, and to pronounce what we
think of this disfigur’d mass, whether this Exteriour frame doth not
seem to be shatter’d; and whether it doth more aptly resemble a new-made
World, or the ruines of one broken. I confess when this *Idea* of the
Earth is present to my thoughts, I can no more believe that this was the
form wherein it was first produc’d, than if I had seen the Temple of
*Jerusalem* in its ruines, when defac’d and sack’d by the *Babylonians*,
I could have perswaded my self that it had never been in any other
posture, and that *Solomon* had given orders for building it so.

So much for the form of the Earth: It remains now that we examine what
causes have been assign’d by others of these irregularities in the form
of the Earth, which we explain by the dissolution of it; what accounts
any of the Ancients have given or attempted to give, how the Earth
swell’d into Mountains in certain places, and in others was deprest into
low Valleys, how the body of it was so broken, and how the Chanel of the
Sea was made. The Elements naturally lie in regular forms one above
another, and now we find them mixt, confounded and transpos’d, how comes
this disturbance and disordination in Nature? The Explications of these
things that have been given by others, may be reduc’d to two general
sorts, *Philosophical* or *Theological*, and we will try them both for
our satisfaction.

Of Philosophers none was more concern’d to give an account of such
things than *Epicurus*, both because he acknowledg’d the Origin of the
Earth to have been from a Chaos, and also admitted no causes to act in
Nature but Matter and Motion: Yet all the account we have from the
*Epicureans* of the form of the Earth, and the great inequalities that
are in it, is so slight and trivial, that me-thinks it doth not deserve
the name of a Philosophical Explication. They say that the Earth and
Water were mix’d at first, or rather the Earth was above the Water, and
as the Earth was condens’d by the heat of the Sun, and the Winds, the
Water was squeez’d out in certain places, which either it found hollow
or made so; and so was the Chanel of the Sea made. Then as for
Mountains, while some parts of the Earth shrunk and sunk in this manner,
others would not sink, and these standing still while the others fell
lower, made the Mountains. How the subterraneous Cavities were made
according to them, I do not find.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

This is all the Account that *Monsieur Gassendi* (who seems to have made
it his business, as well as his pleasure, to embellish that Philosophy)
can help us to out of the *Epicurean* Authors, how the Earth came into
this form; And he that can content himself with this, is, in my mind, of
an humour very easie to be pleas’d. Do the Sun and the Wind use to
squeaze pools of Water out of the Earth, and that in such a quantity as
to make an Ocean? They dry the Earth, and the Waters too, and rarifie
them into vapours, but I never knew them to be the causes of pressing
Water out of the Earth by condensation. Could they compress the Earth
any otherwise, than by drying it and making it hard? and in proportion,
as it was more dry, would it not the more imbibe and suck up the Water?
and how were the great Mountains of the Earth made, in the North and in
the South, where the influence of the Sun is not great? what sunk the
Earth there, and made the flesh start from the bones? But ’tis no wonder
that Epicurus should give such a mean account of the Origin of the
Earth, and the form of its parts, who did not so much as understand the
general Figure of the Body of it, that it was Spherical, or that the
Heavens encompast it round. One must have a blind love for that
Philosophy, and for the conclusions it drives at, not to see its
lameness and defects in those first and fundamental parts.

*Aristotle*, though he was not concern’d to give an account how the
Earth came into this present form, as he suppos’d it, Eternal; yet upon
another consideration he seems oblig’d to give some reason how the
Elements came into this disorder; seeing he supposeth, that, according
to the order of Nature, the Water should lie above the Earth in a
Sphere, as the Air doth above the Water, and his Fire above the Air.
This he toucheth upon in his Meteors, but so gently and fearfully, as if
he was handling hot coals. He saith the Sea is to be consider’d as the
Element, or body of Waters that belongs to this Earth, and that these
Waters change places, and the Sea is some Ages in one part of the Globe,
and some Ages in another; but that this is at such great distances of
time that there can be no memory or record of it. And he seems willing
to suppose that the Water was once all over the Earth, but that it dri’d
up in certain places, and continuing in others, it there made the Sea.

What a miserable account is this? As to his change or removal of the
Sea-chanel in several Ages, as it is without all proof or probability,
if he mean it of the Chanel of the great Ocean, so ’tis nothing to the
purpose here; for the question is not why the Chanel of the Sea is in
such a part of the Earth, rather than in another, but why there is any
such prodigious Cavity in or upon the Earth any where. And if we take
his supposition, that the Element of Water was once higher than the
Earth, and lay in a Sphere about it, then let him tell us in plain terms
how the Earth got above, or how the Cavity of the Ocean was made, and
how the Mountains rise; for this Elementary Earth which lay under the
Water, was, I suppose, equal and smooth when it lay there; and what
reason was there, that the Waters should be dri’d in one part of it,
more than another, if they were every where of an equal depth, and the
ground equal under them? It was not the Climates made any distinction,
for there is Sea towards the Poles, as well as under the Æquator; but
suppose they were dri’d up in certain places, that would

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

make no Mountains, no more than there are Mountains in our dri’d
Marches: And the places where they were not dri’d, would not therefore
become as deep and hollow as the Sea-chanel, and tear the Earth and
Rocks in pieces. If you should say that this very Elementary Earth, as
it lay under the Waters, was unequal, and was so originally, form’d into
Mountains and Valleys, and great Cavities; besides that the supposition
is altogether irrational in it self, you must suppose a prodigious mass
of Water to cover such an Earth; as much as we found requisite for the
vulgar Deluge, namely, eight Oceans; and what then is become of the
other seven? Upon the whole I do not see that either in *Epicurus*'s
way, who seems to suppose that the Waters were at first within the
Earth; nor in *Aristotle*'s way, who seems to suppose them upon the
Earth, any rational or tolerable account can be given of the present
form of the Earth.

Wherefore some modern Authors, dissatisfied, as very well they might be,
with these Explications given us by the Ancients concerning the form of
the Earth, have pitch’d upon other causes, more true indeed in their
kind, and in their degree, but that fall as much short of those effects
to which they would apply them. They say that all the irregularities of
the body of the Earth have risen from Earthquakes in particular places,
and from Torrents and Inundations, and from eruptions of Fire, or such
like causes, whereof we see some instances more or less every Age; And
these have made that havock upon the face of the Earth, and turn’d
things up-side down, raising the Earth in some places, and making great
Cavities or Chasms in others, so as to have brought it at length into
that torn, broken, and disorderly form in which we now see it.

These Authors do so far agree with us, as to acknowledge that the
present irregular form of the Earth must have proceeded from ruines and
dissolutions of one sort or other, but these ruines they make to have
been partial only, in this or in that Country, by piece-meal, and in
several Ages, and from no other causes but such as still continue to act
in Nature, namely, accidental Earthquakes and eruptions of Fires and
Waters. These causes we acknowledge as readily as they do, but not as
capable to produce so great effects as they would ascribe to them: The
surface of the Earth may be a little changed by such accidents as these,
but for the most part they rather sink the Mountains than raise new
ones: As when Houses are blown up by Mines of powder, they are not set
higher, but generally fall lower and flatter: Or suppose they do
sometimes raise an Hill, or a little Mount, what's that to the great
Mountains of our World, to those long and vast piles of Rocks and
Stones, which the Earth can scarce bear? What's that to strong-backt
*Taurus* or *Atlas*, to the *American Andes*, or to a Mountain that
reacheth from the *Pyreneans* to the *Euxine* Sea? There's as much
difference between these and those factitious Mountains they speak of,
as betwixt them and Mole-hills.

And to answer more distinctly to this opinion, as before in speaking of
Islands we distinguish’d betwixt Factitious and Original Islands, so if
you please we may distinguish here betwixt Factitious and Original
Mountains; and allowing some few, and those of the fifth or sixth
magnitude, to have risen from such accidental causes, we enquire
concerning the rest and the greatest, what was their Original?

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If we should suppose that the seven Hills upon
which *Rome* stands, came from ruines or eruptions, or any such causes,
it doth not follow that the *Alps* were made so too. And as for
Mountains, so for the Cavities of the Earth, I suppose there may be
disruptions sometimes made by Earthquakes, and holes worn by
subterraneous Fires and Waters; but what's that to the Chanel of the
*Atlantick Ocean*, or of the *Pacifick Ocean*, which is extended an
hundred and fifty degrees under the Æquator, and towards the Poles still
further. He that should derive such mighty things from no greater
causes, I should think him a very credulous Philosopher. And we are too
subject indeed to that fault of credulity in matter of Philosophizing;
Many when they have found out causes that are proper for certain effects
within such a compass, they cannot keep them there, but they will make
them do every thing for them; and extend them often to other effects of
a superiour nature or degree, which their activity can by no means reach
to. *Ætna* hath been a burning Mountain ever since and above the memory
of Man, yet it hath not destroy’d that Island, nor made any new Chanel
to the Sea, though it stands so near it. Neither is *Vesuvius* above two
or three miles distant from the Sea-side, to the best of my remembrance,
and yet in so many Ages it hath made no passage to it, neither open nor
subterraneous. ’Tis true some *Isthmus*'s have been thrown down by
Earthquakes, and some Lakes have been made in that manner, but what's
this to a Ditch nine thousand miles broad? such an one we have upon the
Earth, and of a depth that is not measurable; what proportion have these
causes to such an instance? and how many thousand Ages must be allow’d
to them to do their work, more than the Chronology of our Earth will
bear?

Besides, when were these great Earthquakes and disruptions, that did
such great execution upon the body of the Earth? was this before the
Flood or since? If before, then the old difficulty returns, how could
there be a Flood, if the Earth was in this Mountainous form before that
time? This, I think, is demonstrated impossible in the Second and Third
Chapters. If since the Flood, where were the Waters of the Earth before
these Earthquakes made a Chanel for them? Besides, where is the History
or Tradition that speaks of these strange things, and of this great
change of the Earth? hath any writ of the Origins of the *Alps*? In what
year of *Rome*, or what *Olympiad* they were born? or how they grew from
little ones? how the Earth groan’d when it brought them forth, when its
bowels were torn by the ragged Rocks? Do the Chronicles of the Nations
mention these things, or ancient fame, or ancient Fables? were they made
all at once, or in successive Ages? These causes continue still in
Nature, we have still Earthquakes and subterraneous Fires and Waters,
why should they not still operate and have the same effects? We often
hear of Cities thrown down by Earthquakes, or Countries swallow’d up,
but whoever heard of a new chain of Mountains made upon the Earth, or a
new Chanel made for the Ocean? We do not read that there hath been so
much as a new *Sinus* of the Sea ever since the memory of man: Which is
far more feasible than what they pretend. And things of this nature
being both strange and sensible, excite admiration and great attention
when they come to pass, and would certainly have been remembred or
propagated

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

in some way or other, if they had ever happen’d since the Deluge. They
have recorded the foundation of Cities and Monarchies, the appearance of
blazing-Stars, the eruptions of fiery Mountains, the most remarkable
Earthquakes and Inundations, the great Eclipses or obscurations of the
Sun, and any thing that look’d strange or prodigy-like, whether in the
Heavens or on Earth, and these which would have been the greatest
prodigies and greatest changes that ever happen’d in nature, would these
have escap’d all observation and memory of men? that's as incredible as
the things themselves are.

Lastly, to comprehend all these opinions together, both of the Ancient
and Modern Authors, they seem all to agree with us in this, *That* the
Earth was once under another form; otherwise why do they go about to
shew the causes how it came into this form. I desire then to know what
form they suppose the Earth to have been under before the Mountains were
made, the Chanel of the Sea, or subterraneous Cavities. Either they must
take that form which we have assign’d it before the Deluge, or else they
must suppose it cover’d with Water, till the Sea-chanels were made, and
the Mountains brought forth; As in that [Fig. pag.
55](ste08.htm#img_05500)<span class="margnote">*Fig*. 2. *p*.
56.</span>. And no doubt it was once in this form, both reason and the
authority of *Moses* assures us of it; and this is the Test which every
opinion must be brought to, how the Earth emerg’d out of that watery
form? and in particular, as to that opinion which we are now examining,
the question is, *how* by Earthquakes, and fiery eruptions,
subterraneous Waters, and such like causes, the body of the Earth could
be wrought from that form to this present form? And the thing is
impossible at first sight; for such causes as these could not take place
in such an Earth. As for subterraneous Waters, there could be none at
that time, for they were all above ground; and as for subterraneous
Exhalations, whether Fiery or Aery, there was no place for them neither,
for the Earth when it lay under the Water was a solid uniform mass,
compact and close united in its parts, as we have shewn before upon
several occasions; no Mines or hollow Vaults for the Vapours to be
lodg’d in, no Store-houses of Fire, nothing that could make Earthquakes,
nor any sort of ruines or eruptions: These are Engines that cannot play
but in an Earth already broken, hollow, and cavernous. Therefore the
Authors of this opinion do in effect beg the question; they assign such
causes of the present form of the Earth, as could not take place, nor
have any activity until the Earth was in this form: These causes may
contribute something to increase the rudeness and inequalities of the
Earth in certain places, but they could not be the original causes of
it: And that not only because of their disproportion to such effects,
but also because of their incapacity, or non-existence at that time when
these effects were to be wrought.

Thus much concerning the Philosophical opinions, or the natural Causes
that have been assign’d for the irregular form of this present Earth.
Let us now consider the Theological opinions, how Mountains were made at
first, and the wonderful Chanel of the Sea: And these Authors say, God
Almighty made them immediately when he made the World; and so dispatch
the business in a few words. This is a short account indeed, but we must
take heed that we do not derogate from the perfection of God, by
ascribing all things promiscuously to his

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

immediate action. I have often suggested that the first order of things
is regular and simple, according as the Divine Nature is; and continues
so till there is some degeneracy in the moral World; I have also noted
upon several occasions, especially in the *Lat. Treat. Chap*. II the
deformity and incommodiousness of the present Earth; and from these two
considerations we may reasonably infer, that the present state of the
Earth was not Original, but is a state of subjection to Vanity, wherein
it must continue till the redemption and restitution of all things.

But besides this general consideration, there are many others, both
Natural and Theological against this opinion, which the Authors of it, I
believe, will find unanswerable. <span class="margnote">2 *Ep*. *Chap*.
3. 5, 6.</span>As first, St. *Peter*'s distinction betwixt the present
Earth and the Ante-diluvian; and that in opposition to certain profane
persons, who seem to have been of the same opinion with these Authors,
namely, that the Heavens and the Earth were the same now that they had
been from the beginning, and that there had been no change in Nature,
either of late, or in former Ages; These St. Peter confutes and upbraids
them with ignorance or forgetfulness of the change that was brought upon
Nature at the Deluge, or that the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth were
of a different form and constitution from the present, whereby that
World was obnoxious to a Deluge of Water, as the present is to a Deluge
of Fire. Let these Authors put themselves in the place of those
Objectors, and see what answer they can make to the Apostle, whom I
leave to dispute the case with them. I hope they will not treat this
Epistle of St. *Peter*'s so rudely as *Didymus Alexandrinus* did, an
ancient Christian, and one of St. *Jerom*'s Masters, he was of the same
opinion with these Theological Authors, and so fierce in it, that seeing
St. *Peter*'s doctrine here to be contrary, he said this Epistle of St.
*Peter*'s was corrupted, and was not to be receiv’d into the Canon. And
all this because it taught that the Heavens and the Earth had chang’d
their form, and would do so again at the Conflagration; so as the same
World would be Triform in success of time. We acknowledge his Exposition
of St. *Peter*'s words to be very true, but what he makes an argument of
the corruption of this Epistle, is rather, in my mind, a peculiar
argument of its Divine Inspiration. In the second place, these writers
dash upon the old rock, the impossibility of explaining the Deluge; if
there were Mountains from the beginning, and the Earth then in the same
form as it is now. Thirdly, they make the state of *Paradise* as
unintelligible as that of the Deluge; For those properties that are
assign’d to *Paradise* by the Ancients, are inconsistent with the
present form of the Earth: As will appear in the Second Book. Lastly,
they must answer, and give an account of all those marks which we have
observ’d in Nature (both in this Chapter, and the Ninth, Tenth, and
Eleventh), of fractions, ruines, and dissolutions that have been on the
Earth, and which we have shewn to be inexplicable, unless we admit that
the Earth was once in another form.

These arguments being premis’d, let us now bring their opinion close to
the Test, and see in what manner these Mountains must have been made
according to them, and how the Chanel of the Sea, and all other Cavities
of the Earth. <span class="margnote">*Fig*. 2. {pr. 56</span>.}Let us to
this purpose consider the Earth again in that transient incompleat form
which it had when the Abysse encompast the whole body of it; we both
agree

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

that the Earth was once in this state, and they say that it came
immediately out of this state into its present form, there being made by
a supernatural Power a great Chanel or Ditch in one part of it, which
drew off the Waters from the rest, and the Earth which was squeez’d and
forc’d out of this Ditch made the Mountains. So there is the Chanel of
the Sea made, and the Mountains of the Earth; how the subterraneous
Cavities were made according to these Authors, I do not well know. This
I confess seems to me a very gross thought, and a way of working very
un-God-like; but however let's have patience to examine it.

And in the first place, if the Mountains were taken out of the Chanel of
the Sea, then they are equal to it, and would fill it up if they were
thrown in again. But these proportions upon examination will not agree;
for though the Mountains of the Earth be very great, yet they do not
equal by much the great Ocean. The Ocean extends to half the surface of
the Earth; and if you suppose the greatest depth of the Ocean to answer
the height of the greatest Mountains, and the middle depth to the middle
sort of Mountains, the Mountains ought to cover all the dry Land to make
them answer to all the capacity of the Ocean; whereas we suppos’d them
upon a reasonable computation to cover but the tenth part of the dry
Land; and consequently, neither they, nor the Sea-chanel, could have
been produc’d in this manner, because of their great disproportion to
one another. And the same thing appears, if we compare the Mountains
with the Abyss, which cover’d the Earth before this Chanel was made; for
this Chanel being made great enough to contain all the Abyss, the
Mountains taken out of it must also be equal to all the Abyss, but the
aggregate of the Mountains will not answer this by many degrees; for
suppose the Abyss was but half as deep as the deep Ocean, to make this
Calculus answer, all the dry Land ought to be cover’d with Mountains,
and with Mountains as high as the Ocean is deep, or doubly high to the
depth of the Abyss, because they are but upon one half of the Globe. And
this is the first argument against the reciprocal production of
Mountains and the Sea, their incongruency or disproportion.

Secondly, we are to consider that a great many Mountains of the Earth
are far distant from any Seas, as the great in-land Mountains of *Asia*
and of *Africk*, and the *Sarmatick* Mountains, and others in *Europe*,
how were these great bodies flung thorough the Air from their respective
Seas, whence they were taken, to those places where they stand? What
appearance is there in common reason, or credibility, that these huge
masses of Earth and Stone that stand in the middle of Continents, were
dug out of any Seas? We think it strange, and very deservedly, that a
little Chapel should be transported from *Palestine* to *Italy* over
Land and Sea, much more the transportation of Mount *Atlas* or *Taurus*
thorough the Air, or of a range of Mountains two or three thousand miles
long, would surely upon all accounts appear incongruous and incredible:
Besides, neither the hollow form of Mountains, nor the stony matter
whereof they commonly consist, agrees with that supposition, that they
were prest or taken out of the Chanel of the Sea.

Lastly, We are to consider that the Mountains are not barely laid upon
the Earth, as a Tomb-stone upon a Grave, nor stand as Statues do upon a
Pedestal, as this opinion seems to suppose; but they are one continu’d
substance with the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

body of the Earth, and their roots reach into the Abyss; As the Rocks by
the Sea-side go as deep as the bottom of the Sea in one continu’d mass:
And ’tis a ridiculous thing to imagine the Earth first a plain surface,
then all the Mountains set upon it, as Hay-cocks in a Field, standing
upon their fiat bottoms. There is no such common surface in Nature, nor
consequently any such super-additions, ’tis all one frame or mass, only
broken and disjoynted in the parts of it. To conclude, ’tis not only the
Mountains that make the inequalities of the Earth, or the irregularity
of its surface, every Country, every Province, every Field hath an
unequal and different situation, higher or lower, inclin’d more or less,
and sometimes one way, sometimes another, you can scarce take a miles
compass in any place where the surface of the ground continues uniform;
and can you imagine that there were Moulds or Stones brought from the
Sea-chanel to make all those inequalities? Or that Earthquakes have been
in every Country, and in every Field? The inner Veins and Lares of the
Earth are also broken as well as the surface. These must proceed from
universal causes, and all those that have been alledg’d, whether from
Philosophy or Theology, are but particular or Topical. I am fully
satisfied, in contemplation of these things, and so I think every
unprejudic’d person may be, that to such an irregular variety of
situation and construction, as we see every where in the parts of the
Earth, nothing could answer but some universal concussion or
dislocation, in the nature of a general ruine.

We have now finisht this first part of our Theory, and all that concerns
the Deluge or dissolution of the Earth; and we have not only establisht
our own *Hypothesis* by positive arguments, but also produc’d and
examin’d all suppositions that have been offer’d by others, whether
Philosophical or Theological, for the Explication of the same things; so
as nothing seems now to remain further upon this subject. For a
conclusion of all, we will consider, if you please, the rest of the
Earths, or of the Planets within our Heavens, that appertain to the same
common Sun; to see, so far as we can go by rational conjectures, if they
be not of the same Fabrick, and have undergone the like fate and forms
with our Earth. It is now acknowledg’d by the generality of Learned Men,
that the Planets are Opake bodies, and particularly our next neighbour,
the Moon, is known to be a Terraqueous Globe, consisting of Mountains
and Valleys, as our Earth does; and we have no reason to believe but
that she came into that form by a dissolution, or from like causes as
our Earth did. *Mercury* is so near the Sun, that we cannot well discern
his face, whether spotted or no, nor make a judgment of it. But as for
*Venus* and *Mars*, if the spots that be observed in them be their
Waters or their Sea, as they are in the Moon, ’tis likely They are also
Terraqueous Globes, and in much what a like form with the Moon and the
Earth, and, for ought we know, from like causes. Particularly as to
*Venus*, ’tis a remarkable passage that St. *Austin* <span
class="margnote">*De civ. Dei* *lib*. 21. *c*. 8.</span>hath preserv’d
out of *Varro*, he saith, *That about the time of the great Deluge there
was a wonderful alteration or Catastrophe happen’d to the Planet Venus,
and that she chang’d her colour, form, figure, and magnitude*. This is a
great presumption that she suffer’d her dissolution about the same time
that our Earth did. I do not know that any such thing is recorded
concerning any of the other Planets, but the body of Mars looks very
rugged, broken, and much disorder’d.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

*Saturn* and *Jupiter* deserve a distinct consideration, as having
something particular and different from the rest of the Planets.
*Saturn* is remarkable for his *Hoop* or Ring, which seems to stand off
from his body, and would strongly induce one to believe, that the
exteriour Earth of that Planet, at its dissolution, did not all fall in,
but the Polar parts sinking into the Abyss, the middle or Æquinoctial
parts still subsisted, and bore themselves up in the nature of an Arch
about the Planet, or of a Bridge, as it were, built over the Sea of
*Saturn*. Jupiter of all the Planets I take to be most intire, and in an
Ante-diluvian state; His *Fasciæ* or *Belts*, as they call them, I
should guess to be Waters, or the two frigid Zones, where his Waters
fall and make two Canals in those parts; such as we shall show to have
been in our Earth before it was broke. <span class="margnote">2 *Book*.
*c*. 9. *Fig*. 3</span>This Planet without all doubt is turn’d about its
*Axis*, otherwise how should its Four Moons be carri’d about it? And
this is also collected from the motion of that (permanent) spot that is
upon its body; which spot I take to be either a Lake, or a Chasm and
*Hiatus* into the Abysse of the Planet; that is part of the Abysse open
or uncover’d, like the Aperture we made in the Seventh Figure. <span
class="margnote">*Chap*. 6. *pag*. 67.</span>And this might either have
been left so, by Providence, at first, for some reasons fitting that
Earth, or it may have fain in afterwards, as Plato's *Atlantis*, or as
*Sodom* and *Gomorrha*, as some judgment upon part of that World.
However that be, as to the Belts of Jupiter, which are the most
remarkable *Phænomenon* of that Planet, I take them to be his Zones, and
to lie parallel with one another, and I believe also with his Æquator:
But we must first know how his Poles lie, and in what situation with the
Ecliptick, and in what Aspect to us, before such things can be certainly
determin’d. In the mean time, if we have guest aright, that *Jupiter* is
in an Ante-diluvian state, I should rather expect to find the Figure of
his Body, than of any other of the Planets, to be Oval or Oblong, such
as our Earth was before its Deluge. To conclude, seeing all the Planets
that are plac’d in this Heaven, and are the foster-children of this Sun,
seem to have some affinity one with another, and have much-what the same
countenance, and the same general *Phænomena*; It seems probable that
they rise much-what the same way, and after the like manner as our
Earth, each one from its respective Chaos; And that they had the same
Elementary Regions at first, and an exteriour Orb form’d over their
Abyss: And lastly, that every one of them hath suffer’d, or is to suffer
its Deluge, as our Earth hath done. These, I say, are probable
conjectures according to the Analogy of Reason and Nature, so far as we
can judge concerning things very remote and inaccessible.

And these things being thus, and our Theory of the Deluge, and the
Dissolution which brought it, having such a general agreement both with
our Heavens and our Earth, I think there is nothing but the uncouthness
of the thing to some mens understandings, the custom of thinking
otherwise, and the uneasiness of entring into a new sett of thoughts,
that can be a bar or hindrance to its reception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](ste16)
