[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste26)  [Next](ste28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI

### Concerning NATURAL PROVIDENCE.

*Several incroachments upon Natural Providence, or misrepresentations of
it, and false methods of Contemplation; A true method propos’d, and a
true representation of the Universe. The Mundane* Idea*, and the
Universal System of Providence; Several subordinate Systems, That of our
Earth and Sublunary World; The course and Periods of it; How much of
this is already treated of, and what remains. The Conclusion*.

WE have set bounds to Nature in the foregoing Chapter, and plac’d her
Author and Governour upon his Throne, to give Laws to her Motions, and
to direct and limit her Power in such ways and methods as are most for
his honour. Let us now consider Nature under the conduct of Providence,
or consider *Natural Providence*, and the extent of it; And as we were
cautious before not to give too much power or greatness to Nature,
consider’d apart from Providence, so we must be careful now, under this
second consideration, not to contract her bounds too much; lest we
should by too mean and narrow thoughts of the Creation, Eclipse the
glory of its Author, whom we have so lately own’d as a Being infinitely
perfect.

And to use no further Introduction, In the *first place*, we must not by
any means admit or imagine, that all Nature, and this great Universe,
was made only for the sake of Man, the meanest of all Intelligent
Creatures that we know of; Nor that this little Planet where we sojourn
for a few days, is the only habitable part of the Universe; These are
Thoughts so groundless and unreasonable in themselves, and also so
derogatory to the infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the First
Cause, that as they are absurd in Reason, so they deserve far better to
be mark’d and censur’d for Heresies in Religion, than many Opinions that
have been censur’d for such, in former Ages. How is it possible that it
should enter into the thoughts of vain Man, to believe himself the
principal part of God's Creation: or that all the rest was ordain’d for
him, for his service or pleasure? Man, whose follies we laugh at every
day, or else complain of them; whose pleasures are vanity, and his
Passions stronger than his Reason; Who sees himself every way weak and
impotent, hath no power over external Nature, little over himself;
cannot execute so much as his own good resolutions; mutable, irregular,
prone to evil. Surely if we made the least reflection upon our selves
with impartiality, we should be asham’d of such an arrogant Thought. How
few of

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

these Sons of Men, for whom, they say, all things were made, are the
Sons of Wisdom? how few find the paths of Life? They spend a few days in
folly and sin, and then go down to the Regions of death and misery. And
is it possible to believe, that all Nature, and all Providence, are
only, or principally for their sake? Is it not a more reasonable
character or conclusion which the Prophet hath made, *Surely every Man
is vanity*? Man that comes into the World at the pleasure of another,
and goes out by an hundred accidents; His Birth and Education generally
determine his fate here, and neither of those are in his own power; His
wit also is as uncertain as his fortune; He hath not the moulding of his
own Brain: however a knock on the Head makes him a Fool, stupid as the
Beasts of the Field; and a little excess of passion or melancholy makes
him worse, Mad and frantick. In his best Senses, he is shallow, and of
little understanding: and in nothing more blind and ignorant than in
things Sacred and Divine; He falls down before a stock or a stone, and
says, Thou art my God; He can believe nonsence and contradictions, and
make it his Religion to do so. And is this the great Creature which God
hath made *by the might of his Power, and for the honour of his
Majesty?* upon whom all things must wait, to whom all things must be
subservient? Methinks we have noted weaknesses and follies enough in the
Nature of Man, this need not be added as the top and accomplishment,
*That with all these he is so Vain, as to think that all the rest of the
World was made for his sake*.

And as due humility and the consideration of our own meanness, ought to
secure us from any such vain opinion of our selves, so the perfection of
other Beings ought to give us more respect and honour for them. With
what face can we pretend, that Creatures far superiour to us, and more
excellent both in Nature and condition, should be made for our sake and
service? How preposterous would it be to ascribe such a thing to our
Maker, and how intolerable a vanity in us to affect it? We that are next
to the Brutes that perish, by a sacrilegious attempt, would make our
selves more considerable than the highest Dignities. It is thought to
have been the crime of *Lucifer*, who was thrown down from Heaven to
Hell, that he affected an equality with the Almighty; and to affect to
be next to the Almighty is a crime next to that. We have no reason to
believe, but that there are, at least, as many orders of Beings above
us, as there are ranks of Creatures below us; there is a greater
distance sure betwixt us and God Al-mighty, than there is betwixt us and
the meanest Worm: and yet we should take it very ill, if the Worms of
the Earth should pretend that we were made for them. But to pass from
the invisible World to the visible and Corporeal, . . . .

Was that made only for our sake? King *David* was more wise, and more
just both to God and man, in his 8*th* Psalm; where he says, He wonders,
when he considers the Heavens, that the Maker of them could think on
Man. He truly supposes the Celestial Bodies and the Inhabitants of them,
much more considerable than we are, and reckons up only Terrestrial
things as put in subjection to Man. Can we then be so fond as to imagine
all the Corporeal Universe made for our use? ’Tis not the millioneth
part of it that is known to us, much less useful; We can neither reach
with our Eye, nor our imagination, those Armies of Stars that lie far
and deep in the boundless Heavens. If we take a good Glass,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

we discover innumerably more Stars in the Firmament than we can with our
single Eye; And yet if you take a second Glass, better than the first,
that carries the sight to a greater distance, you see more still lying
beyond the other; And a third Glass that pierceth further, still make
new discoveries of Stars; and so forwards, indefinitely and
inexhaustedly for any thing we know, according to the immensity of the
Divine Nature and Power. Who can reckon up the Stars of the Galaxy, or
direct us in the use of them? And can we believe that those and all the
rest were made for us? Of those few Stars that we enjoy, or that are
visible to the Eye, there is not a tenth part that is really useful to
Man; And no doubt if the principal end of them had been our pleasure or
conveniency, they would have been put in some better order in respect of
the Earth; They lie carelessly scatter’d, as if they had been sown in
the Heaven, like Seed, by handfuls; and not by a skilful hand neither.
What a beautiful Hemisphere they would have made, if they had been
plac’d in rank and order, if they had been all dispos’d into regular
figures, and the little ones set with due regard to the greater, Then
all finisht and made up into one fair piece or great Composition,
according to the rules of Art and Symmetry. What a surprizing beauty
this would have been to the Inhabitants of the Earth? what a lovely Roof
to our little World? This indeed might have given one some temptation to
have thought that they had been all made for us; but lest any such vain
imagination should now enter into our thoughts, Providence (besides more
important Reasons) seems on purpose to have left them under that
negligence or disorder which they appear in to us.

The second part of this opinion supposeth this Planet, where we live, to
be the only habitable part of the Universe; And this is a natural
consequence of the former; If all things were made to serve us, why
should any more be made than what is useful to us. But ’tis only our
ignorance of the System of the World, and of the grandeur of the works
of God, that betrays us to such narrow thoughts. <span
class="margnote">See the *Lat. Treat*. lib. 1. *c*. 10, *p*. 108, 109,
*&c*.</span>If we do but consider what this Earth is, both for
littleness and deformity, and what its Inhabitants are, we shall not be
apt to think that this miserable Atome hath engross’d and exhausted all
the Divine favours, and all the riches of his goodness, and of his
Providence. But we will not inlarge upon this part of the opinion, lest
it should carry us too far from the subject, and it will fall, of its
own accord, with the former. Upon the whole we may conclude, that it was
only the Sublunary World that was made for the sake of Man, and not the
Great Creation, either Material or Intellectual; and we cannot admit or
affirm any more, without manifest injury, depression, and
misrepresentation of Providence, as we may be easily convinc’d from
these four Heads; *The* meanness of Man and of this Earth, *The*
excellency of other Beings, *The* immensity of the Universe, And *The*
infinite perfection of the first Cause. Which I leave to your further
meditation, and pass on to the second rule, concerning Natural
Providence.

*In the second place* then, if we would have a fair view and right
apprehensions, of Natural Providence, we must not cut the chains of it
too short, by having recourse, without necessity, either to the First
Cause, in explaining the Origins of things: or to Miracles, in
explaining particular effects. This, I say, breaks the chains of Natural
Providence, when it is done without necessity, that is, when

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

things are otherwise intelligible from second Causes. Neither is any
thing gain’d by it to God Almighty; for ’tis but, as the Proverb says,
to rob *Peter* to pay *Paul*, to take so much from his ordinary
Providence, and place it to his extraordinary. When a new Religion is
brought into the World, ’tis very reasonable and decorous that it should
be usher’d in with Miracles, as both the *Jewish* and *Christian* were;
but afterwards things return into their Chanel, and do not change or
overflow again, but upon extraordinary occasions or revolutions. The
power *Extraordinary* of God is to be accounted very Sacred, not to be
touch’d or expos’d for our pleasure or conveniency; but I am afraid we
often make use of it only to conceal our own ignorance, or to save us
the trouble of inquiring into Natural Causes. Men are generally
unwilling to appear ignorant, especially those that make profession of
knowledge, and when they have not skill enough to explain some
particular effect in a way of Reason, they throw it upon the First
Cause, as able to bear all; and so placing it to that account, they
excuse themselves, and save their credit; for all men are equally wise,
if you take away Second Causes; as we are all of the same colour, if you
take away the Light.

<span class="margnote">*See* *Book* I. *c*. 8. *at the end*.</span>But
to state this matter, and see the ground of this rule more distinctly,
we must observe and consider, that *The Course of Nature is truly the
Will of God*; and as I may so say, his first Will; from which we are not
to recede, but upon clear evidence and necessity. And as in matter of
Religion, we are to follow the known reveal’d will of God, and not to
trust to every impulse or motion of Enthusiasm, as coming from the
Divine Spirit, unless there be evident marks that it is Supernatural,
and cannot come from our own; So neither are we, without necessity, to
quit the known and ordinary Will and Power of God establisht in the
course of Nature, and fly to Supernatural Causes, or his extraordinary
Will; for this is a kind of Enthusiasm or Fanaticism, as well as the
other: And no doubt that great prodigality and waste of Miracles which
some make, is no way to the honour of God or Religion. ’Tis true, the
other extream is worse than this, for to deny all Miracles, is in effect
to deny all reveal’d Religion; therefore due measures are to be taken
betwixt these two, ƒo as neither to make the Divine Power too mean and
cheap, nor the Power of Nature illimited and all-sufficient.

*In the Third Place*, To make the Scenes of Natural Providence
considerable, and the knowledge of them satisfactory to the Mind, we
must take a true Philosophy, or the true principles that govern Nature,
which are Geometrical and Mechanical. By these you discover the
footsteps of the Divine Art and Wisdom, and trace the progress of Nature
step by step, as distinctly as in Artificial things, where we see how
the Motions depend upon one another, in what order and by what
necessity. God made all things in *Number*, *Weight* and *Measure*,
which are Geometrical and Mechanical Principles; He is not said to have
made things by *Forms* and *Qualities*, or any combination of qualities,
but by these three principles, which may be conceiv’d to express the
subject of three Mathematical Sciences, Number, of *Arithmetick*;
Weight, of *Staticks*; and Measure and Proportion, of *Geometry*; If
then all things were made according to these principles, to understand
the manner of their construction and composition, we must proceed in the
search of them by the same principles, and resolve them into these
again. Besides,

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

the nature of the subject does direct us sufficiently; for when we
contemplate or treat of Bodies, and the Material World, we must proceed
by the modes of Bodies and their real properties, such as can be
represented, either to Sense or Imagination, for these faculties are
made for Corporeal things; but Logical Notions, when appli’d to
particular Bodies, are meer shadows of them, without light or substance.
No man can raise a Theory upon such grounds, nor calculate any
revolutions of Nature; nor render any service, or invent any thing
useful in Humane Life: And accordingly we see, that for these many Ages,
that this dry Philosophy hath govern’d Christendom, it hath brought
forth no fruit, produc’d nothing good, to God or Man, to Religion or
Humane Society.

To these true principles of Philosophy, we must joyn also the true
System of the World. That gives scope to our thoughts, and rational
grounds to work upon; but the vulgar System, or that which *Aristotle*
and others have propos’d, affords no matter of contemplation. All above
the Moon, according to him, is firm as Adamant, and as immutable; no
change or variation in the Universe, but in those little removes that
happen here below, one quality or form shifting into another; there
would therefore be no great exercise of Reason or Meditation in such a
World, no long Series's of Providence; The Regions above being made of a
kind of immutable Matter, they would always remain in the same form,
structure, and qualities: so as we might lock up that part of the
Universe as to any further Inquiries, and we should find it ten thousand
years hence in the same form and state wherein we left it. Then in this
Sublunary World there would be but very small doings neither, things
would lie in a narrow compass, no great revolution of Nature, no new
Form of the Earth, but a few anniversary *Corruptions* and
*Generations*, and that would be the short and the long of Nature, and
of Providence, according to *Aristotle*. But if we consider the Earth,
as one of those many Planets that move about the Sun, and the Sun as one
of those innumerable fixt Stars that adorn the Universe, and are the
Centers of its greatest Motions; and all this subject to fate and
change, to corruptions and renovations; This opens a large Field for our
Thoughts, and gives a large subject for the exercise and expansion of
the Divine Wisdom and Power, and for the glory of his Providence.

*In the last place*, Having thus prepar’d your Mind, and the subject,
for the Contemplation of *Natural Providence*, do not content yourself
to consider only the present face of Nature, but look back into the
first *Sources* of things, into their more simple and original states;
and observe the progress of Nature from one form to another, through
various modes and compositions. For there is no single Effect, nor any
single state of Nature, how perfect soever, that can be such an argument
and demonstration of Providence, as a Period of Nature, or a revolution
of several states consequential to one another; and in such an order and
dependance, that as they flow and succeed, they shall still be adjusted
to the periods of the moral World; so as to be ready always to be the
ministers of the Divine Justice or beneficence to Mankind. This shows
the manifold riches of the Wisdom and Power of God in Nature. And this
may give us just occasion to reflect again upon *Aristotle*'s System and
method, which destroys Natural Providence in this respect also; for he
takes the World as it is now, both for Matter

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

and Form, and supposeth it to have been in this posture from all
Eternity, and that it will continue to Eternity in the same; so as all
the great turns of Nature, and the principal scenes of Providence in the
Natural World are quite struck out; and we have but this one Scene for
all, and a pitiful one too, if compar’d with the infinite Wisdom of God,
and the depths of Providence. We must take things in their full extent,
and from their Origins, to comprehend them well, and to discover the
mysteries of Providence, both in the Causes and in the Conduct of them.
That method which *David* followed in the contemplation of the Little
World, or in the Body of Man, we should also follow in the Great; take
it in its first mass, in its tender principles and rudiments, and
observe the progress of it to a compleat form; In these first stroaks of
Nature are the secrets of her Art; The Eye must be plac’d in this point
to have a right prospect, and see her works in a true light. *David*
admires the Wisdom of God in the Origin and formation of his Body;<span
class="margnote">*Psal*. 139. 15, 16.</span> *My Body*, says He, *was
not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the
lower parts of the Earth; Thine eyes did see my substance being yet
unperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written; which in
continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, or being
at first in no form. How precious are thy Thoughts to me, O God*, *&c*.
This was the subject of David's Meditations, how his Body was wrought
from a shapeless mass into that marvellous composition which it had when
fully fram’d; and this, he says, was under the Eye of God all along, and
the model of it, as it were, was design’d and delineated in the Book of
Providence, according to which it was by degrees fashion’d and wrought
to perfection. *Thine eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect, in
thy Book all my members were drawn*, *&c*. *Job* also hath aptly exprest
those first rudiments of the Body, or that little Chaos out of which it
riseth,<span class="margnote">*Job*. 10. 10, 11.</span> *Hast thou not
poured me out as Milk, and crudled me like Cheese? Thou hast cloathed me
with Skin and Flesh, and fenced me with Bones and Sinews*. Where he
notes the first Matter and the last Form of his Body, its compleat and
most incompleat state. According to these examples we must likewise
consider the Greater Bodies of Nature, The Earth and the Sublunary
World; we must go to the Origin of them, the Seminal Mass, the Chaos out
of which they rise; Look upon the World first as an Embryo-world,
without form or shape, and then consider how its Members were fashion’d,
how by degrees it was brought into that diversity of parts and Regions,
which it consists of, with all their furniture, and with all their
ornaments. The *Idea* of all which was beforehand, according to
*David*'s expression, written in the Divine Mind; and we partake of that
wisdom, according to our capacity, in seeing and admiring the methods of
it.

These seem to be necessary preparatives or directions to those that
would contemplate, with profit, Natural Providence, and the great works
of God in the visible Creation. We consider’d Nature in the precedent
Chapter abstractly, and in her self, and now we consider her under the
Conduct of Providence, which we therefore call Natural Providence; And
as we have endeavour’d to remove those false notions and suppositions
that lay as Clouds upon her face, so we must now endeavour to represent
her in a better light, and in a fuller beauty. By *Natural Providence*
therefore we understand, *The Form or Course of Universal Nature, as* 

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

*actuated by the Divine Power: with all the changes, Periods, and
vicissitudes, that attend it, according to the method and establishment
made at first, by the Author of it*. I said of *Universal Nature*,
through all the orders of Beings in the Intellectual World, and all the
Regions and Systems of Matter in the Corporeal. For, having prov’d in
the foregoing Chapter, that there is an Author of Nature, A Being
infinitely Perfect, by whose power and influence alone all finite
Natures exist and act, we have an assured ground to conclude, that
nothing can come to pass, throughout the whole Creation, without the
prescience and permission of its Author; and as it is necessary to
suppose, that there is an *Idea* in the Divine Understanding of all the
mass of Beings produc’d or Created, according to the several ranks and
orders wherein they stand; so there is also an *Idea* there, according
to which this great Frame moves, and all the parts of it, in beauty and
harmony

And these two things, The *Essences* of all Beings, and the Series of
their *Motions*, compose the MUNDANE IDEA, as I may so call it; or that
great All-comprehensive Thought in the Divine Understanding, which
contains the System of Universal Providence, and the state of all
things, past, present, or to come. This glorious *Idea* is the express
Image of the whole Creation, of all the works of God, and the
disposition of them; here lie the mysteries of Providence, as in their
Original; The successive Forms of all Nature; and herein, as in a Glass,
may be view’d all the Scenes of Time or Eternity. This is an Abysse of
Sacred Wisdom, The inexhausted treasure of all Science, The Root of
Truth, and Fountain of Intellectual Light; And in the clear and full
contemplation of this is perfect happiness, and a truly beatifick
Vision.

But what concerns the Intellectual World in this *Idea*, and the Orders
or Natures that compose it, is not our present business to pursue; We
are to speak of the Corporeal Universe, whereof we will make now a short
and general Survey, as it lies under Providence. The Corporeal Universe,
how immense soever it be, and divided into innumerable Regions, may be
consider’d all as one System, made up of several subordinate Systems.
And there is also one immense design of Providence co-extended with it,
that contains all the fate, and all the revolutions of this great Mass.
This, I say, is made up of several subordinate Systems, involving one
another, and comprehending one another, in greater and greater Orbs and
Compositions; and the Aggregate of all these is that which we call the
*Universe*. But what the Form of these Compositions is, and what the
Design of Providence that runs thorough them all, and comprehends them
all, this is unsearchable, not only to Humane Understanding, but even to
Angels and Archangels.

Wherefore leaving those greater Systems and Compositions of the
Universe, as matter of our admiration, rather than of our knowledge,
There are two or three kinds of lesser Systems that are visible to us,
and bring us nearer to our subject, and nearer home. *That* of a Fixt
Star, single; *That* of a Fixt Star with its Planets, and *That* of a
single Planet, Primary or Secondary. These three Systems we see and
enjoy more or less. No doubt there are Fixt Stars single, or that have
no Planets about them, as our Sun hath; nay, ’tis probable, that at
first

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

the whole Universe consisted only of such; Globes of liquid Fire, with
Spheres about them of pure Light and Æther: Earths are but the dirt and
skum of the Creation, and all things were pure as they came at first out
of the hands of God. But because we have nothing particular taught us,
either by the light of Nature or Revelation, concerning the Providence
that governs these single Stars, of what use they are to Intellectual
Beings, how animated by them, what diversity there is amongst those
Ethereal Worlds, what Periods they have, what Changes or Vicissitudes
they are capable to undergo; because such Inquiries would seem too
remote, and carry us too far from our subject, we leave these Heavenly
Systems to the enjoyment and contemplation of higher and more noble
Creatures.

The Sun, with all the Planets that move about him, and depend upon him,
make a second sort of System; not considerable indeed, if compar’d with
the whole Universe, or some of the greater Compositions in it, but in
respect of us, the System of the Sun is of vast extent; We cannot
measure the greatness of his Kingdom, and his Dominion is without end.
The distance from the highest Planet to the nearest fixt Star in the
Firmament is unmeasurable, and all this belongs to the Empire of the
Sun; besides the several Planets and their Orbs, which cast themselves
closer about his Body, that they may receive a warmer and stronger
influence from him; for by him they may be said to *live* and *move*.
But those vast spaces that lie beyond these opake Bodies, are Regions of
perpetual light; One Planet may eclipse the Sun to another, and one
Hemisphere of a Planet to the other Hemisphere makes night and darkness,
but nothing can eclipse the Sun, or intercept the course of his light to
these remote Ethereal Regions; They are always luminous, and always pure
and serene. And if the worst and Planetary parts of his Dominions be
replenisht with Inhabitants, we cannot suppose the better to lie as
Desarts, uninjoy’d and uninhabited; his Subjects then must be numerous,
as well as his Dominions large; And in both respects, this System of a
Fixt Star, with its Planets (of which kind we may imagine innumerable in
the Universe, besides this of the Sun, which is near and visible to us)
is of a noble Character and Order, being the habitation of Angels and
glorified Spirits, as well as of mortal Men.

A Planetary System is the last and lowest; And of these, no doubt, there
is great variety, and great differences; not only of Primary and
Secondary, or of the principal Planet, and its Moons or Attendants, but
also amongst Planets of the same rank; for they may differ both in their
original constitution, and according to the form and state they are
under at present; of which sort of differences we have noted <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) some amongst our Planets, though they seem
to be all of much-what the same original constitution. Besides,
according to external circumstances, their distance, manner of motion,
and posture to the Sun, which is the Heart of the whole System, they
become different in many things. And we may observe, that those leading
differences, though they seem little, draw after them innumerable
others, and so make a distinct face of Nature, and a distinct World;
which still shows the riches and fecundity of Divine Providence, and
gives new matter of contemplation to those that take pleasure in
studying the works and ways of

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

\[paragraph continues\] God. But leaving all other Planets or Planetary
Systems to our meditations only, we must particularly consider our own.

Having therefore made this general Survey of the great Universe, run
thorough the boundless Regions of it, and with much ado found our way
home to that little Planet where our concerns lie, This Earth or
Sublunary World, we must rest here as at the end of our course; And
having undertaken to give the general Theory of this Earth, to conclude
the present Treatise, we'll reflect upon the whole work, and observe
what progress we have hitherto made in this Theory, and what remains to
be treated of hereafter. This Earth, though it be a small part or
particle of the Universe, hath a distinct System of Providence belonging
to it, or an Order establisht by the Author of Nature for all its
*Phænomena* (Natural or Moral) throughout the whole Period of its
duration, and every interval of it; for as there is nothing so great as
to be above the Divine care, so neither is there any thing so little as
to be below it. All the Changes of our World are fixt, How, or how often
to be destroy’d, and how renew’d; What different faces of Nature, and
what of Mankind, in every part of its Course; What new Scenes to adorn
the Stage, and what new parts to be Acted; What the Entrance, and what
the Consummation of all. Neither is there any sort of knowledge more
proper, or of more importance to us that are the Inhabitants of this
Earth, than to understand this its Natural and Sacred History, as I may
so call it, both as to what is past, and what is to come. And as those
greater Volumes and Compositions of the Universe are proportion’d to the
understanding of Angels and Superiour Beings, so these little Systems
are *Compendium*'s of the Divine Wisdom, more fitted to our capacity and
comprehension.

The Providence of the Earth, as of all other Systems, consists of two
parts, Natural, and Sacred or Theological. I call that Sacred or
Theological that respects Religion, and the dispensations of it; the
government of the Rational World, or of Mankind, whether under the light
of Nature only, or of a Revelation; the method and terms of their
happiness and unhappiness in a future life; The State, Oeconomy, and
Conduct of this, with all the Mysteries contain’d in it, we call
Theological Providence; in the head whereof stands the Soul of the
Blessed *Messiah*, who is Lord of both Worlds, Intellectual and
Material. When we call the other part of Providence *Natural*, we use
that word in a restrain’d sence, as respecting only the Material World;
and accordingly this part of Providence orders and superintends the
state of the Earth, the great Vicissitudes and Mutations of it; for we
must not imagine, but that these are under the eye of Providence, as
well as Humane affairs, or any revolutions of States and Empires. Now
seeing both in the Intellectual and Corporeal World there are certain
Periods, Fulnesses of Time, and fixt Seasons, either for some great
Catastrophe, or some great Instauration, ’Tis Providence that makes a
due harmony or Synchronism betwixt these two, and measures out the
concurrent fates of both Worlds, so as Nature may be always a faithful
minister of the Divine pleasure, whether for rewards or punishments,
according as the state of Mankind may require. But Theological
Providence not being the subject of this work, we shall only observe, as
we said before, what account we have hitherto given of the Natural state
of the Earth, and what remains to be handled in another Treatise, and so
conclude.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

I did not think it necessary to carry the story and original of the
Earth, higher than the Chaos, as *Zoroaster* and *Orpheus* seem to have
done; but taking That for our Foundation, which Antiquity Sacred and
Profane doth suppose, and Natural Reason approve and confirm, we have
form’d the Earth from it. But when we say the Earth rise from a Fluid
Mass, it is not to be so crudely understood, as if a rock of Marble,
suppose, was fluid immediately before it became Marble; no, Things had a
gradual progression from one form to another, and came at length to
those more permanent forms they are now setled in: Stone was once Earth,
and Earth was once Mud, and Mud was once fluid. And so other things may
have another kind of progression from fluidity; but all was once fluid,
at least all the exteriour Regions of this Earth. And even those Stones
and Rocks of Marble which we speak of, seem to confess they were once
soft or liquid, by those mixtures we find in them of Heterogeneous
Bodies, and those spots and Veins disperst thorough their substance; for
these things could not happen to them after they were hard and
impenetrable, in the form of Stone or Marble. And if we can soften Rocks
and Stones, and run them down into their first Liquors, as these
observations seem to do, we may easily believe that other Bodies also
that compose the Earth, were once in a fluid Mass, which is that we call
a Chaos.

We therefore watch’d the motions of that Chaos, and the several
transformations of it, while it continued Fluid; and we found at length
what its first Concretion would be, and how it setled into the form of
an habitable Earth. But that form was very different from the present
form of the Earth, which is not deducible from a Chaos, by any known
laws of Nature, or by any wit of Man; as every one, that will have
patience to examine it, may easily be satisfied. That first Earth was of
a smooth regular surface, as the Concretions of Liquors are, before they
are disturb’d or broken; under that surface lay the Great Abysse, which
was ready to swallow up the World that hung over it, and about it,
whensoever God should give the command, and the Vault should break; And
this constitution of the Primæval Earth gave occasion to the first
Catastrophe of this World, when it perisht in a Deluge of Water. For
that Vault did break, as we have shown at large, and by the dissolution
and fall of it, the Great Deep was thrown out of its bed, forc’d upwards
into the Air, and overflow’d, in that impetuous Commotion, the highest
tops of the Fragments of the ruin’d Earth, which now we call its
Mountains. And as this was the first great and fatal Period of Nature;
so upon the issue of this, and the return of the Waters into their
Chanels, the second face of Nature appear’d, or the present broken form
of the Earth, as it is *Terraqueous*, *Mountainous*, and *Cavernous*.
These things we have explain’d fully in the first Book, and have thereby
setled two great Points, given a rational account of the *Universal
Deluge*, And shown the Causes of the irregular form of the present or
*Post-diluvian Earth*. This being done, we have appli’d our selves, in
the Second Book, to the description of the *Primæval Earth*, and the
examination of its properties; And this hath led us by an easie tract to
the discovery of *Paradise*, and of the true Notion and Mystery of it;
which is not so much a spot of ground where a fine Garden stood, as a
course of Nature, or a

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

peculiar state of the Earth; *Paradisiacal* in many parts, but
especially in one Region of it; which place or Region we have also
endeavour’d to determine, though not so much from the Theory, as from
the suffrages of Antiquity.

THUS much is finisht, and this contains the Natural Theory of the Earth
till this present time; for since the Deluge all things have continued
in the same state, or without any remarkable change. We are next to
enter upon new Matter and new Thoughts, and not only so, but upon a
Series of *Things and Times to come*, which is to make the Second part
of this Theory. Dividing the duration of the World into two parts, Past
and Future, we have dispatch’d the first and far greater part, and come
better half our way; And if we make a stand here, and look both ways,
backwards to the Chaos, and the Beginning of the World, and forwards to
the End and consummation of all things, though the first be a longer
prospect, yet there are as many general Changes and Revolutions of
Nature in the remaining part as have already happen’d; and in the
Evening of this long Day the Scenes will change faster, and be more
bright and illustrious. From the Creation to this Age the Earth hath
undergone but one Catastrophe, and Nature hath had two different faces;
The next Catastrophe is the CONFLAGRATION, to which a new face of Nature
will accordingly suceed, *New Heavens* and a *New Earth*, *Paradise*
renew’d, and so it is call’d the *Restitution* of things Ἀτοκατά ζασις
ναλιγζενεσία.}, or Regeneration of the World. And that Period of Nature
and Providence being expir’d, then follows the *Consummation of all
things*, or the General *Apotheosis*; *when Death and Hell shall be
swallowed up in victory*; When the great Circle of Time and Fate is run;
or according to the language of Scripture, *When the Heavens and the
Earth shall pass away, and Time shall be no more*.

 

*MAY we, in the mean time, by a true Love of God above all things, and a
contempt of this Vain World which passeth away; By a careful use of the
Gifts of God and Nature, the Light of Reason and Revelation, prepare our
selves, and the state of things, for the great Coming of our Saviour*.
To whom be Praise and Honour for evermore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[225:1](ste27.htm#fr_10) *Book* 1, *chap*.
*last*, *p*. 128, *&c*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page (Book III and IV)](ste28)
