[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste34)  [Next](ste36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

*Concerning the time of the Conflagration, and the end of the World.
What the Astronomers say upon this Subject, and upon what they ground
their Calculations; The true notion of the Great Year, or of the
Platonic, Year, stated and explained*.

HAVING, in this first Section, laid a sure foundation as to the Subject
of our Discourse; the truth and certainty of the *Conflagration* whereof
we are to treat; we will now proceed to enquire after the *Time*,
*Causes*, and *Manner* of it. We are naturally more inquisitive after
the end of the World, and the time of that fatal revolution, than after
the causes of it: for these, we know, are irresistible, whensoever they
come, and therefore we are only sollicitous that they should not
overtake us, or our near posterity. The *Romans* thought they had the
fates of their Empire in the Books of the Sibyls, which were kept by the
Magistrates as a Sacred Treasure. We have also our Prophetical Books,
more sacred and more infallible than theirs, which contain the fate of
all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and of that glorious Kingdom that is to
succeed. And of all futurities, there is none can be of such importance
to be enquired after, as this last scene and close of all humane
affairs.

If I thought it possible to determine the time of the *Conflagration*
from the bare intuition of Natural Causes, I would not treat of it in
this place, but reserve it to the last; after we had brought into view
all those Causes, weigh’d their force, and examin’d how and when they
would concur to produce this great effect. But I am satisfied that the
excitation and concurse of those Causes does not depend upon Nature
only; and tho’ the Causes may be sufficient when all united, yet the
union of them at such a time, and in such a manner, I look upon as the
effect of a particular Providence: and therefore no foresight of ours,
or inspection into Nature can discover to us the time of this
conjuncture. This method therefore of Prediction from Natural Causes
being laid aside as impracticable, all other methods may be treated of
in this place, as being independent upon any thing that is to follow in
the Treatise; and it will be an ease to the Argument to discharge it of
this part, and clear the way by degrees to the principal point, which
is, the *Causes* and *Manner* of the Conflagration.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

Some have thought it a kind of impiety in a Christian to enquire after
the end of the World; because of that check which our Saviour gave his
Disciples, when, after his Resurrection, enquiring of him about the time
of his Kingdom, He answer’d, <span class="margnote">*Act*. 1. 7.</span>
*It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father
hath put in his own power*. And, before his death, when he was
discoursing of the Consummation of all things, He told them expressly,
that tho’ there should be such and such previous Signs as he had
mentioned, yet, <span class="margnote">*Mat*. 24. 36.</span> *Of that
day and hour knoweth no man. No, not the Angels that are in Heaven, but
my Father only*. Be it so, that the Disciples deserv’d a reprimand, for
desiring to know, by a particular revelation from our Saviour, the state
of future times; when many other things were more necessary for their
instruction, and for their ministery. Be it also admitted, that the
Angels, at that distance of time, could not see thorow all events to the
end of the World; it does not at all follow from thence that they do not
know it now; when, in the course of Sixteen hundred years, many things
are come to pass, that may be marks and directions to them to make a
judgment of what remains, and of the last period of all things. However
there will be no danger in our enquiries about this matter, seeing they
are not so much to discover the certainty, as the uncertainty of that
period, as to humane knowledge. Let us therefore consider what methods
have been used, by those that have been curious and busie to measure the
duration of the World.

The *Stoicks* tell us, *When* the Sun and the Stars have drunk up the
Sea, then the Earth shall be burnt. A very fair Prophecy: but how long
will they be a drinking? For unless we can determine that, we cannot
determine when this combustion will begin. <span class="margnote">Cicer.
de Nat. D. l. 2.</span>Many of the Ancients thought that the Stars were
nourish’d by the vapours of the Ocean and of the moist Earth: and when
that nourishment was spent, being of a fiery nature, they would prey
upon the Body of the Earth it self, and consume that, after they had
consum’d the Water. This is old-fashion’d Philosophy, and now, that the
nature of those Bodies is better known, will scarce pass for currant.
’Tis true, we must expect some dispositions towards the combustion of
the World, from a great drought and desiccation of the Earth: But this
helps us nothing on our way; for the question still returns, *When* will
this immoderate drought or dryness happen? and that's as ill to resolve
as the former. Therefore, as I said before, I have no hopes of deciding
the question by Physiology or Natural Causes; let us then look up from
the Earth to the Heavens, To the Astronomers and the Prophets; These
think they can define the age and duration of the World; The one by
their Art, and the other by Inspiration.

We begin with the Astronomers: whose Calculations are founded either
upon the Aspects and Configurations of the Planets, or upon the
Revolutions of the Fixt Stars: or lastly upon that which they call
*Annus Magnus*, or the *Great Year*, whatsoever that Notion proves to be
when it is rightly interpreted. As to the Planets, *Berosus* tells
us,<span class="margnote">*Sen. Nat. qu. li.* 3 c. 29.</span> The
Chaldeans suppose Deluges to proceed from a great conjunction of the
Planets in *Capricorn*: and from a like conjunction in the opposite Sign
of *Cancer*, the Conflagration will ensue. So that if we compute by the
Astronomical Tables how long it will be to such a Conjunction, we find
at

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

the same time how long it will be to the *Conflagration*. This doctrine
of the *Chaldeans* some Christian Authors have owned, and followed the
same principles and method.

If these Authors would deal fairly with Mankind, they should shew us
some connexion betwixt these Causes and the Effects which they make
consequent upon them. For ’tis an unreasonable thing to require a man's
assent to a Proposition, where he sees no dependance or connexion of
Terms; unless it come by Revelation, or from an infallible Authority. If
you say, The Conflagration will be at the first great Conjunction of the
Planets in *Cancer*, and I say it will be at the next Eclipse of the
Moon, if you shew no more reason for your assertion than I do for mine,
and neither of us pretend to revelation or infallibility, we may justly
expect to be equally credited. Pray what reason can you give why the
Planets, when they meet, should plot together, to set on Fire their
Fellow-Planet, the Earth, who never did them any harm? But now there is
a plausible reason for my opinion; for the Moon, when Eclips’d may think
herself affronted by the Earth, interposing rudely betwixt her and the
Sun, and leaving her to grope her way in the dark; She therefore may
justly take her revenge as she can. But you’l say, ’tis not in the power
of the Moon to set the Earth on Fire, if she had malice enough to do it.
No, nor, say I, is it in the power of the other Planets, that are far
more distant from the Earth than the Moon, and as stark dull lumps of
Earth, as she is. The plain truth is, The Planets are so many Earths;
and our Earth is as much a Planet as the brightest of them. ’Tis carried
about the Sun with the same common stream, and shines with as much
lustre to them, as they do to us: neither can they do any more harm to
it, than it can do to them. ’Tis now well known, that the Planets are
dark opake Bodies, generally made up of Earth and Water, as our Globe
is; and have no force or action, but that of reverberating the light
which the Sun casts upon them. This blind superstitious fear or
reverence for the Stars, had its original from the ancient Idolaters;
They thought them Gods, and that they had domination over humane
affairs. We do not indeed worship them, as they did; but some men retain
still the same opinion of their vertues, of their rule and influence
upon us and our affairs, which was the ground of their worship. ’Tis
full time now to sweep away these cobwebs of superstition, these
reliques of Paganism. I do not see how we are any more concern’d in the
postures of the Planets, than in the postures of the Clouds; and you may
as well build an art of prediction or divination upon the one as the
other. They must not know much of the Philosophy of the Heavens, or
little consider it, that think the fate, either of single persons, or of
the whole Earth, can depend upon the aspects or figur’d dances of those
Bodies.

But you'! say, it may be, tho’ no reason can be given for such effects,
yet experience does attest the truth of them. In the first place, I
answer, no experience can be produc’d for this effect we are speaking
of, the conflagration of the World. Secondly, experience fallaciously
recorded, or wholly in favour of one side, is no proof. If a publick
Register was kept of all Astrological Predictions, and of all the events
that followed upon them, right or wrong, agreeing or disagreeing, I
could willingly refer the cause to the determination of such a Register,
and such

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

experience. But that which they call experience, is so stated, that if
one prediction of ten, hits right or near right, it shall make more
noise, and be more taken notice of, than all the nine that are false.
Just as in a Lottery, where many Blanks are drawn for one Prize, yet
these make all the noise, and those are forgotten. If any one be so
lucky as to draw a good Lot, then the Trumpet sounds, and his Name is
register’d, and he tells his good fortune to every body he meets:
whereas those that lose, go silently away with empty Pockets, and are
asham’d to tell their losses. Such a thing is the Register of
Astrological experiences; they record what makes for their credit, but
drop all blank instances, that would discover the vanity or cheat of
their Art.

So much for the Planets. They have also a pretended calculation of the
end of the World from the fixt Stars and the Firmament. Which in short
is this: They suppose these Bodies, besides the hurry of their Diurnal
motion from East to West, quite round the Earth in four and twenty
hours, to have another retrograde motion, from West to East; which is
more slow and leisurely; And when they have finish’d the Circle of this
retrogradation, and come up again to the same place from whence they
started at the beginning of the World, then this course of Nature will
be at an end; and either the Heavens will cease from all motion, or a
new set of motions will be put a foot, and the world begin again. This
is a bundle of fictions tied up in a pretty knot. In the first place,
there is no such thing as a solid Firmament, in which the Stars are
fixt, as nails in a board. The Heavens are as fluid as our air, and the
higher we go, the more thin and subtle is the ethereal matter. Then, the
fixt Stars are not all in one Surface, as they seem to us, nor at an
equal distance from the Earth, but are plac’d in several Orbs higher and
higher; there being infinite room in the great Deep of the Heavens,
every way, for innumerable Stars and Spheres behind one another, to fill
and beautify the immense spaces of the Universe. Lastly, the fixt Stars
have no motion common to them all, nor any motion singly, unless upon
their own centres; and therefore, never leaving their stations, they can
never return to any common station, which they would suppose them to
have had at the beginning of the World. So as this period they speak of,
whereby they would measure the duration of the World, is meerly
imaginary, and hath no foundation in the true nature or motion of the
celestial Bodies.

But in the third place, They speak of an ANNUS MAGNUS, a *Great Year*; A
revolution so call’d, whatsoever it is, that is of the same extent with
the length of the world. This notion, I confess, is more ancient and
universal, and therefore I am the more apt to believe that it is not
altogether groundless. But the difficulty is, to find out the true
notion of this *Great Year*, what is to be understood by it, and then of
what length it is. They all agree that it is a time of some grand
instauration of all things, or a Restitution of the Heavens and the
Earth to their former state; that is, to the state and posture they had
at the beginning of the world; such therefore as will reduce the Golden
age, and that happy state of nature wherein things were at first. If so,
if these be the marks and properties of this Revolution, which is call’d
the *Great Year*, we need not go so far to find the true notion and
interpretation of it. Those that have read the first part of

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

this Theory, may remember that in the second Book we gave an account
what the posture of the Earth was at the beginning of the world, and
what were the consequences of that posture, A *perpetual Spring* and
Equinox throughout all the Earth: And if the Earth was restor’d again to
that posture and situation, all that is imputed to the *Great Year*,
would immediately follow upon it, without ever disturbing or moving the
fix’d Stars, Firmament, or Planets; and yet at the same time all these
three would return or be restor’d to the same posture they had at the
beginning of the world; so as the whole character of the *Great Year*
would be truly fulfill’d, tho’ not in that way which they imagin’d; but
in another, more compendious, and of easier conception. My meaning is
this, If the Axis of the Earth was rectified, and set parallel with the
Axis of the Ecliptick, upon which the Planets, Firmament and fix’d Stars
are suppos’d to move, all things would be as they were at first; A
general harmony and conformity of all the motions of the Universe would
presently appear, such, as they say, was in the Golden Age, before any
disorder came into the natural or moral World.

As this is an easie, so I do not doubt, but it is a true account of that
which was originally call’d the *Great Year*, or the Great Instauration;
which nature will bring to pass in this simple method, by rectifying the
Axis of the Earth, without those operose revolutions, which some
Astronomers have fansied. But however, this account being admitted, how
will it help us to define what the Age and duration of the World will
be? ’Tis true, many have undertaken to tell us the length of this *Great
Year*, and consequently of the World; but, besides that their accounts
are very different, and generally of an extravagant length, if we had
the true account, it would not assure us when the World would end;
because we do not know when it did begin, or what progress we have
already made in the line of time. For I am satisfied, the Chronology of
the World, whether sacred or prophane, is lost; till Providence shall
please to retrieve it by some new discovery. As to prophane Chronology,
or that of the *Heathens*, the *Greeks* and the *Romans* knew nothing
above the *Olympiads*; which fell short many Ages of the Deluge, much
more of the beginning of the World. And the Eastern barbarous Nations,
as they disagreed amongst themselves, so generally they run the origine
of the World to such a prodigious height, as is neither agreeable to
Faith, nor Reason. As to Sacred Chronology, ’tis well known, that the
difference there is betwixt the *Greek*, *Hebrew*, and *Samaritan*
Copies of the Bible, makes the Age of the World altogether undetermin'd:
And there is no way yet found out, how we may certainly discover which
of the three Copies is most Authentick, and consequently what the Age of
the World is, upon a true computation. Seeing therefore we have no
assurance how long the World hath stood already, neither could we be
assur’d how long it hath to stand, though, by this *Annus Magnus*, or
any other way, the total sum, or whole term of its duration was truly
known.

I am sorry to see the little success we have had in our first search
after the end of the World, from Astronomical Calculations. But ’tis an
useful piece of knowledge to know the bounds of our knowledge; that so
we may not spend our time and thoughts about things that lie out of our
reach. I have little or no hopes of resolving this point by the Light of
Nature, and therefore it only remains now

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

 

to enquire, Whether Providence hath made it known by any sort of
Prophecy or Revelation. Which shall be the Subject of the following
Chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](ste36)
