[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste46)  [Next](ste48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

#### THE

## THEORY

##### OF THE

# EARTH

# BOOK IV

Concerning the new Heavens and new Earth,

AND

Concerning the Consummation of all things.

### CHAPTER I

### THE INTRODUCTION

*That the World will not be annihilated in the last Fire. That we are to
expect, according to Scripture and the Christian doctrine, New Heavens
and a new Earth, when these are dissolv’d or burnt up*.

WE are now so far advanc’d in the Theory of the Earth, as to have seen
the End of two Worlds: One destroy’d by Water, and another by Fire. It
remains onely to consider, whether we be yet come to the final period of
Nature: The last Scene of all things, and consequently the utmost bound
of our enquiries. Or, whether Providence, which is inexhausted in wisdom
and goodness, will raise up, from this dead glass, New Heavens and a new
Earth. Another habitable World, better and more perfect than that which
was destroyed. That, as the first World began with a Paradise, and a
state of Innocency, so the last may be a kind of Renovation of that
happy state; whose Inhabitants shall not die, but be translated to a
blessed Immortality.

I know ’tis the opinion of some, that this World will be annihilated, or
reduc’d to nothing, at the Conflagration: and that would put an end to
all further enquiries. But whence do they learn this? from Scripture, or
Reason, or their own imagination? What instance or example can they give
us, of this they call Annihilation? Or what place of Scripture can they
produce, that says the World, in the last Fire, shall be reduc’d to
nothing? If they have neither instance, nor proof of what they affirm,
’tis an empty Imagination of their own: neither agreeable to Philosophy,
nor Divinity. Fire does not consume any substance: It changes the form
and qualities of it, but the matter remains. And if the design had been
*Annihilation*, the employing of fire would have been of no use or
effect. For smoak and ashes are at as great a distance from *Nothing*,
as the bodies themselves out of which they are made. But these Authors
seem to have but a small tincture of Philosophy, and therefore it will
be more proper to confute their opinion from the words of Scripture;
which hath left us sufficient evidence, that another World will succeed
after the Conflagration of that we now inhabit.

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

The Prophets, both of the Old and New Testament, have left us their
predictions concerning *New Heavens and a New Earth*. So says the
Prophet *Isaiah*, ch. 65. 17. *Behold I create New Heavens and a New
Earth, and the former shall not be remembred, or come into mind*. As not
worthy our thoughts, in comparison of those that will arise when these
pass away. So the Prophet St. *John*, in his *Apocalypse*,<span
class="margnote">*Apoc*. 21. 1.</span> when he was come to the end of
this World, says, *And I saw a new heaven and a new earth. For the first
heaven and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea*.
Where he does not only give us an account of a New Heaven and a New
Earth, in general: but also gives a distinctive character of the *New
Earth*: that it shall have *no Sea*. And in the 5*th* *ver*. He that sat
upon the Throne, says, *Behold I make all things New*; which, consider’d
with the antecedents and consequents, cannot be otherwise understood
than of a New World.

But some men make evasions here as to the words of the Prophets, and say
they are to be understood in a figurate and allegorical sence: and to be
applyed to the times of the Gospel, either at first or towards the
latter end of the World. So as this *New Heaven and New Earth* signifie
only a great change in the moral World. But how can that be, seeing St.
*John* places them after the end of the World: and the Prophet
*Isaiah*<span class="margnote">*ch*. 65.</span> connects such things
with his New Heavens and New Earth, as are not competible to the present
state of Nature? However to avoid all shuffling and tergiversation in
this point, let us appeal to St. *Peter*, who uses a plain literal
style, and discourses down-right concerning the Natural World. In his
2*d* *Epist*. and 3*d* *chap*. when he had foretold and explained the
Future Conflagration, he adds, But we expect *New Heavens and a New
Earth according to his promises*. These Promises were made by the
Prophets: and this gives us full authority to interpret their *New
Heavens and New Earth* to be after the *Conflagration*. St. *Peter*,
when he had describ’d the Dissolution of the World in the last Fire, in
full and emphatical terms, as *the passing away of the Heavens with a
noise: the melting of the Elements, and burning up all the works of the
Earth:* he subjoyns, *Nevertheless*, notwithstanding this total
dissolution of the present World, *We, according to his promises, look
for new heavens and a new earth: wherein dwelleth Righteousness*. As if
the Apostle should have said, Notwithstanding this strange and violent
dissolution of the present Heavens and Earth, which I have described to
you, we do not at all distrust God's Promises concerning New Heavens and
a New Earth, that are to succeed these, and to be the seat of the
Righteous.

Here's no room for Allegories or allegorical expositions: unless you
will make the Conflagration of the World an Allegory. For, as Heavens
and Earth were destroy’d, so Heavens and Earth are restored: and if in
the first place you understand the natural material World, you must also
understand it in the second place: They are both Allegories, or neither.
But to make the Conflagration an Allegory, is not only to contradict St.
*Peter*, but all Antiquity, Sacred or Prophane. And I desire no more
assurance that we shall have New Heavens and a New Earth, in a literal
Sence, than we have that the present Heavens and Earth shall be
destroyed in a literal Sence, and by material Fire. Let it therefore
rest upon that issue, as to this first evidence and argument from
Scripture.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

Some will fancy, it may be, that we shall have New Heavens and Earth;
and yet that these shall be annihilated; They would have These first
reduc’d to no-thing, and then others created, spick and span New, out of
nothing. But why so, pray, what's the humour of that? lest Omnipotency
should want employment, you would have it do, and undo, and do again. As
if new-made Matter, like new Clothes, or new Furniture, had a better
Gloss, and was more creditable. Matter never wears: as fine Gold, melt
it down never so often, it loses nothing of its quantity. The substance
of the World is the same, burnt or unburnt: and is of the same Value and
Virtue, New or Old: and we must not multiply the actions of Omnipotency
without necessity. God does not make, or unmake things, to try
experiments: He knows before hand the utmost capacities of every thing,
and does no vain or superfluous work. Such imaginations as these proceed
only from want of true Philosophy, or the true knowledge of the Nature
of God and of his Works; which should always be carefully attended to,
in such Speculations as concern the Natural World. But to proceed in our
Subject.

If they suppose part of the World to be annihilated, and to continue so,
they Philosophize still worse and worse. How high shall this
Annihilation reach? Shall the Sun, Moon, and Stars be reduc’d to
nothing? but what have They done, that they should undergo so hard a
fate? must they be turn’d out of Being for our faults? The whole
material Universe will not be Annihilated at this bout, for we are to
have Bodies after the Resurrection, and to live in Heaven. How much of
the Universe then will you leave standing: or how shall it subsist with
this great *Vacuum* in the heart of it? This shell of a World is but the
fiction of an empty Brain: For God and Nature in their works never admit
of such gaping vacuities and emptinesses.

If we consult Scripture again, we shall find that that makes mention of
a *Restitution* and *Reviviscency* of all things: at the end of the
World, or at the Coming of our Saviour. St. *Peter*,<span
class="margnote">*Act*. 3.</span> whose doctrine we have hitherto
followed, in his Sermon to the *Jews* after our Saviour's Ascension,
tells them that He will come again, and that there will be then a
*Restitution of all things:* such as was promised by the Prophets. *The
Heavens*, says he, <span class="margnote">*ver*. 21.</span> *must
receive him until the time of Restitution of all things: which God hath
spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets, since the world began*. If we
compare this passage of St. *Peter*'s, with that which we alledged
before out of his second Epistle, it can scarce be doubted but that he
refers to the same Promises in both places: and what he there calls a
*New Heaven* and a *New Earth*, he calls here a *Restitution of all
things*. For the Heavens and the Earth comprehend all, and both these
are but different phrases for the Renovation of the World. This gives us
also light how to understand what our Saviour calls the *Regeneration*
or *Reviviscency*,<span class="margnote">*Matt*. 19. 28, 29.</span> when
he shall sit upon his Throne of Glory, and will reward his followers an
hundred fold, for all their losses in this World: besides Everlasting
Life as the Crown of all. I know, in our English Translation, we
separate *the Regeneration* from *sitting upon his Throne:* but without
any warrant from the Original. And seeing our Saviour speaks here of
Bodily goods, and seems to distinguish them from *everlasting life*,
which is to be the final reward of his Followers, This *Regeneration*
seems to belong to his Second

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

coming, when the World shall be renew’d or regenerated: and the
Righteous shall possess the Earth.

Other places of Scripture that foretel the fate of this material World,
represent it always as a *Change*, not as an *Annihilation*. St. *Paul*
says, *The Figure of this World passes away*: 1 Cor. 7. 31. The form,
fashion, and disposition of its parts: but the substance still remains.
As a Body that is melted down and dissolv’d, the Form perishes,<span
class="margnote">*Psal*. 102. 26.</span> but the Matter is not
destroy’d. And the Psalmist says, The Heavens and the Earth shall be
*chang’d*: which answers to this Transformation we speak of. The same
Apostle, in the Eight Chapter to the *Romans*,<span
class="margnote">*Ver*. 21, 22, 23, 24.</span> shows also that this
change shall be, and shall be for the better: and calls it a
*Deliverance of the Creation from vanity and corruption:* and a
participation of the *glorious liberty of the Children of God*. Being a
sort of *Redemption*, as they have a *Redemption of their Bodies*.

But, seeing the *Renovation* of the World is a Doctrine generally
receiv’d, both by ancient and modern Authors, as we shall have occasion
to show hereafter: We need add no more, in this place, for confirmation
of it. Some Men are willing to throw all things into a state of
*Nothing* at the Conflagration, and bury them there, that they may not
be oblig’d to give an account of that state of things, that is to
succeed it. Those who think themselves bound in honour, to know every
thing in Theology that is knowable: and find it uneasie to answer such
questions and speculations, as would arise upon their admitting a new
World, think it more adviseable to stifle it in the birth, and so to
bound all knowledge at the Conflagration. But surely, so far as Reason
or Scripture lead us, we may and ought to follow: otherwise we should be
ungrateful to Providence, that sent us those Guides. Provided, we be
always duly sensible of our own weakness: and, according to the
difficulty of the subject, and the measure of light that falls upon it,
proceed with that modesty and ingenuity, that becomes such fallible
enquirers after Truth, as we are. And this rule I desire to prescribe to
my self, as in all others Writings, so especially in this: where, tho’ I
look upon the principal Conclusions as fully prov’d, there are several
particulars, that are rather propos’d to examination, than positively
asserted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](ste48)
