[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste42)  [Next](ste44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XII

*An imperfect description of the Coming of our Saviour, and of the World
on Fire*.

CERTAINLY there is nothing in the whole course of Nature, or of Humane C
affairs, so great and so extraordinary, as the two last Scenes of them,
THE COMING OF OUR SAVIOUR, and the BURNING OF THE WORLD. If we could
draw in our minds the Pictures of these, in true and lively colours, We
should scarce be able to attend to any thing else, or ever divert our
imagination from these two objects. For what can more affect us than the
greatest Glory that ever was visible upon Earth, and at the same time
the greatest Terror. A God descending in the Head of an Army of Angels,
and a Burning World under his feet.

These are things truly above expression; And not only so, but so
different and remote from our ordinary thoughts and conceptions, that he
that comes nearest to a true description of them, shall be look’d upon
as the most extravagant. ’Tis or unhappiness to be so much used to
little trifling things in this life, that when any thing great is
represented to us, it appears phantastical: An Idea, made by some
contemplative or melancholy person. I will not venture therefore,
without premising some grounds out of Scripture, to say any thing
concerning This Glorious Appearance. As to the Burning of the World; I
think we have already laid a foundation sufficient to support the
highest description that can be made of it; But the coming of our
Saviour being wholly out of the way of

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Natural Causes, it is reasonable we should take
all directions we can from Scripture, that we may give a more fitting
and just account of that Sacred Pomp.

I need not mention those places of Scripture<span
class="margnote">*Matt*. 24. 30, 31. *Act*. 1. 11. & 3. 20, 21. *Apoc*.
1. 7. *Heb*. 9. 28.</span> that prove the second coming of our Saviour
in general, or his return to the Earth again at the end of the World: no
Christian can doubt of this, ’tis so often repeated in those Sacred
Writings. But the manner and circumstances of this Coming, or of this
Appearance, are the things we now enquire into. And in the first place,
we may observe that Scripture tells us our Saviour will come in *Flaming
Fire*, and with an *Host of mighty Angels*; so says St. *Paul* to the
*Thessalonians*, <span class="margnote">1 *Ep*. 1. 7. *Matt*. 16.
27.</span> *The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with mighty
Angels; in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ*. In the second place, our
Saviour says himself, *The Son of man shall come in the glory of his
Father with his Angels*. From which two places we may learn, first, that
the appearance of our Saviour will be with flames of Fire. Secondly,
with an Host of Angels. Thirdly, in the glory of his Father. By which
glory of the Father I think is understood that Throne of Glory
represented by *Daniel* for the *Ancient of Days*. For our Saviour
speaks here to the *Jews*, and probably in a way intelligible to them;
And the Glory of the Father which they were most likely to understand,
would be either the Glory wherein God appeared at Mount *Sinai*, upon
the giving of the Law, whereof the Apostle speaks largely to the
*Hebrews*; <span class="margnote">*ch*. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21.</span>or
that which *Daniel* represents Him in at the day of Judgment. And this
latter being more proper to the subject of our Saviour's discourse, ’tis
more likely this expression refers to it. Give me leave therefore to set
down that description of the Glory of the Father upon his Throne, from
the Prophet *Daniel*, ch. 7, 9. *And I beheld till the Thrones were
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)set, and the Ancient of days did
sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the
pure wool: His throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as
burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him,
thousand thousands ministred unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him*. With this Throne of the glory of the Father,
let us, if you please, compare the Throne of the Son of God, as it was
seen by St. John in the Apocalypse, ch. 4. 2, *&c*. *And immediately I
was in the Spirit: and behold a throne was set in heaven, and one sate
on the Throne. And he that sat, was to look upon like a jasper, and a
Sardine stone: and there was a Rain-bow round about the Throne, in
appearance like unto an Emerald. And out of the Throne proceeded
Lightnings, and Thunderings, and Voices, &c. and before the Throne was a
Sea of glass like unto Crystal*.

In these representations you have some beams of the glory of the Father
and of the Son; which may be partly a direction to us, in conceiving the
lustre of our Saviour's appearance. Let us further observe, if you
please, how external nature will be affected at the sight of God, or of
this approaching glory. The Scripture often takes notice of this, and in
terms very high and eloquent. The Psalmist seems to have lov’d that
subject above others; to set out the greatness of the day of the Lord,
and the consternation of all nature at that time. He throws about his
thunder and lightning, makes the Hills to melt like wax at the presence
of

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

the Lord, and the very foundations of the Earth to tremble, as you may
see in the 18*th* *Psalm*, and the 97. and the 104. and several others,
which are too long to be here inserted. So the Prophet *Habakkuk*, in
his Prophetick prayer, *Chap*. 3*d*. hath many Ejaculations to the like
purpose. And the Prophet *Nahum* says, *The mountains quake at him, and
the hills melt, and the Earth is burnt at his presence: yea, the world,
and all that dwell therein*.

But more particularly, as to the face of Nature just before the coming
of our Saviour, that may be best collected from the signs of his coming
mention’d in the precedent Chapter. Those all meeting together, help to
prepare and make ready a Theater, fit for an angry God to come down
upon. The countenance of the Heavens will be dark and gloomy; and a Veil
drawn over the face of the Sun. The Earth in a disposition every where
to break into open flames. The tops of the Mountains smoaking; the
Rivers dry; Earthquakes in several places; the Sea sunk and retied into
its deepest Chanel, and roaring, as against some mighty storm. These
things will make the day dead and melancholy, but the Night-Scenes will
have more of horrour in them. When the *Blazing-Stars* appear, like so
many Furies, with their lighted Torches, threatning to set all on fire.
For I do not doubt but the Comets will bear a part in this Tragedy, and
have something extraordinary in them, at that time; either as to number,
or bigness, or nearness to the Earth. Besides, the Air will be full of
flaming Meteors, of unusual forms and magnitudes; Balls of fire rowling
in the Skie, and pointed lightnings darted against the Earth; mixt with
claps of thunder, and unusual noises from the Clouds. The Moon and the
Stars will be confus’d and irregular, both in their light and motions;
as if the whole frame of the Heavens was out of order, all the laws of
Nature were broken or expir’d.

When all things are in this languishing or dying posture, and the
Inhabitants of the Earth under the fears of their last end; The Heavens
will open on a sudden, and the Glory of God will appear. A Glory
surpassing the Sun in its greatest radiancy; which, tho’ we cannot
describe, we may suppose it will bear some resemblance or proportion
with those representations that are made in Scripture, of *God upon his
Throne*. This wonder in the Heavens, whatsoever its form may be, will
presently attract the eyes of all the Christian World. Nothing can more
affect them than an object so unusual and so illustrious; and that,
(probably) brings along with it their last destiny, and will put a
period to all humane affairs.

Some of the Ancients<span class="margnote">2 *Pet*. 3. 10.</span> have
thought that this coming of our Saviour would be in the dead of the
night, and his first glorious appearance in the midst of darkness. God
is often describ’d in Scripture as Light or Fire, with darkness round
about him. <span class="margnote">Psal. 18. 9, 11, 12.</span>*He bowed
the Heavens and came down, and darkness was under his feet. He made
darkness his secret place: His pavilion round about him were dark Waters
and thick Clouds of the Skies. At the brightness that was before him,
the thick Clouds passed*.<span class="margnote">*Psal*. 97.</span> And
when God appear’d upon Mount *Sinai*, *the Mountain burnt with fire unto
the midst of Heaven with darkness, clouds, and thick darkness*:<span
class="margnote">Deut. 4. 11.</span> Or, as the Apostle expresses it,
with *blackness* and *darkness*, and *tempest*. Light is never more
glorious than when surrounded with darkness; and it may be the Sun, at
that time, will be so obscure, as to make little distinction of Day and
Night. <span class="margnote">Hebr. 12. 18.</span> But

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

however this Divine Light over-bears and distinguishes it self from
common Light, tho’ it be at Mid-day. ’Twas about Noon that the Light
shin’d from Heaven and surrounded St. Paul.<span class="margnote">*Acts*
22. 6.</span> And ’twas on the Day-time that St. *Stephen* saw the
*Heavens opened; saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God*.<span class="margnote">*Acts* 7. 55, 56.</span> This light,
which flows from a more vital source, be it Day or Night, will always be
predominant.

That appearance of God upon Mount *Sinai*, which we mention’d, if we
reflect upon it, will help us a little to form an Idea of this last
appearance. When God had declar’d, that he would come down in the sight
of the People; The Text says, *There were thunders and lightnings, and a
thick Cloud upon the Mount, and the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud;
so that all the people that was in the Camp trembled. And Mount Sinai
was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire.
And the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole
Mount quaked greatly*. If we look upon this Mount as an Epitome of the
Earth, this appearance gives us an imperfect resemblance of that which
is to come. Here are the several parts or main strokes of it; first, the
Heavens and the Earth in smoke and fire, then the appearance of a Divine
Glory, and the sound of a Trumpet in the presence of Angels. But as the
second coming of our Saviour is a Triumph over his Enemies, and an
entrance into his Kingdom, and is acted upon the Theater of the whole
Earth; so we are to suppose, in proportion, all the parts and
circumstances of it, more great and magnificent.

When therefore this mighty God returns again to that Earth, where he had
once been ill treated, not Mount *Sinai* only, but all the Mountains of
the Earth, and all the Inhabitants of the World, will tremble at his
presence. At the first opening of the Heavens, the brightness of his
Person will scatter the dark Clouds, and shoot streams of light
throughout all the Air. But that first appearance, being far from the
Earth, will seem to be onely a great mass of light, without any distinct
form; till, by nearer approaches, this bright Body shows it self to be
an Army of Angels, with this King of kings for their Leader. Then you
may imagine how guilty Mankind will tremble and be astonish’d; and while
they are gazing at this heavenly Host, the Voice of the *Archangel is
heard*, the shrill sound of the Trumpet reaches their ears. And this
gives the general Alarum to all the World. *For he cometh, for he
cometh*, they cry, *to judge the Earth*. The crucified God is return’d
in Glory, to take Vengeance upon his Enemies: Not onely upon those that
pierc’d his Sacred Body, with Nails and with a Spear, at *Jerusalem*;
but those also that pierce him every day by their prophaneness and hard
speeches, concerning his Person and his Religion. Now they see that God
whom they have mock’d, or blasphem’d, laugh’t at his meanness, or at his
vain threats; They see Him, and are confounded with shame and fear; and
in the bitterness of their anguish and despair call for the Mountains to
fall upon them.<span class="margnote">*Isa*. 2. 19.  
*Rev*. 6. 16, 17.</span> *Fly into the clefts of the Rocks, and into the
Caves of the Earth, for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his Majesty,
when he ariseth to shake terribly the Earth*.

As it is not possible for us to express or conceive the dread and
majesty of this appearance; so neither can we, on the other hand,
express the passions and consternation of the People that behold it.
These things exceed the measures of

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

humane affairs, and of humane thoughts; we have neither words, nor
comparisons, to make them known by. The greatest pomp and magnificence
of the Emperors of the East, in their Armies, in their triumphs, in
their inaugurations, is but like the sport and entertainment of
Children, if compar’d with this Solemnity. When God condescends to an
external glory, with a visible Train and Equipage: When, from all the
Provinces of his vast and boundless Empire, he summons his Nobles, as I
may so say: The several orders of Angels and Arch-Angels, to attend his
Person; tho’ we cannot tell the form or manner of this Appearance, we
know there is nothing in our experience, or in the whole history of this
World, that can be a just representation of the least part of it. No
Armies so numerous as the Host of Heaven: and in the midst of those
bright Legions, in a flaming Chariot, will sit the Sun of Man, when he
comes to be glorified in his Saints, and triumph over his Enemies. And
instead of the wild noises of the rabble, which makes a great part of
our worldly state: This blessed Company will breath their *Halleluiahs*
into the open Air; and repeated acclamations of<span
class="margnote">*Apoc*. 7. 10. &  
12. 10.</span> *Salvation to God, which sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb. Now is come salvation and strength, and the kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ*.

But I leave the rest to our silent devotion and admiration. Onely give
me leave, whilst this object is before our eyes, to make a short
reflection upon the wonderful history of our Saviour; and the different
states, which that Sacred Person, within the compass of our knowledge,
hath undergone. We now see him coming in the Clouds in glory and
triumph, surrounded with innumerable Angels. This is the same Person,
who, so many hundred Years ago, enter’d *Jerusalem*, with another sort
of Equipage: mounted upon an Asse's Colt, while the little people and
the multitude cry’d, *Hosanna* to the *Son of David*. Nay, this is the
same Person, that, at his first coming into this World, was laid in a
Manger instead of a Cradle; A naked Babe dropt in a Crib at
*Bethlehem*:<span class="margnote">Luke 2. 12.</span> His poor Mother
not having wherewithall to get her a better Lodging, when she was to be
deliver’d of this Sacred burthen. This helpless Infant, that often
wanted a little Milk to refresh it, and support its weakness: That hath
often cry’d for the Breast, with hunger and tears: now appears to be the
Lord of Heaven and Earth. If this Divine Person had fain from the clouds
in a mortal Body, cloath’d with Flesh and Blond, and spent his life here
amongst sinners; that alone had been an infinite condescension. But as
if it had not been enough to take upon him humane Nature, he was
content, for many months, to live the life of an Animal, or of a Plant,
in the dark cell of a woman's Womb. *This is the Lord's doing, it is
marvellous in our eyes*.

Neither is this all that is wonderful in the story of our Saviour. If
the manner of his death be compar’d with his present glory, we shall
think, either the one, or the other, incredible. Look up, first, into
the Heavens: see how they bow under him, and receive a new light from
the Glory of his Presence. Then look down upon the Earth, and see a
naked Body hanging upon a cursed Tree in *Golgotha*: crucified betwixt
two Thieves: wounded, spit upon, mock’d, abus’d. Is it possible to
believe that one and the same person can act or suffer such different
parts? That he, that is now Lord and Master of all Nature: not only

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

of Death and Hell, and the powers of darkness: but of all Principalities
in heavenly places: is the same Infant Jesus, the same crucified Jesus,
of whose life and death the Christian records give us an account? The
History of this person is the Wonder of this World<span
class="margnote">1 *Pet*. 1. 11, 12.</span>; and not of this World only,
but of the Angels above, that desire to look into it.

Let us now return to our subject. We left the Earth in a languishing
condition, ready to be made a Burnt-offering, to appease the wrath of
its offended Lord. When *Sodom* was to be destroy’d, <span
class="margnote">*Gen*. 18.</span> *Abraham* interceded with God that he
would spare it for the Righteous sake: And *David*<span
class="margnote">2 *Sam*. 24. 17.</span> interceded to save his
guiltless People from God's Judgments and the Destroying Angel. But here
is no Intercessor for mankind in this last extremity: None to interpose
where the Mediator of our Peace is the party offended. Shall then *the
righteous perish with the wicked? Shall not the judge of all the Earth
do right?* Or if the Righteous be translated and delivered from This
Fire, what shall become of innocent children and Infants? Must these all
be given up to the merciless flames, as a Sacrifice to *Moloch*? and
their tender flesh, like burnt incense, send up fumes to feed the
nostrils of evil Spirits? Can the God of *Israel* smell a sweet savour
from such Sacrifices? The greater half of mankind is made up of Infants
and Children: and if the wicked be destroyed, *yet these Lambs, what
have they done?* are there no bowels of compassion for such an harmless
multitude? But we leave them to their Guardian Angels, <span
class="margnote">*Matt*. 18. 10.</span> and to that Providence which
watches over all things.

It only remains therefore, to let fall that Fire from Heaven, which is
to consume this Holocaust. Imagine all Nature now standing in a silent
expectation to receive its last doom: The Tutelary and Destroying Angels
to have their instructions: Every thing to be ready for the fatal hour:
And then, after a little silence, all the Host of Heaven to raise their
voice and sing aloud, LET GOD ARISE: *Let his enemies be scattered. As
smoak is driven away, so drive them away: As wax melteth before the
fire, so LET the wicked perish at the presence of God*. And upon this,
as upon a signal given, all the sublunary World breaks into Flames, and
all the Treasuries of Fire are open’d, in Heaven and in Earth.

Thus the Conflagration begins. If one should now go about to represent
*the World on Fire*, with all the confusions that necessarily must be,
in Nature and in Mankind, upon that occasion, it would seem to most men
a Romantick Scene. Yet we are sure there must be such a Scene. *The
heavens will pass away with a noise, and the Elements will melt with
fervent heat, and all the works of the Earth will be burnt up*. And
these things cannot come to pass without the greatest disorders
imaginable, both in the minds of Men and in external Nature: and the
saddest spectacles that eye can behold. We think it a great matter to
see a single person burnt alive: here are Millions, shrieking in the
flames at once. ’Tis frightful to us to look upon a great City in
flames, and to see the distractions and misery of the people: here is an
Universal Fire through all the Cities of the Earth, and an Universal
Massacre of their Inhabitants. Whatsoever the Prophets<span
class="margnote">*Isa*. 24.  
*Jer*. 51.  
*Lament*.</span> foretold of the desolations of *Judea*, *Jerusalem*, or
*Babylon*, in the highest strains, is more than literally accomplish’d
in this last and general Calamity: And those only that are Spectators of
it, can make its History.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

The disorders in Nature and the inanimate World will be no less, nor
less strange and unaccountable, than those in Mankind. Every Element,
and every Region, so far as the bounds of this Fire extend, will be in a
tumult and a fury, and the whole habitable World running into confusion.
A World is sooner destroyed than made, and Nature relapses hastily into
that Chaos-state, out of which she came by slow and leisurely motions.
As an Army advances into the field by just and regular marches, but when
it is broken and routed, it flies with precipitation, and one cannot
describe its posture. Fire is a barbarous Enemy, it gives no mercy;
there is nothing but fury, and rage, and ruine, and destruction,
wheresoever it prevails. A storm or *Hurricano*, tho’ it be but the
force of Air, makes a strange havock where it comes; but devouring
flames, or exhalations set on Fire, have still a far greater violence,
and carry more terror along with them. Thunder and Earthquakes are the
Sons of Fire: and we know nothing in all Nature, more impetuous, or more
irresistibly destructive than these two. And accordingly in this last
war of the Elements, we may be sure, they will bear their parts, and do
great execution in the several regions of the World. Earthquakes and
Subterraneous Eruptions will tear the body and bowels of the Earth; and
Thunders and convulsive motions of the Air, rend the Skies. The waters
of the Sea will boyl and struggle with streams of Sulphur that run into
them; which will make them fume, and smoke, and roar, beyond all storms
and tempests. And these noises of the Sea will be answered again from
the Land by failing Rocks and Mountains. This is a small part of the
disorders of that day.

But ’tis not possible, from any station, to have a full prospect of this
last Scene of the Earth: for ’tis a mixture of fire and darkness. This
new Temple is fill’d with smoak, while it is consecrating, and none can
enter into it. But I am apt to think, if we could look down upon this
burning World from above the Clouds, and have a full view of it, in all
its parts, we should think it a lively representation of *Hell* it self.
For, Fire and darkness are the two chief things by which that state, or
that place, uses to be describ'd: and they are both here mingled
together: with all other ingredients that make that Tophet that is
prepar’d of old. <span class="margnote">*Isa*. 30.</span>Here are Lakes
of fire and brimstone: Rivers of melted glowing matter: Ten thousand
Volcano's vomiting flames all at once. Thick darkness, and Pillars of
smoke twisted about with wreaths of flame, like fiery Snakes. Mountains
of Earth thrown up into the Air, and the Heavens dropping down in lumps
of fire. These things will all be literally true, concerning that day,
and that state of the Earth. And if we suppose *Beelzebub*, and his
Apostate crew, in the midst of this fiery furnace: (and I know not where
they can be else.) It will be hard to find any part of the Universe, or
any state of things, that answers to so many of the properties and
characters of *Hell*, as this which is now before us.

But if we suppose the storm over, and that the fire hath got an entire
victory over all other bodies, and subdued every thing to it self, the
Conflagration will end in a Deluge of fire: Or, in a Sea of fire,
covering the whole Globe of the Earth. For, when the exterior region of
the Earth is melted into a fluor, like molten glass, or running metal;
it will, according to the nature of other Fluids,

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

fill all vacuities and depressions, and fall into a regular surface, at
an equal distance, every where, from its center. This Sea of fire, like
the first Abyss, will cover the face of the whole Earth: make a kind of
second Chaos: and leave a capacity for another World to rise from it.
But that is not our present business. Let us onely, if you please, to
take leave of this subject, reflect upon this occasion, on the Vanity
and transient glory of all this habitable World. How, by the force of
one Element, breaking loose upon the rest, all the Varieties of Nature,
all the works of Art, all the labours of Men are reduc’d to nothing. All
that we admir’d and ador’d before, as great and magnificent, is
obliterated or vanish’d. And another form and face of things, plain,
simple, and every where the same, overspreads the whole Earth. Where are
now the great Empires of the World, and their great Imperial Cities?
Their Pillars, Trophees, and Monuments of glory? Show me where they
stood: read the Inscription, tell me the Victor's name. What remains,
what impressions, what difference or distinction do you see in this mass
of fire? *Rome* it self, *Eternal Rome*, the Great City, the Empress of
the World, whose domination and superstition, *ancient and modern*, make
a great part of the history of this Earth: What is become of her now?
She laid her foundations deep, and her Palaces were strong and
sumptuous: *She glorified her self, and liv’d deliciously: and said in
her heart, I sit a Queen, and shall see no sorrow*. But her hour is
come, she is wip’d away from the face of the Earth, and buried in
everlasting oblivion. But ’tis not Cities onely, and works of men's
hands, but the everlasting Hills, the Mountains and Rocks of the Earth,
are melted as Wax before the Sun; and *their place is no where found*.
Here stood the *Alpes*, a prodigious range of Stone, the Load of the
Earth, that cover’d many Countries, and reach’d their armes from the
Ocean to the *Black Sea*; This huge mass of Stone is soften’d and
dissolv’d, as a tender Cloud into rain. Here stood the *African*
Mountains, and *Atlas* with his top above the Clouds. There was frozen
Caucasus, and *Taurus*, and *Imaus*, and the Mountains of *Asia*. And
yonder towards the North stood the *Riphæan* Hills, cloath’d in Ice and
Snow. All these are vanish’d, dropt away as the Snow upon their heads:
and swallowed up in a red Sea of fire. <span class="margnote">Revel. 15.
3.</span>*Great and marvellous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty: just
and true are thy ways, Thou King of Saints*. Hallelujah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[300:1](ste43.htm#fr_15) ’Tis ill render’d in
the English, *cast down*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conclusion](ste44)
