[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste49)  [Next](ste51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

*The proof of a* Millennium*, or of a blessed Age to come, from
Scripture. A view of the Apocalypse, and of the Prophecies of* Daniel*,
in reference to this Kingdom of Christ and of his Saints*.

WE have given fair presumptions, if not proofs, in the precedent
Chapter, That the Sons of the first Resurrection will be the persons
that shall inhabit the *New Earth*, or the World to come. But to make
that proof compleat and unexceptionable, I told you it would be
necessary to make a larger compass in our discourse, and to examine what
is meant by *That Reign with Christ a thousand years*, which is promis’d
to the Sons of the *first Resurrection*; by St. *John* in the
Apocalypse; and in other places of Scripture is usually call’d the
*Kingdom of Christ*, and the reign of the Saints. And by Ecclesiastical
Authors, in imitation of St. *John*, it is commonly styled the
*Millennium*. We shall indifferently use any of these words or phrases;
and examine, First, the truth of the Notion and Opinion; whether in
Scripture there be such an happy state promised to the Saints, under the
conduct of Christ. And then we will proceed to examine the nature,
characters, place and time of it. And I am in hopes when these things
are duly discuss’d and stated, you will be satisfied that we have found
out the true Inhabitants of the New Heavens and New Earth: and the true
mystery of that state which is call’d the *Millennium*, or the Reign of
Christ and of his Saints.

We begin with St. *John*; whose words, in the twentieth chapter of the
*Apocalypse*, are express, both as to the first Resurrection, and as to
the reign of those Saints, that rise, with Christ, for a thousand years.
Satan in the mean time being bound, or disabled from doing mischief and
seducing mankind, The words of the Prophet<span class="margnote">*ver*.
1, 2, 4, 5, 6.</span> are these: *And I saw an Angel come down from
heaven, having the key of the bottom-less pit, and a great chain in his
hand. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old* 

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan; and
bound him a thousand years. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them,
and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the Souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which
had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received
his mark upon their fore-heads, or in their hands; and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not
again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first
Resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first
Resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be
priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years*. These words do fully express a Resurrection, and a reign with
Christ a thousand years. As for that particular space of time, of a
*thousand years*, it is not much material to our present purpose: but
the Resurrection here spoken of, and the reign with Christ, make the
substance of the controversie, and in effect prove all that we enquire
after at present. This Resurrection, you see, is call’d the *First
Resurrection*, by way of distinction from the second and general
Resurrection; which is also taken notice of, and plac’d a thousand years
after the first. And both this first Resurrection and the reign of
Christ, seem to be appropriated to the Martyrs in this place. For the
Prophet says, *The Souls of those that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus,* &c*. They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years*. From
which words, if you please, we will raise this Doctrine: That, *Those
that have suffered for the sake of Christ and a good Conscience, shall
be raised from the dead a thousand years before the general
Resurrection, and reign with Christ, in an happy state*. This
Proposition seems to be plainly included in the words of St. *John*, and
to be the intended sence of this Vision; but you must have patience a
little as to your enquiry into particulars, till, in the progress of our
discourse, we have brought all the parts of this conclusion into a
fuller light.

In the mean time, there is but one way, that I know of, to evade the
force of these words, and of the conclusion drawn from them; and that
is, by supposing that the *First Resurrection* here mentioned, is not to
be understood in a literal sense, but is Allegorical and mystical;
signifying only a Resurrection from sin to a Spiritual Life. As we are
said to be *dead in sin*, and to be *risen with Christ*, by Faith and
Regeneration. This is a manner of Speech which St. *Paul* does sometimes
use: as *Ephes*. 2. 6. and 5. 14. and *Col*. 3. 1. But how can this be
applyed to the present case? Were the Martyrs dead in sin? ’Tis they
that are here rais’d from the dead. Or, after they were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, naturally dead and laid in their graves, were they
then regenerate by Faith? There is no congruity in allegories so
applyed. Besides, why should they be said to be regenerate a thousand
years before the day of Judgment: Or, to reign with Christ, after this
Spiritual Resurrection, such a limited time, a thousand years? why not
to Eternity? For in this allegorical sence of *rising* and *reigning*,
they will reign with him for everlasting. Then, after a thousand years
must all the wicked be regenerate, and rise into a Spiritual Life? ’Tis
said here,<span class="margnote">*ver*. 5.</span> *The rest of the Dead
lived not again, until the thousand years were finished*. That implyes,
that at the end of these thousand years, the rest of the dead did live
again; which, according to the Allegory must be, that, after a thousand
years, all the wicked will be

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

regenerate, and rais’d into a Spiritual Life. These absurdities arise
upon an allegorical exposition of this Resurrection, if apply’d to
single Persons.

But Dr. *Hammond*, a Learned and worthy Divine, (but one that loves to
contract and cramp the sence of Prophecies) making this first
Resurrection allegorical, applies it not to single Persons, but to the
state of the Church in general; The Christian Church, he says, shall
have a Resurrection for a thousand years: that is, shall rise out of
Persecution, be in a prosperous condition, and an undisturb’d profession
of the true Religion, for so long a time. But this agrees with the
Prophecy as little as the former; If it be a state of the Church in
general, and of the Church then in being, why is this Resurrection
apply’d to the Martyrs? why are they said to rise? seeing the state they
liv’d in, was a troublesome state of the Church, and it would be no
happiness to have that reviv’d again. Then as to the Time of this
Resurrection of the Church, where will you fix it? The Prophet *Daniel*
places this Reign of Christ, at, or after the dissolution of the fourth
Monarchy: and St. *John* places it a thousand years before the last Day
of Judgment: How will you adjust the Allegorical Resurrection of the
Church to these limits? Or if, in point of time, you was free, as to
Prophecy; yet how would you adjust it to History? Where will you take
these thousand years of happiness and prosperity to the Church? These
Authors suppose them past, and therefore must begin them either from the
first times of the Gospel, or from the time of *Constantine*. Under the
first Ages of the Gospel, were, you know, the great Persecutions by the
*Heathen* Emperours: Could those be call’d the Reign of Christ and of
his Saints? Was Sathan then bound? or was this Epocha but a thousand
years before the Day of Judgment? And if you begin this Resurrection of
the Church from the days of *Constantine*, when the Empire became
Christian, how will you reckon a thousand years from that time, for the
continuance of the Church in *peace* and *purity*? for the reign of
Christ and of his Saints must necessarily imply both those
Characters.<span class="margnote">*Ver*. 5.</span> Besides, who are the
*rest of the Dead*, that liv’d after the expiration of those thousand
years, if they begun at *Constantine*? And why is not the second
Resurrection and the Day of Judgment yet come? Lastly, you ought to be
tender of interpreting the first Resurrection in an Allegorical sence,
lest you expose the second Resurrection to be made an Allegory also.

To conclude, the words of the Text are plain and express for a literal
Resurrection, as to the first, as well as the second; and there is no
Allegorical interpretation that I know of, that will hold through all
the particulars of the Text, consistently with it self and with History.
And when we shall have prov’d this future Kingdom of Christ from other
places of the Apocalypse, and of Holy Writ, you will the more easily
admit the literal sence of this place: Which, you know, according to the
receiv’d rule of Interpreters, is never to be quitted or forsaken,
without necessity. But when I speak of confirming this Doctrine from
other passages of Scripture, I do not mean as to that definite time of a
*thousand years*, for that is no where else mention’d in the Apocalypse
or in Scripture, that I know of; and seems to be mention’d here, in this
close of all things, to mind us of that type that was propos’d in the
beginning of all things, *Of Six days and a Sabbath*. Whereof each Day
comprehends a thousand years, and the *Sabbath*,

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

which is the *Millennial state*, hath its thousand. According to the
known Prophecy of *Elias*,<span class="margnote">*Book* 3, *ch*.
5.</span> which, as I told you before, was not onely receiv’d amongst
the *Jews*, but also own’d by very many of the Christian Fathers.

To proceed therefore to other parts of St. *John*'s Prophecies, that set
forth this Kingdom of Christ. The Vision of the *Seven Trumpets* is one
of the most remarkable in the Apocalypse; and the seventh Trumpet,
which, plainly reaches to the end of the World, and the Resurrection of
the Dead, opens the Scene to the *Millennium*. Hear the sound of
it.<span class="margnote">*Chap*. 11. 15, 16, 17, 18.</span> *The
seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying,
The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. And the four and
twenty Elders, which sat before God on their Seats, fell upon their
faces, and worshiped God: Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God
Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken
to thee thy great power and hast reigned. And the Nations were angry,
and thy wrath is come, and the time of the Dead, that they should be
judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the
Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy Name, small and
great, and shouldest destroy them that destroy the Earth,* &c. This is
manifestly the kingdom of Christ: and with this is joyn’d the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the rewarding of the suffering Prophets
and Saints; as in the *twentieth Chapter*. This is that *mystery of God
that was to he finish’d in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel*:
as is said in the 20*th*. Chap. ver. 7. *As he hath declared to his
servants the Prophets*. Namely, the mystery of this kingdom, which was
foretold by the Prophets of the Old Testament: and more especially by
Daniel, as we shall see hereafter.

The *new Jerusalem*, (as it is set down, *Apoc*. 21. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.)
is another instance or image of this kingdom of Christ. And the
*Palm-bearing Company*, Chap. 7. 9, *&c*. are some of the Martyrs that
shall enjoy it. They are plainly describ’d there as Christian Martyrs;
(*ver*. 14.) And their reward, or the state of happiness they are to
enjoy, (*ver*. 15, 16, 17.) is the same with that of the In-habitants of
the *new Jerusalem*: Ch. 21. 2, 3, 4, *&c*. as, upon comparing those two
places, will easily appear. Furthermore, at the opening of the *Seals*,
*Chap*. 5. which is another principal Vision, and reaches to the end of
the World, there is a prospect given us of this kingdom of Christ, and
of that reward of his Saints. For when they sing the new Song to the
Lamb, (*ver*. 9, 10.) they say, *Thou art worthy to take the Book, and
to open the Seals thereof: For thou wast slain and hast redeemed us to
God, by thy bloud. And hast made us unto our God Kings and Priests: and
we shall reign on the Earth*. This must be the same state, and the same
thousand-years-Reign mention’d in the 20*th* Chapter. Where ’tis said,
(*ver*. 6.) the partakers of it *shall be Priests of God and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years*.

Another completory Vision, that extends it self to the end of the World,
is that of the *seven Vials*, *Ch*. 15, & 16. And as at the opening of
the Seals, so at the pouring out of the Vials, a triumphal Song is sung,
and ’tis call’d the *Song of Moses and of the Lamb*.<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 15. 3.</span> ’Tis plainly a Song of thanksgiving
for a Deliverance: but I do not look upon this deliverance as already
wrought, before the pouring

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

out of Vials, though it be plac’d before them: as often the grand design
and issue of a Vision is plac’d at the beginning. It is wrought by the
Vials themselves, and by their effusion, and therefore upon the pouring
out of the last Vial, The voice came out of the Temple of Heaven, from
the Throne, saying,<span class="margnote">*ch*. 16. 17.</span>
*Consummatum est*: *It is done*. Now the Deliverance is wrought, now the
work is at an end: or, *The mystery of God is finish*’d, as the phrase
was before, concerning the 7*th* Trumpet: *Ch*. 10. 7. You see therefore
this terminates upon the same time, and consequently upon the same
state, of the *Millennium*. And that they are the same Persons that
triumph here, and reign there, *Ch*. 20. You may see by the same
Characters given to both of them.<span class="margnote">*ch*. 15.
2.</span> Here, those that triumph, are said *to have gotten the
victory* over the Beast, and over his Image, *and over his mark, and
over the number of his name*. And there,<span class="margnote">*ch*. 20.
4.</span> Those that reign with Christ, are said to be those *that had
not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had received his
mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands*. These are the same
Persons therefore, triumphing over the same Enemies, and enjoying the
same reward.

And you shall seldom find any *Doxology* or *Hallelujah* in the
Apocalypse, but ’tis in prospect of the kingdom of Christ, and the
*Millennial* state. That is still the burthen of the Sacred Song: The
complement of every grand Vision, and the life and strength of the whole
Systeme of Prophecies in that Book. Even those *Halleluja's* that are
sung at the destruction of *Babylon*, in the 19*th*. Chapter,<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 19. 6, 7.</span> are rais’d upon the view of the
succeeding state, *the Reign of Christ*. For the Text says, *And I heard
as it were a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, and as the voice of mighty thunders, saying, Hallelujah. FOR THE
LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT REIGNETH. Let us be glad and rejoyce and give honour
to him: FOR THE MARRIAGE OF THE LAMB IS COME, AND HIS WIFE HATH MADE HER
SELF READY*. This appears plainly to be the *New Jerusalem*, if you
consult the 21. ch. ver. 2. *And I John saw the Holy City, New
Jerusalem, coining down from God out of Heaven, PREPARED AS A BRIDE
ADORNED FOR HER HUSBAND*. ’Tis, no doubt, the same Bride and Bridegroom,
in both places; the same marriage or preparations for marriage; which
are compleated in the Millennial bliss, in the kingdom of Christ and of
his Saints.

I must still beg your patience a little longer, in pursuing this
argument throughout the Apocalypse. As towards the latter end of St.
*John*'s Revelation this Kingdom of Christ shines out in a more full
glory, so there are the dawnings of it in the very beginning and
entrance into his Prophecies. As at the beginning of a Poem, we have
commonly in a few words the design of the Work, in like manner St. John
makes this Preface to his Prophecies,<span class="margnote">*ch*. 1. 5,
6.</span> *From Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the first
begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth: unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own bloud: And hath
made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever, Amen. Behold, he cometh in the clouds*, &c.
In this Prologue the grand argument is pointed at, and that happy
Catastrophe and last Scene which is to crown the Work: The Reign of
Christ and of his Saints at his second coming. He hath *made us Kings
and Priests unto God*: This is always the

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Characteristick of those that are to enjoy the
Millennial happiness; as you may see at the opening of the Seals, chap.
5. 10. and in the Sons of the *First Resurrection*, *ch*. 20. 6. And
this being joyned to the coming of our Saviour, puts it still more out
of doubt. That expression also, of being *washt from our sins in his
bloud*, is repeated again both at the opening of the Seals, *ch*. 5. 9.
and in the *Palm-bearing* Company, *ch*. 7. 14. both which places we
have cited before as referring to the Millennial State.

Give me leave to add further, that as in this general Preface, so also
in the Introductory visions of the *Seven Churches*, there are, covertly
or expresly, in the conclusion of each, glances upon the *Millennium*.
As in the first to *Ephesus*, the Prophet concludes,<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 2. 7.</span> *He that hath an ear, let him hear,
what the Spirit says to the Churches: TO HIM THAT OVERCOMETH WILL I GIVE
TO EAT OF THE TREE OF LIFE, WHICH IS IN THE MIDST OF THE PARADISE OF
GOD*. This is the Millennial happiness which is promised to the
Conquerour; as we noted before concerning that phrase. In like manner in
the second to *Smyrna*, He concludes:<span class="margnote">*ch*. 2.
11.</span> *He that overcometh, shall not be hurt of the second death*.
This implyes, he shall be partaker of the *first Resurrection*, for
that's the thing understood; as you may see plainly by their being
joyn’d in the 20*th* *ch*. *ver*. 6. *Blessed and holy is he that hath
part in the first Resurrection: on such the second death hath no power:
but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him
a thousand years*. In the 3*d* to *Pergamus*,<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 2. 17.</span> the promise is, *to eat of the
hidden Manna, to have a white stone, and a new name written in it*. But
seeing the Prophet adds, *which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth
it*, we will not presume to interpret that new state, whatsoever it is.
In *Thyatira*, the reward is,<span class="margnote">*ch*. 2. 26,
27.</span> *To have power over the nations*, and to have the *Morning
Star*. Which is to reign with Christ, who is the morning Star, in his
Millennial Empire: both these phrases being us’d in that sence in the
close of this Book. In *Sardis* the promise is,<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 3. 5.</span> *To be clothed in white raiment, and
not to be blotted out of the Book of Life*. And you see afterwards the
*Palm-bearing* Company<span class="margnote">*ch*. 7. 9, 14.</span> are
clothed in *white robes*; and those that are admitted into the *New
Jerusalem*, are such as are *written in the Lamb's book of life*, *ch*.
21. 27. Then as to *Philadelphia*,<span class="margnote">*ch*. 3.
12.</span> the reward promised there does openly mark the Millennial
state, by the *City of God, New Jerusalem which cometh down out of
heaven from God*: compar’d with *chap*. 21. 2. Lastly, to the Church of
*Laodicea* is said,<span class="margnote">*ch*. 3. 21.</span> *To him
that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my Throne*. And that is
the usual phrase to express the dignity of those that reign with Christ,
in his Millennial kingdom: as you may see, *Apoc*. 20. 4. *Matt*. 19.
28. *Dan*. 7. 9, 13, 14. So all these promises to the Churches aim at
one and the same thing, and terminate upon the same point; ’Tis the same
re-ward express’d in different ways; and seeing ’tis still fixt upon a
victory, and appropriated to those that overcome, it does the more
easily carry our thoughts to the *Millennium*, which is the proper
reward of Victors, that is, of Martyrs and Confessors.

Thus you see how this notion and mystery of the Millennial kingdom of
Christ, does both begin and end the *Apocalypse*, and run thorough all
its parts: As the Soul of that Body of Prophecies: A Spirit or ferment
that actuates the whole

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

mass. And if we could thoroughly understand that illustrious Scene at
the opening of this Apocalyptical Theatre in the 4*th* and 5*th* *chap*.
I do not doubt but we should find it a Representation of the Majesty of
our Saviour in the Glory of his future Kingdom. But I dare not venture
upon the explication of it, there are so many things of difficult and
dubious interpretation, coucht under those Schemes. Wherefore having
made these observations upon the Prophecies of St. *John*, we will now
add to them some reflections upon the Prophecies of *Daniel*. That by
the agreement and concurrence of these two great Witnesses, the
Conclusion we pretend to prove, may be fully established.

In the Prophecies of *Daniel* there are two grand Visions, that of the
*Statue* or Image, chap. 2. and that of the four Beasts, *chap*. 7. And
both these Visions terminate upon the *Millennium*, or the Kingdom of
Christ. In the Vision of the Statue, representing to us the four great
Monarchies of the World successively, (whereof, by the general consent
of Interpreters, The *Roman* is the fourth and last) after the
dissolution of the last of them, a fifth Monarchy, the Kingdom of
Christ, is openly introduc’d, in these words:<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 2. *v*. 44.</span> *And in the days of these
kingdoms, shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be
destroy’d, and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it
shall break in pieces, and consume all those kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever*. This may be verified, in some measure, by the first
coming of our Saviour in the days of the 4*th* kingdom; when his
Religion from small beginnings, in a short time overspread the greatest
part of the known World. <span class="margnote">*ver*. 34, 35.</span>As
the *stone cut out without hands*, became a great *mountain and filled
the whole Earth*. But the full and final accomplishment of this Prophecy
cannot be till the second coming of our Saviour. <span
class="margnote">*ver*. 35.</span>For not till then, will he *break in
pieces and consume all those kingdoms; and that in such a manner, that
they shall become like the chaff of the Summer threshing floor, carried
away by the wind: so as no place shall be found for them*. This, I say,
will not be done, nor an everlasting Kingdom erected in their place,
over all the Nations of the Earth, till his Second Coming, and his
Millennial Reign.

But this Reign is declared more expresly, in the Vision of the four
Beasts, *chap*. 7.<span class="margnote">*ch*. 7. 13.</span> For after
the destruction of the fourth Beast, the Prophet says, *I saw in the
night, Visions, and behold one like the Son of man, came with the clouds
of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near
before him: And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom,
that all people, nations, and languages should serve him: His dominion
is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away: and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroy’d*. Accordingly he says, ver. 21, 22.
*The last Beast and the little Horn made war against the Saints, until
the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the
most High; and the time came that the Saints possessed the kingdom*. And
lastly, in pursuit still of the same argument, he concludes to the same
effect in fuller words, ver. 26, 27. *But the Judgment shall sit, and
they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the
end. And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom
under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most High: whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions shall serve and obey him*.

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

*Here is the end of the matter:* says the Prophet.<span
class="margnote">*ch*. 7. 28.  
*ch*. 12. 13.</span> Here is the upshot and result of all. Here
terminate both the Prophecies of *Daniel* and St. *John*: and all the
affairs of the Terrestrial World. *Daniel* brings in, this kingdom of
Christ, in the conclusion of two or three Visions; but St. *John* hath
interwoven it every where with his Prophecies, from first to last. And
you may as well open a Lock without a Key, as interpret the Apocalypse
without the *Millennium*. But after these two great Witnesses, the one
for the old Testament, the other for the new, we must look into the rest
of the Sacred Writers; for tho’ every single Author there, is an Oracle,
yet the concurrence of Oracles is still a further demonstration, and
takes away all remains of doubt or incredulity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](ste51)
