[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ste60)  [Next](ste62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

THE later Part consists of the *Conflagration of the World*, and the
*New Heavens* and *New Earth*. And seeing there is no dispute concerning
the former of these two, our task will now lie in a little compass.
Being onely this, To prove that there will be New Heavens, and a New
Earth, after the Conflagration. This, to my mind, is sufficiently done
already, in the first, second and third Chapters of the 4*th*. Book,
both from Scripture and Antiquity, whether Sacred or prophane: and
therefore, at present, we will onely make a short and easie review of
Scripture-Testimonies, with design chiefly to obviate and disappoint the
evasions of such, as would beat down solid Texts into thin Metaphors and
Allegories.

The Testimonies of Scripture concerning the *Renovation of the World*,
are either express, or implicit. Those I call express, that mention the
New Heavens and New Earth: And those implicit, that signifie the same
thing, but not in express terms. So when our Saviour speaks of a
*Palingenesia*, or Regeneration, (*Matt*. 19. 28, 29.) Or St. *Peter* of
an *Apocatastasis* or Restitution, (*Act*. 3. 21.) These being words
us’d by all Authors, prophane or Ecclesiastical, for the Renovation of
the World, ought, in reason, to be interpreted in the same sence in the
holy Writings. And in like manner, when St. *Paul* speaks of his *Future
Earth*, or an *habitable World to come*, *Hebr*. 2. 5. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38) or of a *Redemption* or melioration of the
present state of nature, *Rom*. 8. 21, 22. These lead us again, in other
terms, to the same *Renovation* of the World. But there are also some
places of Scripture, that set the *New Heavens* and *New Earth* in such
a full and open view, that we must shut our eyes not to see them. St.
*John* says, he saw them, and observ’d the form of the New Earth,
*Apoc*. 21. 1. The Seer *Isaiah*<span class="margnote">*Isa*. 65.
57.</span> spoke of them in express words, many hundred years before.
And St. *Peter* marks the time when they are to be introduc’d, namely
after the Conflagration, or after the Dissolution of the present Heavens
and Earth: 2 *Pet*. 3. 12, 13.

These later Texts of Scripture, being so express, there is but one way
left to elude the force of them; and that is, by turning the *Renovation
of the World* into an Allegory: and making the New Heavens and New Earth
to be Allegorical Heavens and Earth, not real and material, as ours are.
This is a bold attempt of some modern Authors, who chuse rather to
strain the Word of God, than their

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

own notions. There are Allegories, no doubt, in Scripture, but we are
not to allegorize Scripture without some warrant: either from an
Apostolical interpretation, or from the necessity of the matter: and I
do not know how they can pretend to either of these, in this case.
However, that they may have all fair play, we will lay aside, at
present, all the other Texts of Scripture, and confine our selves wholly
to St. *Peter*'s words: to see and examine whether they are, or can be
turn’d into an Allegory, according to the best rules of interpretation.

<span class="margnote">2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13.</span>St. *Peter*'s words
are these: *Seeing then all these things shall be dissolv’d, what manner
of persons ought ye to be, in holy conversation and godliness? Looking
for, and hasting the coming of the Day of God: wherein the Heavens being
on fire shall be dissolv’d, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat. NEVERTHELESS, we, according to his promise, look for New Heavens
and a New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell*. The Question is
concerning this last Verse, *Whether the New Heavens and Earth* here
promis’d, are to be real and material Heavens and Earth, or onely
figurative and allegorical. The words, you see, are clear: And the
general rule of interpretation is this, *That* we are not to recede from
the letter, or the literal sence, unless there be a necessity from the
subject matter; such a necessity, as makes a literal interpretation
absurd. But where is that necessity in this Case? Cannot God make new
Heavens and a new Earth, as easily as he made the Old ones? Is his
strength decay’d since that time, or is Matter grown more disobedient?
Nay, does not Nature offer her self voluntarily to raise a new World
from the second Chaos, as well as from the first: and, under the conduct
of Providence, to make it as convenient an habitation as the Primæval
Earth? Therefore no necessity can be pretended of leaving the literal
sence, upon an incapacity of the subject matter.

The second rule to determine an Interpretation to be Literal or
Allegorical, is, the use of the same words or phrase in the Context, and
the signification of them there. Let's then examine our case according
to this rule. St. *Peter* had us’d the same phrase of *Heavens and
Earth* twice before in the same Chapter. The *old Heavens and Earth*,
*ver*. 5. The *present Heavens and Earth*, *ver*. 7. and now he uses it
again, *ver*. 13. *The new Heavens and Earth*. Have we not then reason
to suppose, that he takes it here in the same sence, that he had done
twice before, for real and material Heavens and Earth? There is no mark
set of a new signification, nor why we should alter the sence of the
words. That he us’d them always before for the material Heavens and
Earth, I think none will question: and therefore, unless they can give
us a sufficient reason, why we should change the signification of the
words, we are bound, by this second rule also, to understand them in a
literal sence.

Lastly, The very form of the words, and the manner of their dependance
upon the Context, leads us to a literal sence, and to material Heavens
and Earth. *NEVERTHELESS*, says the Apostle, *we expect new Heavens*,
*&c*. Why *Nevertheless!* that is, notwithstanding the dissolution of
the present Heavens and Earth. The Apostle foresaw, what he had said,
might raise a doubt in their minds, whether all things would not be at
an end: Nothing more of Heavens and Earth, or of any habitable World,
after the Conflagration; and to obviate

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

this, he tells them, *Notwithstanding* that wonderful desolation that I
have describ’d, we do, according to God's promises, expect new Heavens
and a new Earth, to be an Habitation for the Righteous.

You see then the New Heavens and New Earth, which the Apostle speaks of,
are substituted in the place of those that were destroy’d at the
Conflagration; and would you substitute Allegorical Heavens and Earth in
the place of Material? A shadow for a substance? What an Equivocation
would it be in the Apostle, when the doubt was about the material
Heavens and Earth, to make an answer about Allegorical. Lastly, the
timeing of the thing determines the sence. When shall this new World
appear? after the Conflagration, the Apostle says: Therefore it cannot
be understood of any moral renovation, to be made at, or in the times of
the Gospel, as these Allegorists pretend. We must therefore, upon all
accounts, conclude, that the Apostle intended a literal sence: real and
material Heavens, to succeed these after the Conflagration: which was
the thing to be prov’d. And I know not what Bars the Spirit of God can
set, to keep us within the Compass of a Literal sence, if these be not
sufficient.

Thus much for the Explication of St. *Peter*'s Doctrine, concerning the
new Heavens and new Earth: which secures the second Part of our Theory.
For the Theory stands upon two Pillars, or two pedestals, The
Ante-diluvian Earth and the Future Earth: or, in St. *Peter*'s phrase,
The Old Heavens and Earth, and the New Heavens and Earth: And it cannot
be shaken, so long as these two continue firm and immoveable. We might
now put an end to this Review, but it may be expected possibly that we
should say something concerning the *Millennium*: which we have,
contrary to the general Sentiment of the modern *Millenaries*, plac’d in
the *Future* Earth. Our opinion hath this advantage above others, that,
all fanatical pretensions to power and empire in this World, are, by
these means, blown away, as chaff before the wind. Princes need not fear
to be dethron’d, to make way to the Saints: nor Governments unhing’d,
that They may rule the World with a rod of Iron. These are the effects
of a wild Enthusiasm; seeing the very state which they aim at, is not to
be upon this Earth.

But that our sence may not be mistaken or misapprehended in this
particular, as if we thought the Christian Church would never, upon this
Earth, be in a better and happier posture than it is in at present: We
must distinguish betwixt a *melioration* of the World, if you will allow
that word: and a *millennium*. We do not deny a reformation and
improvement of the Church, both as to Peace, Purity, and Piety. That
knowledge may increase, mens minds be enlarg’d, and Christian Religion
better understood: That the power of Antichrist shall be diminish’d,
persecution cease, and a greater union and harmony establish’d amongst
the Reformed. All this may be, and I hope will be, ere long. But the
*Apocalyptical Millennium*, or the *New Jerusalem*, is still another
matter. It differs not in degree only from the present state, but is a
new order of things: both in the Moral World and in the Natural; and
that cannot be till we come into the *New Heavens* and *New Earth*.
Suppose what Reformation you can in this World, there will still remain
many things inconsistent with the true Millennial state. Antichrist,
tho’ weakned, will not be finally destroy’d till the coming of our

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Saviour, nor Satan bound. And there will be
always poverty, wars, diseases, knaves and hypocrites, in this World:
which are not consistent with the New *Jerusalem*, as St. *John*
describes it. *Apoc*. 21. 2, 3, 4, *&c*.

You see now what our notion is of the Millennium, as we deny this Earth
to be the Seat of it. ’Tis the state that succeeds the first
Resurrection, when Satan is lockt up in the bottomless pit. The state
when the Martyrs are to return into Life, and wherein they are to have
the first lot and chief share. A state which is to last a thousand
years. *And Blessed and Holy is he, that hath a part in it: on such the
second death hath no power, but they shall be Priests of God and Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years*. If you would see more
particular reasons of our judgment in this case, why such a Millennium
is not to be expected in this World: they are set down in the 8*th*
Chap. of the 4*th* Book, and we do not think it necessary that they
should be here repeated.

As to that dissertation that follows the Millennium, and reaches to the
Consummation of all things, seeing it is but problematical, we leave it
to stand or fall by the evidence already given. And should be very glad
to see the conjectures of others, more learned, in Speculations so
abstruse and remote from common knowledge. They cannot surely be thought
unworthy or unfit for our Meditations, seeing they are suggested to us
by Scripture it self. And to what end were they propos’d to us there, if
it was not intended that they should be understood, sooner or later?

I have done with this Review: and shall only add one or two reflections
upon the whole discourse, and so conclude. You have seen the state of
the Theory of the Earth, as to the *Matter*, *Form*, and *Proofs* of it:
both Natural and Sacred. If any one will substitute a better in its
place, I shall think my self more obliged to him, than if he had shew’d
me the Quadrature of the Circle. But it is not enough to pick quarrels
here and there: that may be done by any writing, especially when it is
of so great extent and comprehension. They must build up, as well as
pull down; and give us another Theory instead of this, fitted to the
same natural History of the Earth, according as it is set down in
Scripture: and then let the World take their choice. He that cuts down a
Tree, is bound in reason to plant two, because there is an hazard in
their growth and thriving.

Then as to those that are such rigorous Scripturists, as to require
plainly demonstrative and irresistible Texts for every thing they
entertain or believe; They would do well to reflect and consider,
whether, for every article in the three Creeds (which have no support
from natural reason) they can bring such Texts of Scripture, as they
require of others: or a fairer and juster evidence, all things
consider’d, than we have done for the substance of this Theory. We have
not indeed said all that might be said, as to Antiquity: that making no
part in this Review, and being capable still of great additions. But as
to Scripture and Reason I have no more to add. Those that are not
satisfied with the proofs already produc’d upon these two heads, are
under a fate, good or bad, which is not in my power to overcome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[409:1](ste61.htm#fr_38) ἡ εἰκουμὶνη ἡ μέλλουτα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Books printed for Walter Kettilby](ste62)
