[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cbc00)  [Next](cbc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# PREFACE

Among the various avenues of approach to the investigation of Maya
civilization, the study of the native literature of Yucatan is, next to
the actual archæological exploration of the remains, one of the most
promising, for it contains much of what the Indians remembered of their
old culture after the Spanish Conquest.

The Books of Chilam Balam form the most important part of this native
Maya literature. Written in the Maya language, they reflect more closely
the thought of these Indians than any other records that have come down
to us. Not only do they contain a wealth of historical and ethnological
information invaluable to the student of the pre-Columbian career of the
Maya, but they also furnish a record of the reactions of the native mind
to the European culture and of the manner in which the latter was
adapted to suit its new environment. It is hardly necessary to dwell
upon the value of these old texts to the linguistic student.

The translation of the Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel depends
primarily upon the reading given to the badly punctuated and often
misspelled Maya text, and such a reading is based upon an extensive
comparison with other similar texts. The difficulties of translation are
not to be underestimated, but they can be greatly lessened by such a
comparison.

That I have been able to avail myself of the assistance afforded by the
manuscripts of the Berendt Linguistic Collection, so often referred to
in these pages, is due to the collaboration of the Museum of the
University of Pennsylvania and to the kindness of Dr. Horace H. F.
Jayne, Director, who has supplied me with the necessary photostats.
Professor Alfred M. Tozzer, whose previous extensive survey of Maya
literature was the indispensable preliminary to the present work, has
given cordial assistance; both he and the Peabody Museum of American
Archæology and Ethnology have cooperated generously with the loan of
material necessary to the work. Mr. Frans Blom, Director, and the
Department of Middle American Research of the Tulane University of
Louisiana have kindly loaned photographs of Sixteenth Century Maya
documents in their collection, which have proved most valuable in the
study of the present text.

Dr. Sylvanus G. Morley has spent much time and thought in going over my
manuscript and has offered many valuable suggestions as well as
searching out and obtaining related material in Mexico and Yucatan. Mr.
Thomas R. Johnson has undertaken the tedious task of copying the
drawings in the Chumayel manuscript. Mr. Juan Martínez Hernández has
again, as in the past, come to my aid in the elucidation of obscure
phrases and badly written

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

passages in the Maya text. Linguistic data furnished by Dr. Manuel J.
Andrade and ethnological analogies suggested by Dr. Robert Redfield will
be found acknowledged elsewhere in this book. The manner of editing the
Maya text is that suggested by Professor Otis J. Todd, who has assisted
me in adapting the methods of classical scholars to this newer field of
endeavor. For a number of the text-figures, Alice P. Roys has made
copies from photographs and other reproductions. To Librarian John
Ridington and Assistant Librarian Dorothy Jefferd, I am indebted for the
many facilities afforded by the Library of the University of British
Columbia. Throughout the preparation of this work, Dr. Alfred V. Kidder
has given generously of his time and attention to the practical problems
involved in the task. To all these I wish to make grateful
acknowledgment at this time.

RALPH L. ROYS

March 30, 1932

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](cbc02)
