[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Time](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crt08)  [Next](crt10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486233545/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Christmas in Ritual and Tradition*, by Clement A. Miles, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="POSTSCRIPT"></span>POSTSCRIPT

Before we pass on to the pagan aspects of Christmas, let us gather up
our thoughts in an attempt to realize the peculiar appeal of the Feast
of the Nativity, as it has been felt in the past, as it is felt to-day
even by moderns who have no belief in the historical truth of the story
it commemorates.

This appeal of Christmas seems to lie in the union of two modes of
feeling which may be called the *carol spirit* and the *mystical
spirit*. The *carol spirit*﻿—by this we may understand the simple, human
joyousness, the tender and graceful imagination, the kindly, intimate
affection, which have gathered round the cradle of the Christ Child. The
folk-tune, the secular song adapted to a sacred theme﻿—such is the
carol. What a sense of kindliness, not of sentimentality, but of genuine
human feeling, these old songs give us, as though the folk who first
sang them were more truly comrades, more closely knit together than we
under modern industrialism.

One element in the carol spirit is the rustic note that finds its
sanction as regards Christmas in St. Luke's story of the shepherds
keeping watch over their flocks by night. One thinks of the stillness
over the fields, of the hinds with their rough talk, “simply chatting in
a rustic row,” of the keen air, and the great burst of light and song
that dazes their simple wits, of their journey to Bethlehem where “the
heaven-born Child all meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies,” of the ox
and ass linking the beasts of the field to the Christmas adoration of
mankind.﻿ [80](crt24.htm#Footnote_80.md)<span id="FNanchor_80"></span>

For many people, indeed, the charm of Christmas is inseparably
associated with the country; it is lost in London﻿—the city is too vast,
too modern, too sophisticated. It is bound up with the thought of frosty
fields, of bells heard far away, of bare trees <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="Page_156"></span>against the starlit sky, of carols
sung not by trained choirs but by rustic folk with rough accent,
irregular time, and tunes learnt by ear and not by book.

Again, without the idea of winter half the charm of Christmas would be
gone. Transplanted in the imagination of western Christendom from an
undefined season in the hot East to Europe at midwinter, the Nativity
scenes have taken on a new pathos with the thought of the bitter cold to
which the great Little One lay exposed in the rough stable, with the
contrast between the cold and darkness of the night and the fire of love
veiled beneath that infant form. *Lux in tenebris* is one of the
strongest notes of Christmas: in the bleak midwinter a light shines
through the darkness; when all is cold and gloom, the sky bursts into
splendour, and in the dark cave is born the Light of the World.

There is the idea of royalty too, with all it stands for of colour and
magnificence, though not so much in literature as in painting is this
side of the Christmas story represented. The Epiphany is the great
opportunity for imaginative development of the regal idea. Then is seen
the union of utter poverty with highest kingship; the monarchs of the
East come to bow before the humble Infant for whom the world has found
no room in the inn. How suggestive by their long, slow syllables are the
Italian names of the Magi. Gasparre, Baldassarre, Melchiorre﻿—we picture
Oriental monarchs in robes mysteriously gorgeous, wrought with strange
patterns, heavy with gold and precious stones. With slow processional
motion they advance, bearing to the King of Kings their symbolic gifts,
gold for His crowning, incense for His worship, myrrh for His mortality,
and with them come the mystery, colour, and perfume of the East, the
occult wisdom which bows itself before the revelation in the Child.

Above all, as the foregoing pages have shown, it is the *childhood* of
the Redeemer that has won the heart of Europe for Christmas; it is the
appeal to the parental instinct, the love for the tender, weak,
helpless, yet all-potential babe, that has given the Church's festival
its strongest hold. And this side of Christmas is penetrated often by
the *mystical spirit*﻿—that sense of the Infinite in the finite without
which the highest human life is impossible.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span> <span id="Page_157"></span>The feeling
for Christmas varies from mere delight in the Christ Child as a
representative symbol on which to lavish affection, as a child delights
in a doll, to the mystical philosophy of Eckhart, in whose Christmas
sermons the Nativity is viewed as a type of the Birth of God in the
depths of man's being. Yet even the least spiritual forms of the cult of
the Child are seldom without some hint of the supersensual, the
Infinite, and even in Eckhart there is a love of concrete symbolism.
Christmas stands peculiarly for the sacramental principle that the
outward and visible is a sign and shadow of the inward and spiritual. It
means the seeing of common, earthly things shot through by the glory of
the Infinite. “Its note,” as has been said of a stage of the mystic
consciousness, the Illuminative Way, “is sacramental not ascetic. It
entails ... the discovery of the Perfect One ablaze in the Many, not the
forsaking of the Many in order to find the One ... an ineffable
radiance, a beauty and a reality never before suspected, are perceived
by a sort of clairvoyance shining in the meanest
things.”﻿ [6-1](crt22.htm#Note_6-1.md)<span id="Nanchor_6-1"></span>
Christmas is the festival of the Divine Immanence, and it is natural
that it should have been beloved by the saint and mystic whose life was
the supreme manifestation of the *Via Illuminativa*, Francis of Assisi.

Christmas is the most human and lovable of the Church's feasts. Easter
and Ascensiontide speak of the rising and exaltation of a glorious
being, clothed in a spiritual body refined beyond all comparison with
our natural flesh; Whitsuntide tells of the coming of a mysterious,
intangible Power﻿—like the wind, we cannot tell whence It cometh and
whither It goeth; Trinity offers for contemplation an ineffable paradox
of Pure Being. But the God of Christmas is no ethereal form, no mere
spiritual essence, but a very human child, feeling the cold and the
roughness of the straw, needing to be warmed and fed and cherished.
Christmas is the festival of the natural body, of this world; it means
the consecration of the ordinary things of life, affection and
comradeship, eating and drinking and merrymaking; and in some degree the
memory of the Incarnation has been able to blend with the pagan joyance
of the New Year.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="Page_158"></span><span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="Page_159"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Pre-Christian Winter Festivals](crt10.md)
