[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Time](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crt14)  [Next](crt16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486233545/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Christmas in Ritual and Tradition*, by Clement A. Miles, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="Chapter_XI"></span>CHAPTER XI

## THE CHRISTMAS-TREE, DECORATIONS, AND GIFTS

> The Christmas-tree a German Creation﻿—Charm of the German
> Christmas﻿—Early Christmas-trees﻿—The Christmas Pyramid﻿—Spread of the
> Tree in Modern Germany and other Countries﻿—Origin of the
> Christmas-tree﻿—Beliefs about Flowering Trees at Christmas﻿—Evergreens
> at the Kalends﻿—Non-German Parallels to the Christmas-tree﻿—Christmas
> Decorations connected with Ancient Kalends Customs﻿—Sacredness of
> Holly and Mistletoe﻿—Floors strewn with Straw﻿—Christmas and New Year
> Gifts, their Connection with the Roman *Strenae* and St.
> Nicholas﻿—Present-giving in Various Countries﻿—Christmas Cards.

<div class="illustration">

<span id="image19"></span><span id="img_image19"></span>

[![THE GERMAN CHRISTMAS-TREE IN THE EIGHTEENTH
CENTURY.](tn/image19.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/image19.jpg.md)  
  

THE GERMAN CHRISTMAS-TREE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

From an engraving by Joseph Kellner.

</div>

### <span class="smcap">The Christmas-tree.</span>

The most widespread, and to children the most delightful, of all festal
institutions is the Christmas-tree. Its picturesqueness and gay charm
have made it spread rapidly all over Europe without roots in national
tradition, for, as most people know, it is a German creation, and even
in Germany it attained its present immense popularity only in the
nineteenth century. To Germany, of course, one should go to see the tree
in all its glory. Many people, indeed, maintain that no other Christmas
can compare with the German *Weihnacht*. “It is,” writes Miss I. A. R.
Wylie, “that childish, open-hearted simplicity which, so it seems to me,
makes Christmas essentially German, or at any rate explains why it is
that nowhere else in the world does it find so pure an expression. The
German is himself simple, warm-hearted, unpretentious, with something at
the bottom of him which is childlike in the best sense. He is the last
‘Naturmensch’ in civilization.” Christmas suits him “as well as a play
suits an actor for whose character and temperament it has been
especially written.”﻿ [12-1](crt22.htm#Note_12-1.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-1"></span>

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="Page_264"></span>In Germany
the Christmas-tree is not a luxury for well-to-do people as in England,
but a necessity, the very centre of the festival; no one is too poor or
too lonely to have one. There is something about a German
*Weihnachtsbaum*﻿—a romance and a wonder﻿—that English Christmas-trees
do not possess. For one thing, perhaps, in a land of forests the tree
seems more in place; it is a kind of sacrament linking mankind to the
mysteries of the woodland. Again the German tree is simply a thing of
beauty and radiance; no utilitarian presents hang from its boughs﻿—they
are laid apart on a table﻿—and the tree is purely splendour for
splendour's sake. However tawdry it may look by day, at night it is a
true thing of wonder, shining with countless lights and glittering
ornaments, with fruit of gold and shimmering festoons of silver. Then
there is the solemnity with which it is surrounded; the long secret
preparations behind the closed doors, and, when Christmas Eve arrives,
the sudden revelation of hidden glory. The Germans have quite a
religious feeling for their *Weihnachtsbaum*, coming down, one may
fancy, from some dim ancestral worship of the trees of the wood.

As Christmas draws near the market-place in a German town is filled with
a miniature forest of firs; the trees are sold by old women in quaint
costumes, and the shop-windows are full of candles and ornaments to deck
them. Mrs. Alfred Sidgwick in her “Home Life in Germany” gives a
delightful picture of such a Christmas market in “one of the old German
cities in the hill country, when the streets and the open places are
covered with crisp clean snow, and the mountains are white with it....
The air is cold and still, and heavy with the scent of the
Christmas-trees brought from the forest for the pleasure of the
children. Day by day you see the rows of them growing thinner, and if
you go to the market on Christmas Eve itself you will find only a few
trees left out in the cold. The market is empty, the peasants are
harnessing their horses or their oxen, the women are packing up their
unsold goods. In every home in the city one of the trees that scented
the open air a week ago is shining now with lights and little gilded
nuts and apples, and is helping to make that Christmas smell, all
compact of the pine forest, wax <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="Page_265"></span>candles, cakes and painted toys, you must associate
so long as you live with Christmas in
Germany.”﻿ [12-2](crt22.htm#Note_12-2.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-2"></span>

Even in London one may get a glimpse of the Teutonic Christmas in the
half-German streets round Fitzroy Square. They are bald and drab enough,
but at Christmas here and there a window shines with a lighted tree, and
the very prosaic Lutheran church in Cleveland Street has an unwonted
sight to show﻿—two great fir-trees decked with white candles, standing
one on each side of the pulpit. The church of the German Catholics, too,
St. Boniface's, Whitechapel, has in its sanctuary two Christmas-trees
strangely gay with coloured glistening balls and long strands of gold
and silver *engelshaar*. The candles are lit at Benediction during the
festival, and between the shining trees the solemn ritual is performed
by the priest and a crowd of serving boys in scarlet and white with
tapers and incense.

There is a pretty story about the institution of the *Weihnachtsbaum* by
Martin Luther: how, after wandering one Christmas Eve under the clear
winter sky lit by a thousand stars, he set up for his children a tree
with countless candles, an image of the starry heaven whence Christ came
down. This, however, belongs to the region of legend; the first
historical mention of the Christmas-tree is found in the notes of a
certain Strasburg citizen of unknown name, written in the year 1605. “At
Christmas,” he writes, “they set up fir-trees in the parlours at
Strasburg and hang thereon roses cut out of many-coloured paper, apples,
wafers, gold-foil, sweets, &c.”﻿ [12-3](crt22.htm#Note_12-3.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-3"></span>

We next meet with the tree in a hostile allusion by a distinguished
Strasburg theologian, Dr. Johann Konrad Dannhauer, Professor and
Preacher at the Cathedral. In his book, “The Milk of the Catechism,”
published about the middle of the seventeenth century, he speaks of “the
Christmas- or fir-tree, which people set up in their houses, hang with
dolls and sweets, and afterwards shake and deflower.” “Whence comes the
custom,” he says, “I know not; it is child's play.... Far better were it
to point the children to the spiritual cedar-tree, Jesus
Christ.”﻿ [12-4](crt22.htm#Note_12-4.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-4"></span>

In neither of these references is there any mention of candles﻿—the
<span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span id="Page_266"></span>most
fascinating feature of the modern tree. These appear, however, in a
Latin work on Christmas presents by Karl Gottfried Kissling of the
University of Wittenberg, written in 1737. He tells how a certain
country lady of his acquaintance set up a little tree for each of her
sons and daughters, lit candles on or around the trees, laid out
presents beneath them, and called her children one by one into the room
to take the trees and gifts intended for
them.﻿ [12-5](crt22.htm#Note_12-5.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-5"></span>

With the advance of the eighteenth-century notices of the
*Weihnachtsbaum* become more frequent: Jung Stilling, Goethe, Schiller,
and others mention it, and about the end of the century its use seems to
have been fairly general in Germany.﻿ [12-6](crt22.htm#Note_12-6.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-6"></span> In many places, however, it was not common
till well on in the eighteen hundreds: it was a Protestant rather than a
Catholic institution, and it made its way but slowly in regions where
the older faith was held.﻿ [12-7](crt22.htm#Note_12-7.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-7"></span> Well-to-do townspeople welcomed it first, and
the peasantry were slow to adopt it. In Old Bavaria, for instance, in
1855 it was quite unknown in country places, and even to-day it is not
very common there, except in the
towns.﻿ [12-8](crt22.htm#Note_12-8.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-8"></span> “It
is more in vogue on the whole,” wrote Dr. Tille in 1893, “in the
Protestant north than in the Catholic
south,”﻿ [12-9](crt22.htm#Note_12-9.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-9"></span> but
its popularity was rapidly growing at that time.

A common substitute for the Christmas-tree in Saxony during the
nineteenth century, and one still found in country places, was the
so-called “pyramid,” a wooden erection adorned with many-coloured paper
and with lights. These pyramids were very popular among the smaller
*bourgeoisie* and artisans, and were kept from one Christmas to
another.﻿ [12-10](crt22.htm#Note_12-10.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-10"></span>
In Berlin, too, the pyramid was once very common. It was there adorned
with green twigs as well as with candles and coloured paper, and had
more resemblance to the
Christmas-tree.﻿ [12-11](crt22.htm#Note_12-11.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-11"></span> Tieck refers to it in his story,
“Weihnacht-Abend” (1805).﻿ [12-12](crt22.htm#Note_12-12.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-12"></span>

Pyramids, without lights apparently, were known in England before 1840.
In Hertfordshire they were formed of gilt evergreens, apples, and nuts,
and were carried about just before Christmas for presents. In
Herefordshire they were known at the New
Year.﻿ [12-13](crt22.htm#Note_12-13.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-13"></span>

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span id="Page_267"></span>The
Christmas-tree was introduced into France in 1840, when Princess Helene
of Mecklenburg brought it to Paris. In 1890 between thirty and
thirty-five thousand of the trees are said to have been sold in
Paris.﻿ [12-14](crt22.htm#Note_12-14.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-14"></span>

In England it is alluded to in 1789,﻿ [12-15](crt22.htm#Note_12-15.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-15"></span> but its use did not become at all general
until about the eighteen-forties. In 1840 Queen Victoria and Prince
Albert had a Christmas-tree, and the fashion spread until it became
completely naturalized.﻿ [12-16](crt22.htm#Note_12-16.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-16"></span> In Denmark and Norway it was known in 1830,
and in Sweden in 1863 (among the Swedish population on the coast of
Finland it seems to have been in use in
1800).﻿ [12-17](crt22.htm#Note_12-17.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-17"></span> In
Bohemia it is mentioned in 1862.﻿ [12-18](crt22.htm#Note_12-18.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-18"></span> It is also found in Russia, the United
States, Spain, Italy, and Holland,﻿ [12-19](crt22.htm#Note_12-19.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-19"></span> and of course in Switzerland and Austria, so
largely German in language and customs. In non-German countries it is
rather a thing for the well-to-do classes than for the masses of the
people.

The Christmas-tree is essentially a domestic institution. It has,
however, found its way into Protestant churches in Germany and from them
into Catholic churches. Even the Swiss Zwinglians, with all their
Puritanism, do not exclude it from their bare, white-washed fanes. In
the Münsterthal, for instance, a valley of Romonsch speech, off the
Lower Engadine, a tree decked with candles, festoons, presents, and
serpent-squibs, stands in church at Christmas, and it is difficult for
the minister to conduct service, for all the time, except during the
prayers, the people are letting off fireworks. On one day between
Christmas Eve and New Year there is a great present-giving in
church.﻿ [12-20](crt22.htm#Note_12-20.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-20"></span>

In Munich, and doubtless elsewhere, the tree appears not only in the
church and in the home, but in the cemetery. The graves of the dead are
decked on Christmas Eve with holly and mistletoe and a little
Christmas-tree with gleaming lights, a touching token of remembrance, an
attempt, perhaps, to give the departed a share in the brightness of the
festival.﻿ [12-21](crt22.htm#Note_12-21.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-21"></span>

The question of the origin of Christmas-trees is of great interest.
Though their affinity to other sacraments of the <span id="page_268">p.
268</span> <span id="Page_268"></span>vegetation-spirit is evident, it
is difficult to be certain of their exact ancestry. Dr. Tille regards
them as coming from a union of two elements: the old Roman custom of
decking houses with laurels and green trees at the Kalends of January,
and the popular belief that every Christmas Eve apple and other trees
blossomed and bore fruit.﻿ [12-22](crt22.htm#Note_12-22.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-22"></span>

Before the advent of the Christmas-tree proper﻿—a fir with lights and
ornaments often imitating and always suggesting flowers and fruit﻿—it
was customary to put trees like cherry or hawthorn into water or into
pots indoors, so that they might bud and blossom at New Year or
Christmas.﻿ [12-23](crt22.htm#Note_12-23.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-23"></span> Even to-day the practice of picking boughs in
order that they may blossom at Christmas is to be found in some parts of
Austria. In Carinthia girls on St. Lucia's Day (December 13) stick a
cherry-branch into wet sand; if it blooms at Christmas their wishes will
be fulfilled. In other parts the branches﻿—pear as well as cherry﻿—are
picked on St. Barbara's Day (December 4), and in South Tyrol
cherry-trees are manured with lime on the first Thursday in Advent so
that they may blossom at Christmas.﻿ [12-24](crt22.htm#Note_12-24.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-24"></span> The custom may have had to do with legendary
lore about the marvellous transformation of Nature on the night of
Christ's birth, when the rivers ran wine instead of water and trees
stood in full blossom in spite of ice and
snow.﻿ [12-25](crt22.htm#Note_12-25.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-25"></span>

In England there was an old belief in trees blossoming at Christmas,
connected with the well-known legend of St. Joseph of Arimathea. When
the saint settled at Glastonbury he planted his staff in the earth and
it put forth leaves; moreover it blossomed every Christmas Eve. Not only
the original thorn at Glastonbury but trees of the same species in other
parts of England had this characteristic. When in 1752 the New Style was
substituted for the Old, making Christmas fall twelve days earlier,
folks were curious to see what the thorns would do. At Quainton in
Buckinghamshire two thousand people, it is said, went out on the new
Christmas Eve to view a blackthorn which had the Christmas blossoming
habit. As no sign of buds was visible they agreed that the new Christmas
could not be right, and refused to keep it. At Glastonbury itself
nothing <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="Page_269"></span>happened on December 24, but on January 5, the
right day according to the Old Style, the thorn blossomed as
usual.﻿ [102](crt24.htm#Footnote_102.md)<span
id="FNanchor_102"></span>﻿ [12-26](crt22.htm#Note_12-26.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-26"></span>

Let us turn to the customs of the Roman Empire which may be in part
responsible for the German Christmas-tree. The practice of adorning
houses with evergreens at the January Kalends was common throughout the
Empire, as we learn from Libanius, Tertullian, and Chrysostom. A grim
denunciation of such decorations and the lights which accompanied them
may be quoted from Tertullian; it makes a pregnant contrast of pagan and
Christian. “Let them,” he says of the heathen, “kindle lamps, they who
have no light; let them fix on the doorposts laurels which shall
afterwards be burnt, they for whom fire is close at hand; meet for them
are testimonies of darkness and auguries of punishment. But thou,” he
says to the Christian, “art a light of the world and a tree that is ever
green; if thou hast renounced temples, make not a temple of thy own
house-door.”﻿ [12-27](crt22.htm#Note_12-27.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-27"></span>

That these New Year practices of the Empire had to do with the
*Weihnachtsbaum* is very possible, but on the other hand it has closer
parallels in certain folk-customs that in no way suggest Roman or Greek
influence. Not only at Christmas are ceremonial “trees” to be found in
Germany. In the Erzgebirge there is dancing at the summer solstice round
“St. John's tree,” a pyramid decked with garlands and flowers, and lit
up at night by candles.﻿ [12-28](crt22.htm#Note_12-28.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-28"></span> At midsummer “in the towns of the Upper Harz
Mountains tall fir-trees, with the bark peeled off their lower trunks,
were set up in open places and decked with flowers and eggs, which were
painted yellow and red. Round these trees the young folk danced by day
and the old folk in the evening”;﻿ [12-29](crt22.htm#Note_12-29.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-29"></span> while on Dutch ground in Gelderland and
Limburg at the beginning of May trees were adorned with
lights.﻿ [12-30](crt22.htm#Note_12-30.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-30"></span>

Nearer to Christmas is a New Year's custom found in some <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span id="Page_270"></span>Alsatian
villages: the adorning of the fountain with a “May.” The girls who visit
the fountain procure a small fir-tree or holly-bush, and deck it with
ribbons, egg-shells, and little figures representing a shepherd or a man
beating his wife. This is set up above the fountain on New Year's Eve.
On the evening of the next day the snow is carefully cleared away and
the girls dance and sing around the fountain. The lads may only take
part in the dance by permission of the girls. The tree is kept all
through the year as a protection to those who have set it
up.﻿ [12-31](crt22.htm#Note_12-31.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-31"></span>

In Sweden, before the advent of the German type of tree, it was
customary to place young pines, divested of bark and branches, outside
the houses at Christmastide.﻿ [12-32](crt22.htm#Note_12-32.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-32"></span> An English parallel which does not suggest
any borrowing from Germany, was formerly to be found at Brough in
Westmoreland on Twelfth Night. A holly-tree with torches attached to its
branches was carried through the town in procession. It was finally
thrown among the populace, who divided into two parties, one of which
endeavoured to take the tree to one inn, and the other, to a rival
hostelry.﻿ [12-33](crt22.htm#Note_12-33.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-33"></span>
We have here pretty plainly a struggle of two factions﻿—perhaps of two
quarters of a town that were once separate villages﻿—for the possession
of a sacred object.﻿ [103](crt24.htm#Footnote_103.md)<span
id="FNanchor_103"></span>

We may find parallels, lastly, in two remote corners of Europe. In the
island of Chios﻿—here we are on Greek ground﻿—tenants are wont to offer
to their landlords on Christmas morning a *rhamna*, a pole with wreaths
of myrtle, olive, and orange leaves bound around it; “to these are fixed
any flowers that may be found﻿—geraniums, anemones, and the like, and,
by way of further decoration, oranges, lemons, and strips of gold and
coloured paper.”﻿ [104](crt24.htm#Footnote_104.md)<span
id="FNanchor_104"></span>﻿ [12-34](crt22.htm#Note_12-34.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-34"></span> Secondly, among the Circassians in the early
half of the nineteenth century, a young pear-tree used to be carried
into each house at an autumn festival, to the sound of music and joyous
cries. It was covered with candles, and a cheese was fastened to its
top. Round about it they ate, drank, and sang. Afterwards it was <span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span id="Page_271"></span>removed to the
courtyard, where it remained for the rest of the
year.﻿ [12-36](crt22.htm#Note_12-36.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-36"></span>

Though there is no recorded instance of the use of a tree at Christmas
in Germany before the seventeenth century, the *Weihnachtsbaum* may well
be a descendant of some sacred tree carried about or set up at the
beginning-of-winter festival. All things considered, it seems to belong
to a class of primitive sacraments of which the example most familiar to
English peoples is the May-pole. This is, of course, an early summer
institution, but in France and Germany a Harvest May is also known﻿—a
large branch or a whole tree, which is decked with ears of corn, brought
home on the last waggon from the harvest field, and fastened to the roof
of farmhouse or barn, where it remains for a
year.﻿ [12-37](crt22.htm#Note_12-37.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-37"></span>
Mannhardt has shown that such sacraments embody the tree-spirit
conceived as the spirit of vegetation in general, and are believed to
convey its life-giving, fructifying influences. Probably the idea of
contact with the spirit of growth lay also beneath the Roman evergreen
decorations, so that whether or not we connect the Christmas-tree with
these, the principle at the bottom is the same.

Certain Christian ideas, finally, besides that of trees blossoming on
the night of the Nativity, may have affected the fortunes of the
Christmas-tree. December 24 was in old Church calendars the day of Adam
and Eve, the idea being that Christ the second Adam had repaired by His
Incarnation the loss caused by the sin of the first. A legend grew up
that Adam when he left Paradise took with him an apple or sprout from
the Tree of Knowledge, and that from this sprang the tree from which the
Cross was made. Or it was said that on Adam's grave grew a sprig from
the Tree of Life, and that from it Christ plucked the fruit of
redemption. The Cross in early Christian poetry was conceived as the
Tree of Life planted anew, bearing the glorious fruit of Christ's body,
and repairing the mischief wrought by the misuse of the first tree. We
may recall a verse from the “Pange, lingua” of Passiontide:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Faithful Cross! above all other,</span>  
<span class="i3">One and only noble tree!<span id="page_272">p.
272</span> <span id="Page_272"></span></span>  
<span class="i2">None in foliage, none in blossom,</span>  
<span class="i3">None in fruit thy peer may be:</span>  
<span class="i2">Sweetest wood and sweetest iron!</span>  
<span class="i3">Sweetest weight is hung on thee.”</span>  

</div>

</div>

In the religious Christmas plays the tree of Paradise was sometimes
shown to the people. At Oberufer, for instance, it was a fine
juniper-tree, adorned with apples and ribbons. Sometimes Christ Himself
was regarded as the tree of
Paradise.﻿ [12-38](crt22.htm#Note_12-38.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-38"></span>
The thought of Him as both the Light of the World and the Tree of Life
may at least have given a Christian meaning to the light-bearing tree,
and helped to establish its popularity among pious folk.

### <span class="smcap">Christmas Decorations.</span>

We have seen that the Christmas-tree may be a development, partly at
least, from the custom of decorating buildings with evergreens at the
New Year, and that such decorations were common throughout the Roman
Empire.﻿ [105](crt24.htm#Footnote_105.md)<span id="FNanchor_105"></span>
Some further consideration may now be given to the subject of Christmas
decorations in various lands. In winter, when all is brown and dead, the
evergreens are manifestations of the abiding life within the
plant-world, and they may well have been used as sacramental means of
contact with the spirit of growth and fertility, threatened by the
powers of blight. Particularly precious would be plants like the holly,
the ivy, and the mistletoe, which actually bore fruit in the
winter-time.﻿ [12-39](crt22.htm#Note_12-39.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-39"></span>

In spite of ecclesiastical condemnations of Kalends decorations﻿—as late
as the sixth century the *capitula* of Bishop Martin of Braga forbid the
adorning of houses with laurels and green
trees﻿ [12-40](crt22.htm#Note_12-40.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-40"></span>
﻿—the custom has found its way even into churches, and nowhere more than
in England. At least as far back as the fifteenth century, according to
Stow's “Survay of London,” it was the custom at Christmas for “every
man's house, as also the parish churches,” to be “decked with holm, ivy,
bays, and whatsoever the season of the year afforded to be green. The
conduits and <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span
id="Page_273"></span>standards in the streets were likewise
garnished.”﻿ [12-41](crt22.htm#Note_12-41.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-41"></span> Many people of the last generation will
remember the old English mode of decoration﻿—how sprigs of holly and
yew, stuck into holes in the high pews, used to make the churches into
miniature forests. Only upon the mistletoe does a trace of the
ecclesiastical taboo remain, and even that is not universal, for at York
Minster, for instance, some was laid upon the
altar.﻿ [12-42](crt22.htm#Note_12-42.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-42"></span>

English popular custom has connected particular plants with the winter
festival in a peculiarly delightful way; at the mere mention of holly or
mistletoe the picture of Christmas with its country charm rises to the
mind﻿—we think of snowy fields and distant bells, of warm hearths and
kindly merrymaking.

It is no wonder that the mistletoe has a special place in Christmas
decorations, for it is associated with both Teutonic myth and Celtic
ritual. It was with mistletoe that the beloved Balder was shot, and the
plant played an important part in a Druidic ceremony described by Pliny.
A white-robed Druid climbed a sacred oak and cut the mistletoe with a
golden sickle. As it fell it was caught in a white cloth, and two white
bulls were then sacrificed, with prayer. The mistletoe was called
“all-healer” and was believed to be a remedy against poison and to make
barren animals fruitful.﻿ [12-43](crt22.htm#Note_12-43.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-43"></span> The significance of the ritual is not easy to
find. Pliny's account, Dr. MacCulloch has suggested, may be incomplete,
and the cutting of the mistletoe may have been a preliminary to some
other ceremony﻿—perhaps the felling of the tree on which it grew, whose
soul was supposed to be in it, or perhaps the slaying of a
representative of the tree-spirit; while the white oxen of Pliny's time
may have replaced a human victim.﻿ [12-44](crt22.htm#Note_12-44.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-44"></span>

It is interesting to find that the name “all-healer” is still given to
the mistletoe in Celtic speech,﻿ [106](crt24.htm#Footnote_106.md)<span
id="FNanchor_106"></span>﻿ [12-45](crt22.htm#Note_12-45.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-45"></span> and that in various European countries it is
believed to possess marvellous powers of healing sickness or averting
misfortune.﻿ [12-46](crt22.htm#Note_12-46.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-46"></span>

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="Page_274"></span>It is hard
to say exactly what is the origin of the English “kissing under the
mistletoe,” but the practice would appear to be due to an imagined
relation between the love of the sexes and the spirit of fertility
embodied in the sacred bough, and it may be a vestige of the licence
often permitted at folk-festivals. According to one form of the English
custom the young men plucked, each time they kissed a girl, a berry from
the bough. When the berries were all picked, the privilege
ceased.﻿ [12-48](crt22.htm#Note_12-48.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-48"></span>

Sometimes a curious form, reminding one both of the German
Christmas-tree and of the *Krippe*, is taken by the “kissing bunch.”
Here is an account from Derbyshire:﻿—

> “The ‘kissing bunch’ is always an elaborate affair. The size depends
> upon the couple of hoops﻿—one thrust through the other﻿—which form its
> skeleton. Each of the ribs is garlanded with holly, ivy, and sprigs of
> other greens, with bits of coloured ribbons and paper roses,
> rosy-cheeked apples, specially reserved for this occasion, and
> oranges. Three small dolls are also prepared, often with much taste,
> and these represent our Saviour, the mother of Jesus, and Joseph.
> These dolls generally hang within the kissing bunch by strings from
> the top, and are surrounded by apples, oranges tied to strings, and
> various brightly coloured ornaments. Occasionally, however, the dolls
> are arranged in the kissing bunch to represent a manger-scene....
> Mistletoe is not very plentiful in Derbyshire; but, generally, a bit
> is obtainable, and this is carefully tied to the bottom of the kissing
> bunch, which is then hung in the middle of the house-place, the centre
> of attention during
> Christmastide.”﻿ [12-49](crt22.htm#Note_12-49.md)<span
> id="Nanchor_12-49"></span>

Kissing under the mistletoe seems to be distinctively English. There is,
however, a New Year's Eve custom in Lower Austria and the Rhaetian Alps
that somewhat resembles our mistletoe bough practices. People linger
late in the inns, the walls and windows of which are decorated with
green pine-twigs. In the centre of the inn-parlour hangs from a
roof-beam a wreath of the same greenery, and in a dark corner hides a
masked figure known as “Sylvester,” old and ugly, with a flaxen beard
and *a wreath of mistletoe*. If a youth or maiden happens to pass under
the pine wreath Sylvester springs out and imprints a rough kiss. When
midnight comes he is driven out as the representative of the old
year.﻿ [12-50](crt22.htm#Note_12-50.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-50"></span>

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span id="Page_275"></span>There are
traces in Britain of the sacredness of holly as well as mistletoe. In
Northumberland it is used for divination: nine leaves are taken and tied
with nine knots into a handkerchief, and put under the pillow by a
person who desires prophetic dreams.﻿ [12-51](crt22.htm#Note_12-51.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-51"></span> For this purpose smooth leaves (without
prickles) must be employed, and it is to be noted that at Burford in
Shropshire smooth holly only was used for the Christmas
decorations.﻿ [12-52](crt22.htm#Note_12-52.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-52"></span> Holly is hated by
witches,﻿ [12-53](crt22.htm#Note_12-53.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-53"></span>
but perhaps this may be due not to any pre-Christian sanctity attached
to it but to the association of its thorns and blood-red berries with
the Passion﻿—an association to which it owes its Danish name,
*Kristdorn*.

In some old English Christmas carols holly and ivy are put into a
curious antagonism, apparently connected with a contest of the sexes.
Holly is the men's plant, ivy the women's, and the carols are debates as
to the respective merits of each. Possibly some sort of rude drama may
once have been performed.﻿ [12-54](crt22.htm#Note_12-54.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-54"></span> Here is a fifteenth-century example of these
carols:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Holly and Ivy made a great party,</span>  
<span class="i2">Who should have the mastery,</span>  
<span class="i3">In landës where they go.</span>  

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i2">Then spoke Holly, ‘I am free and jolly,</span>  
<span class="i2">I will have the mastery,</span>  
<span class="i3">In landës where we go.’</span>  

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i2">Then spake Ivy, ‘I am lov'd and prov'd,</span>  
<span class="i2">And I will have the mastery,</span>  
<span class="i3">In landës where we go.’</span>  

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i2">Then spake Holly, and set him down on his
knee,</span>  
<span class="i2">‘I pray thee, gentle Ivy,</span>  
<span class="i2">Say me no villainy,</span>  
<span class="i3">In landës where we
go.’”﻿ [12-55](crt22.htm#Note_12-55.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-55"></span>
</span>  

</div>

</div>

The sanctity of Christmas house-decorations in England is shown by the
care taken in disposing of them when removed from the walls. In
Shropshire old-fashioned people never threw them away, for fear of
misfortune, but either burnt them or gave them to the cows; it was very
unlucky to let a piece <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="Page_276"></span>fall to the ground. The Shropshire custom was to
leave the holly and ivy up until Candlemas, while the mistletoe-bough
was carefully preserved until the time came for a new one next year.
West Shropshire tradition, by the way, connects the mistletoe with the
New Year rather than with Christmas; the bough ought not to be put up
until New Year's Eve.﻿ [12-56](crt22.htm#Note_12-56.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-56"></span>

In Sweden green boughs, apparently, are not used for decoration, but the
floor of the parlour is strewn with sprigs of fragrant juniper or
spruce-pine, or with rye-straw.﻿ [12-57](crt22.htm#Note_12-57.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-57"></span> The straw was probably intended originally to
bring to the house, by means of sacramental contact, the wholesome
influences of the corn-spirit, though the common people connect it with
the stable at Bethlehem. The practice of laying straw and the same
Christian explanation are found also in
Poland﻿ [12-58](crt22.htm#Note_12-58.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-58"></span>
and in Crivoscia.﻿ [12-59](crt22.htm#Note_12-59.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-59"></span> In Poland before the cloth is laid on
Christmas Eve, the table is covered with a layer of hay or straw, and a
sheaf stands in the corner. Years ago straw was also spread on the
floor. Sometimes it is given to the cattle as a charm and sometimes it
is used to tie up fruit-trees.﻿ [12-60](crt22.htm#Note_12-60.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-60"></span>

Dr. Frazer conjectures that the Swedish Yule straw comes in part at
least from the last sheaf at harvest, to which, as embodying the
corn-spirit, a peculiar significance is attached. The Swedish, like the
Polish, Yule straw has sundry virtues; scattered on the ground it will
make a barren field productive; and it is used to bind trees and make
them fruitful.﻿ [12-61](crt22.htm#Note_12-61.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-61"></span> Again the peasant at Christmas will sit on a
log and throw up Yule straws one by one to the roof; as many as lodge in
the rafters, so many will be the sheaves of rye at
harvest.﻿ [12-62](crt22.htm#Note_12-62.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-62"></span>

### <span class="smcap">Christmas and New Year Gifts.</span>

We have come across presents of various kinds at the pre-Christmas
festivals; now that we have reached Christmastide itself we may dwell a
little upon the festival as the great present-giving season of the year,
and try to get at the origins of the custom.

The Roman *strenae* offered to the Emperor or exchanged between private
citizens at the January Kalends have already <span id="page_277">p.
277</span> <span id="Page_277"></span>been noted. According to tradition
they were originally merely branches plucked from the grove of the
goddess Strenia, and the purpose of these may well have been akin to
that of the greenery used for decorations, viz., to secure contact with
a vegetation-spirit. In the time of the Empire, however, the *strenae*
were of a more attractive character, “men gave honeyed things, that the
year of the recipient might be full of sweetness, lamps that it might be
full of light, copper and silver and gold that wealth might flow in
amain.”﻿ [12-63](crt22.htm#Note_12-63.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-63"></span>
Such presents were obviously a kind of charm for the New Year, based on
the principle that as the beginning was, so would the rest of the year
be.

With the adoption of the Roman New Year's Day its present-giving customs
appear to have spread far and wide. In France, where the Latin spirit is
still strong, January 1 is even now the great day for presents, and they
are actually called *étrennes*, a name obviously derived from *strenae*.
In Paris boxes of sweets are then given by bachelors to friends who have
entertained them at their houses during the year﻿—a survival perhaps of
the “honeyed things” given in Roman times.

In many countries, however, present-giving is attached to the
ecclesiastical festival of Christmas. This is doubtless largely due to
attraction from the Roman New Year's Day to the feast hallowed by the
Church, but readers of the foregoing pages will have seen that Christmas
has also drawn to itself many practices of a November festival, and it
is probable that German Christmas presents, at least, are connected as
much with the apples and nuts of St. Martin and St.
Nicholas﻿ [107](crt24.htm#Footnote_107.md)<span id="FNanchor_107"></span>
as with the Roman *strenae*. It has already been pointed out that the
German St. Nicholas as present-giver appears to be a duplicate of St.
Martin, and that St. Nicholas himself has often wandered from his own
day to Christmas, or has been replaced by the Christ Child. We have also
noted the rod associated with the two saints, and seen reason for
thinking that its original purpose was not disciplinary but
health-giving.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span id="Page_278"></span>It is
interesting to find that while, if we may trust tradition, the Roman
*strenae* were originally twigs, Christmas gifts in sixteenth-century
Germany showed a connection with the twigs or rods of St. Martin and St.
Nicholas. The presents were tied together in a bundle, and a twig was
added to them.﻿ [12-65](crt22.htm#Note_12-65.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-65"></span> This was regarded by the pedagogic mind of
the period not as a lucky twig but as a rod in the sinister sense. In
some Protestant sermons of the latter half of the century there are
curious detailed references to Christmas presents. These are supposed to
be brought to children by the Saviour Himself, strangely called the
*Haus-Christ*. Among the gifts mentioned as contained in the
“Christ-bundles” are pleasant things like money, sugar-plums, cakes,
apples, nuts, dolls; useful things like clothes; and also things “that
belong to teaching, obedience, chastisement, and discipline, as A.B.C.
tablets, Bibles and handsome books, writing materials, paper, &c., *and
the* ‘*Christ-rod*.’”﻿ [12-66](crt22.htm#Note_12-66.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-66"></span>

A common gift to German children at Christmas or the New Year was an
apple with a coin in it; the coin may conceivably be a Roman
survival,﻿ [12-67](crt22.htm#Note_12-67.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-67"></span>
while the apple may be connected with those brought by St. Nicholas.

The Christ Child is still supposed to bring presents in Germany; in
France, too, it is sometimes *le petit Jésus* who bears the welcome
gifts.﻿ [12-68](crt22.htm#Note_12-68.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-68"></span> In
Italy we shall find that the great time for children's presents is
Epiphany Eve, when the Befana comes, though in the northern provinces
Santa Lucia is sometimes a
gift-bringer.﻿ [12-69](crt22.htm#Note_12-69.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-69"></span> In Sicily the days for gifts and the supposed
bringers vary; sometimes, as we have already seen, it is the dead who
bring them, on All Souls’ Eve; sometimes it is *la Vecchia di
Natali*﻿—the Christmas old woman﻿—who comes with them on Christmas Eve;
sometimes they are brought by the old woman Strina﻿—note the derivation
from *strenae*﻿—at the New Year; sometimes by the Befana at the
Epiphany.﻿ [12-70](crt22.htm#Note_12-70.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-70"></span>

A curious mode of giving presents on Christmas Eve belongs particularly
to Sweden, though it is also found﻿—perhaps borrowed﻿—in Mecklenburg,
Pomerania, and other parts of Germany. The so-called *Julklapp* is a
gift wrapped up in innumerable coverings. The person who brings it raps
noisily at <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="Page_279"></span>the door, and throws or pushes the *Julklapp* into
the room. It is essential that he should arrive quite unexpectedly, and
come and go like lightning without revealing his identity. Great efforts
are made to conceal the gift so that the recipient after much trouble in
undoing the covering may have to search and search again to find it.
Sometimes in Sweden a thin gold ring is hidden away in a great heavy
box, or a little gold heart is put in a Christmas cake. Occasionally a
man contrives to hide in the *Julklapp* and thus offer himself as a
Christmas present to the lady whom he loves. The gift is often
accompanied by some satirical rhyme, or takes a form intended to tease
the recipient.﻿ [12-71](crt22.htm#Note_12-71.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-71"></span>

Another custom, sometimes found in “better-class” Swedish households, is
for the Christmas presents to be given by two masked figures, an old man
and an old woman. The old man holds a bell in his hand and rings it, the
old woman carries a basket full of sealed packets, which she delivers to
the addressees.﻿ [12-72](crt22.htm#Note_12-72.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-72"></span>

There is nothing specially interesting in modern English modes of
present-giving. We may, however, perhaps see in the custom of Christmas
boxes, inexorably demanded and not always willingly bestowed, a
degeneration of what was once friendly entertainment given in return for
the good wishes and the luck brought by wassailers. Instances of gifts
to calling neighbours have already come before our notice at several
pre-Christmas festivals, notably All Souls’, St. Clement's, and St.
Thomas's. As for the name “Christmas box,” it would seem to have come
from the receptacles used for the gifts. According to one account
apprentices, journeymen, and servants used to carry about earthen boxes
with a slit in them, and when the time for collecting was over, broke
them to obtain the contents.﻿ [12-73](crt22.htm#Note_12-73.md)<span
id="Nanchor_12-73"></span>

The Christmas card, a sort of attenuated present, seems to be of quite
modern origin. It is apparently a descendant of the “school pieces” or
“Christmas pieces” popular in England in the first half of the
nineteenth century﻿—sheets of writing-paper with designs in pen and ink
or copper-plate headings. The first Christmas card proper appears to
have been issued in 1846, but it was not till about 1862 that the custom
of card-sending obtained any
foothold.﻿ [12-74](crt22.htm#Note_12-74.md)<span id="Nanchor_12-74"></span>

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span id="Page_280"></span>

<div class="illustration">

<span id="image20"></span><span id="img_image20"></span>

[![CHRISTMAS MORNING IN LOWER AUSTRIA.](tn/image20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/image20.jpg.md)  
  

CHRISTMAS MORNING IN LOWER AUSTRIA.

*By Ferdinand Waldmûller (b. 1793).*

</div>

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span id="Page_281"></span><span
id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span id="Page_282"></span><span
id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span id="Page_283"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Christmas Feasting and Sacrificial Survivals](crt16.md)
