[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Time](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crt16)  [Next](crt18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486233545/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Christmas in Ritual and Tradition*, by Clement A. Miles, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="Chapter_XIII"></span>CHAPTER XIII

## MASKING, THE MUMMERS’ PLAY, THE FEAST OF FOOLS, AND THE BOY BISHOP

> English Court Masking﻿—“The Lord of Misrule”﻿—The Mummers’ Play, the
> Sword-Dance, and the Morris Dance﻿—Origin of St. George and other
> Characters﻿—Mumming in Eastern Europe﻿—The Feast of Fools, its History
> and Suppression﻿—The Boy Bishop, his Functions and Sermons﻿—Modern
> Survivals of the Boy Bishop.

<div class="illustration">

<span id="image21"></span><span id="img_image21"></span>

[![YORKSHIRE SWORD-ACTORS: ST. GEORGE IN COMBAT WITH ST.
PETER.](tn/image21.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/image21.jpg)  
  

YORKSHIRE SWORD-ACTORS: ST. GEORGE IN COMBAT WITH ST. PETER.

From an article by Mr. T. M. Fallow in *The Antiquary*, May, 1895.

(By permission of Messrs. Elliot Stock.)

</div>

We have already seen a good deal of masking in connection with St.
Nicholas, Knecht Ruprecht, and other figures of the German Christmas; we
may next give some attention to English customs of the same sort during
the Twelve Days, and then pass on to the strange burlesque ceremonies of
the Feast of Fools and the Boy Bishop, ceremonies which show an
intrusion of pagan mummery into the sanctuary itself.

### <span class="smcap">Christmas Masking.</span>

The custom of Christmas masking, “mumming,” or “disguising” can be
traced at the English court as early as the reign of Edward III. It is
in all probability connected with that wearing of beasts’ heads and
skins of which we have already noted various examples﻿—its origin in
folk-custom seems to have been the coming of a band of worshippers clad
in this uncouth but auspicious garb to bring good luck to a
house.﻿ [14-1](crt22.htm#Note_14-1)<span id="Nanchor_14-1"></span> The
most direct English survival is found in the village mummers who still
call themselves “guisers” or “geese-dancers” and claim the right to
enter every house. These will be dealt with shortly, after a
consideration of more courtly customs of the same kind.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span id="Page_298"></span>In the
sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries the English court masque
reached its greatest developments; the fundamental idea was then
generally overlaid with splendid trappings, the dresses and the
arrangements were often extremely elaborate, and the introduction of
dialogued speech made these “disguises” regular dramatic performances. A
notable example is Ben Jonson's “Masque of
Christmas.”﻿ [14-2](crt22.htm#Note_14-2)<span id="Nanchor_14-2"></span>
Shakespeare, however, gives us in “Henry
VIII.”﻿ [14-3](crt22.htm#Note_14-3)<span id="Nanchor_14-3"></span> an
example of a simpler impromptu form: the king and a party dressed up as
shepherds break in upon a banquet of Wolsey's.

In this volume we are more concerned with the popular Christmas than
with the festivities of kings and courts and grandees. Mention must,
however, be made of a personage who played an important part in the
Christmas of the Tudor court and appeared also in colleges, Inns of
Court, and the houses of the nobility﻿—the “Lord of
Misrule.”﻿ [14-4](crt22.htm#Note_14-4)<span id="Nanchor_14-4"></span> He
was annually elected to preside over the revels, had a retinue of
courtiers, and was surrounded by elaborate ceremonial. He seems to be
the equivalent and was probably the direct descendant of the “Abbot” or
“Bishop” of the Feast of Fools, who will be noticed later in this
chapter. Sometimes indeed he is actually called “Abbot of Misrule.” A
parallel to him is the Twelfth Night “king,” and he appears to be a
courtly example of the temporary monarch of folk-custom, though his name
is sometimes extended to “kings” of quite vulgar origin elected not by
court or gentry but by the common people. The “Lord of Misrule” was
among the relics of paganism most violently attacked by Puritan writers
like Stubbes and Prynne, and the Great Rebellion seems to have been the
death of him.

### <span class="smcap">Mummers’ Plays and Morris Dances.</span>

Let us turn now to the rustic Christmas mummers, to-day fast
disappearing, but common enough in the mid-nineteenth century. Their
goings-on are really far more interesting, because more traditional,
than the elaborate shows and dressings-up of the court. Their names
vary: “mummers” and “guisers” are the commonest; in Sussex they are
“tipteerers,” perhaps because of <span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="Page_299"></span>the perquisites they collect, in Cornwall
“geese-dancers” (“geese” no doubt comes from “disguise”), in Shropshire
“morris”﻿—or “merry”﻿—“dancers.”﻿ [14-5](crt22.htm#Note_14-5)<span
id="Nanchor_14-5"></span> It is to be noted that they are unbidden
guests, and enter your house as of
right.﻿ [14-6](crt22.htm#Note_14-6)<span id="Nanchor_14-6"></span>
Sometimes they merely dance, sing, and feast, but commonly they perform
a rude drama.﻿ [14-7](crt22.htm#Note_14-7)<span
id="Nanchor_14-7"></span>

The plays acted by the mummers﻿ [14-8](crt22.htm#Note_14-8)<span
id="Nanchor_14-8"></span> vary so much that it is difficult to describe
them in general terms. There is no reason to suppose that the words are
of great antiquity﻿—the earliest form may perhaps date from the
seventeenth century; they appear to be the result of a crude dramatic
and literary instinct working upon the remains of traditional ritual,
and manipulating it for purposes of entertainment. The central figure is
St. George (occasionally he is called Sir, King, or Prince George), and
the main dramatic substance, after a prologue and introduction of the
characters, is a fight and the arrival of a doctor to bring back the
slain to life. At the close comes a *quête* for money. The name George
is found in all the Christmas plays, but the other characters have a
bewildering variety of names ranging from Hector and Alexander to
Bonaparte and Nelson.

Mr. Chambers in two very interesting and elaborately documented chapters
has traced a connection between these St. George players and the
sword-dancers found at Christmas or other festivals in Germany, Spain,
France, Italy, Sweden, and Great Britain. The sword-dance in its
simplest form is described by Tacitus in his “Germania”: “they have,” he
says of the Germans, “but one kind of public show: in every gathering it
is the same. Naked youths, who profess this sport, fling themselves in
dance among swords and levelled
lances.”﻿ [14-9](crt22.htm#Note_14-9)<span id="Nanchor_14-9"></span> In
certain forms of the dance there are figures in which the swords are
brought together on the heads of performers, or a pretence is made to
cut at heads and feet, or the swords are put in a ring round a person's
neck. This strongly suggests that an execution, probably a sacrifice,
lies at the bottom of the dances. In several cases, moreover, they are
accompanied by sets of verses containing the incident of a quarrel and
the violent death of one of the performers. The likeness to the central
feature of the <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="Page_300"></span>St. George play﻿—the slaying﻿—will be noticed. In
one of the dances, too, there is even a doctor who revives the victim.

In England the sword-dance is found chiefly in the north, but with it
appear to be identical the morris-dances﻿—characterized by the wearing
of jingling bells﻿—which are commoner in the southern counties.
Blackened faces are common in both, and both have the same grotesque
figures, a man and a woman, often called Tommy and Bessy in the
sword-dance and “the fool” and Maid Marian in the morris. Moreover the
morris-dancers in England sometimes use swords, and in one case the
performers of an undoubted sword-dance were called “morrice” dancers in
the eighteenth century. Bells too, so characteristic of the morris, are
mentioned in some Continental accounts of the
sword-dance.﻿ [111](crt24.htm#Footnote_111)<span
id="FNanchor_111"></span>

Intermediate between these dances and the fully developed St. George
dramas are the plays performed on Plough Monday in Lincolnshire and the
East Midlands. They all contain a good deal of dancing, a violent death
and a revival, and grotesques found both in the dances and in the
Christmas plays.

The sword-dance thus passes by a gradual transition, the dancing
diminishing, the dramatic elements increasing, into the mummers’ plays
of St. George. The central motive, death and revival, Mr. Chambers
regards as a symbol of the resurrection of the year or the spirit of
vegetation,﻿ [112](crt24.htm#Footnote_112)<span
id="FNanchor_112"></span> like the Thuringian custom of executing a
“wild man” covered with leaves, whom a doctor brings to life again by
bleeding. This piece of ritual has apparently been attracted to
Christmas from an early feast of spring, and Plough Monday, when the
East Midland plays take place, is just such an early spring feast.
Again, in some places the <span id="page_301">p. 301</span> <span
id="Page_301"></span>St. George play is performed at Easter, a date
alluded to in the title, “Pace-eggers’” or “Pasque-eggers’”
play.﻿ [14-13](crt22.htm#Note_14-13)<span id="Nanchor_14-13"></span>

Two grotesque figures appear with varying degrees of clearness and with
various names in the dances and in the plays﻿—the “fool” (Tommy) who
wears the skin and tail of a fox or other animal, and a man dressed in
woman's clothes (Bessy). In these we may recognize the skin-clad mummer
and the man aping a woman whom we meet in the old Kalends denunciations.
Sometimes the two are combined, while a hobby-horse also not
unfrequently appears.﻿ [14-14](crt22.htm#Note_14-14)<span
id="Nanchor_14-14"></span>

How exactly St. George came to be the central figure of the Christmas
plays is uncertain; possibly they may be a development of a dance in
which appeared the “Seven Champions,” the English national heroes﻿—of
whom Richard Johnson wrote a history in 1596﻿—with St. George at their
head. It is more probable, however, that the saint came in from the
mediaeval pageants held on his day in many English
towns.﻿ [14-15](crt22.htm#Note_14-15)<span id="Nanchor_14-15"></span>

Can it be that the German St. Nicholas plays are more Christianized and
sophisticated forms of folk-dramas like in origin to those we have been
discussing? They certainly resemble the English plays in the manner in
which one actor calls in another by name; while the grotesque figures
introduced have some likeness to the “fool” of the morris.

Christmas mumming, it may be added, is found in eastern as well as
western Europe. In Greece, where ecclesiastical condemnations of such
things can be traced with remarkable clearness from early times to the
twelfth century, it takes sundry forms. “At Pharsala,” writes Mr. J. C.
Lawson, “there is a sort of play at the Epiphany, in which the mummers
represent bride, bridegroom, and ‘Arab’; the Arab tries to carry off the
bride, and the bridegroom defends her.... Formerly also at ‘Kozane and
in many other parts of Greece,’ according to a Greek writer in the early
part of the nineteenth century, throughout the Twelve Days boys carrying
bells used to go round the houses, singing songs and having ‘one or more
of their company dressed up with masks and bells and foxes’ brushes and
other such things to give them a weird and monstrous
look.’”﻿ [14-16](crt22.htm#Note_14-16)<span id="Nanchor_14-16"></span>

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span id="Page_302"></span>In Russia,
too, mummers used to go about at Christmastide, visiting houses,
dancing, and performing all kinds of antics. “Prominent parts were
always played by human representatives of a goat and a bear. Some of the
party would be disguised as ‘Lazaruses,’ that is, as blind beggars.” A
certain number of the mummers were generally supposed to play the part
of thieves anxious to break in.﻿ [14-17](crt22.htm#Note_14-17)<span
id="Nanchor_14-17"></span> Readers of Tolstoy's “War and Peace” may
remember a description of some such maskings in the year 1810.

### <span class="smcap">The Feast of Fools.</span>

So far, in this Second Part, we have been considering customs practised
chiefly in houses, streets, and fields. We must now turn to certain
festivities following hard upon Christmas Day, which, though pagan in
origin and sometimes even blasphemous, found their way in the Middle
Ages within the walls of the church.

Shortly after Christmas a group of *tripudia* or revels was held by the
various inferior clergy and ministrants of cathedrals and other
churches. These festivals, of which the best known are the Feast of
Fools and the Boy Bishop ceremonies, have been so fully described by
other writers, and my space here is so limited, that I need but treat
them in outline, and for detail refer the reader to such admirable
accounts as are to be found in Chapters XIII., XIV., and XV. of Mr.
Chamber's “The Mediaeval Stage.”﻿ [14-18](crt22.htm#Note_14-18)<span
id="Nanchor_14-18"></span>

Johannes Belethus, Rector of Theology at Paris towards the end of the
twelfth century, speaks of four *tripudia* held after Christmas:﻿—those
of the deacons on St. Stephen's Day, the priests on St. John's, the
choir-boys on Holy Innocents’, and the subdeacons on the Circumcision,
the Epiphany, or the Octave of the Epiphany. The feast of subdeacons,
says Belethus, “we call that of fools.” It is this feast which, though
not apparently the earliest in origin of the four, was the most riotous
and disorderly, and shows most clearly its pagan character. Belethus’
mention of it is the first clear notice, though disorderly revels of the
same kind seem to have existed at Constantinople as early as the ninth
century. At first confined to the subdeacons, the Feast of Fools became
in its later developments a festival not only of that order but of the
<span id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span id="Page_303"></span>inferior
clergy in general, of the vicars choral, the chaplains, and the
choir-clerks, as distinguished from the canons. For this rabble of poor
and low-class clergy it was no doubt a welcome relaxation, and one can
hardly wonder that they let themselves go in burlesquing the sacred but
often wearisome rites at which it was their business to be present
through many long hours, or that they delighted to usurp for once in a
way the functions ordinarily performed by their superiors. The putting
down of the mighty from their seat and the exalting of them of low
degree was the keynote of the festival. While “Deposuit potentes de
sede: et exaltavit humiles” was being sung at the “Magnificat,” it would
appear that the precentor's *baculus* or staff was handed over to the
clerk who was to be “lord of the feast” for the year, and throughout the
services of the day the inferior clergy predominated, under the
leadership of this chosen “lord.” He was usually given some title of
ecclesiastical dignity, “bishop,” “prelate,” “archbishop,” “cardinal,”
or even “pope,” was vested in full pontificals, and in some cases sat on
the real bishop's throne, gave benedictions, and issued indulgences.

These lower clergy, it must be remembered, belonged to the peasant or
small *bourgeois* class and were probably for the most part but
ill-educated. They were likely to bring with them into the Church the
superstitions floating about among the people, and the Feast of Fools
may be regarded as a recoil of paganism upon Christianity in its very
sanctuary. “An ebullition of the natural lout beneath the cassock” it
has been called by Mr. Chambers, and many of its usages may be explained
by the reaction of coarse natures freed for once from restraint. It
brought to light, however, not merely personal vulgarity, but a whole
range of traditional customs, derived probably from a fusion of the
Roman feast of the Kalends of January with Teutonic or Celtic heathen
festivities.

A general account of its usages is given in a letter addressed in 1445
by the Paris Faculty of Theology to the bishops and chapters of
France:﻿—

> “Priests and clerks may be seen wearing masks and monstrous visages at
> the hours of office. They dance in the choir dressed as <span
> id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="Page_304"></span>women, panders
> or minstrels. They sing wanton songs. They eat black puddings at the
> horn of the altar while the celebrant is saying Mass. They play at
> dice there. They cense with stinking smoke from the soles of old
> shoes. They run and leap through the church, without a blush at their
> own shame. Finally they drive about the town and its theatres in
> shabby traps and carts, and rouse the laughter of their fellows and
> the bystanders in infamous performances, with indecent gesture and
> verses scurrilous and unchaste.”﻿ [14-19](crt22.htm#Note_14-19)<span
> id="Nanchor_14-19"></span>

The letter also speaks of “bishops” or “archbishops” of Fools, who wore
mitres and held pastoral staffs. We here see clearly, besides mere
irreverence, an outcrop of pagan practices. Topsy-turvydom, the
temporary exaltation of inferiors, was itself a characteristic of the
Kalends celebrations, and a still more remarkable feature of them was,
as we have seen, the wearing of beast-masks and the dressing up of men
in women's clothes. And what is the “bishop” or “archbishop” but a
parallel to, and, we may well believe, an example of, the mock king whom
Dr. Frazer has traced in so many a folk-festival, and who is found at
the *Saturnalia*?

One more feature of the Feast of Fools must be considered, the Ass who
gave to it the not uncommon title of *asinaria festa*. At Bourges, Sens,
and Beauvais, a curious half-comic hymn was sung in church, the
so-called “Prose of the Ass.” It begins as follows:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Orientis partibus</span>  
<span class="i2">Adventavit Asinus,</span>  
<span class="i2">Pulcher et fortissimus,</span>  
<span class="i2">Sarcinis aptissimus.</span>  
<span class="i2">Hez, Sir Asnes, car chantez,</span>  
<span class="i2">Belle bouche rechignez,</span>  
<span class="i2">Vous aurez du foin assez</span>  
<span class="i2">Et de l'avoine a plantez.”</span>  

</div>

</div>

And after eight verses in praise of the beast, with some mention of his
connection with Bethlehem and the Wise Men, it closes thus:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Amen dicas, Asine,</span>  
<span class="i2">Iam satur de gramine,<span id="page_305">p.
305</span> <span id="Page_305"></span></span>  
<span class="i2">Amen, Amen, itera,</span>  
<span class="i2">Aspernare vetera.</span>  
<span class="i2">Hez va, hez va! hez va, hez!</span>  
<span class="i2">Bialx Sire Asnes, car allez:</span>  
<span class="i2">Belle bouche, car
chantez.”﻿ [14-20](crt22.htm#Note_14-20)<span id="Nanchor_14-20"></span>
</span>  

</div>

</div>

An ass, it would seem, was actually brought into church, at Beauvais at
all events, during the singing of this song on the feast of the
Circumcision. On January 14 an extraordinary ceremony took place there.
A girl with a child in her arms rode upon an ass into St. Stephen's
church, to represent the Flight into Egypt. The Introit, “Kyrie,”
“Gloria,” and “Credo” at Mass ended in a bray, and at the close of the
service the priest instead of saying “Ite, missa est,” had to bray three
times, and the people to respond in like manner. Mr. Chambers's theory
is that the ass was a descendant of the *cervulus* or hobby-buck who
figures so largely in ecclesiastical condemnations of Kalends customs.

The country *par excellence* of the Feast of the Fools was France. It
can also be traced in Germany and Bohemia, while in England too there
are notices of it, though far fewer than in France. Its abuses were the
subject of frequent denunciations by Church reformers from the twelfth
to the fifteenth century. The feast was prohibited at various times, and
notably by the Council of Basle in 1435, but it was too popular to be
quickly suppressed, and it took a century and a half to die out after
this condemnation by a general council of the Church. In one cathedral,
Amiens, it even lingered until 1721.

When in the fifteenth century and later the Feast of Fools was expelled
from the churches of France, associations of laymen sprang up to carry
on its traditions outside. It was indeed a form of entertainment which
the townsfolk as well as the lower clergy thoroughly appreciated, and
they were by no means willing to let it die. A *Prince des Sots* took
the place of the “bishop,” and was chosen by *sociétés joyeuses*
organized by the youth of the cities for New Year merrymaking. Gradually
their activities grew, and their celebrations came to take place at
other festive times beside the Christmas season. The *sots* had a
distinctive dress, its <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="Page_306"></span>most characteristic feature being a hood with
asses’ ears, probably a relic of the primitive days when the heads of
sacrificed animals were worn by festal
worshippers.﻿ [14-21](crt22.htm#Note_14-21)<span
id="Nanchor_14-21"></span>

### <span class="smcap">The Boy Bishop.</span>

Of older standing than the Feast of Fools were the Christmas revels of
the deacons, the priests, and the choir-boys. They can be traced back to
the early tenth century, and may have originated at the great
song-school of St. Gall near Constance. The most important of the three
feasts was that of the boys on Holy Innocents’ Day, a theoretically
appropriate date. Corresponding to the “lord” of the Feast of Fools was
the famous “Boy Bishop,” a choir-boy chosen by the lads themselves, who
was vested in cope and mitre, held a pastoral staff, and gave the
benediction. Other boys too usurped the dignities of their elders, and
were attired as dean, archdeacons, and canons. Offices for the festival,
in which the Boy Bishop figures largely, are to be found in English,
French, and German service-books, the best known in this country being
those in the Sarum Processional and Breviary. In England these
ceremonies were far more popular and lasting than the Feast of Fools,
and, unlike it, they were recognized and approved by authority, probably
because boys were more amenable to discipline than men, and
objectionable features could be pruned away with comparative ease. The
festivities must have formed a delightful break in the year of the
mediaeval schoolboy, for whom holidays, as distinguished from holy-days
for church-going, scarcely existed. The feast, as we shall see, was by
no means confined within the church walls; there was plenty of
merrymaking and money-making outside.

Minute details have been preserved of the Boy Bishop customs at St.
Paul's Cathedral in the thirteenth century. It had apparently been usual
for the “bishop” to make the cathedral dignitaries act as taper- and
incense-bearers, thus reversing matters so that the great performed the
functions of the lowly. In 1263 this was forbidden, and only clerks of
lower rank might be chosen for these offices. But the “bishop” had the
right to demand <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span
id="Page_307"></span>after Compline on the Eve of the Innocents a supper
for himself and his train from the Dean or one of his canons. The number
of his following must, however, be limited; if he went to the Dean's he
might take with him a train of fifteen: two chaplains, two
taper-bearers, five clerks, two vergers, and four residentiary canons;
if to a lesser dignitary his attendants were to be fewer.

On Innocents’ Day he was given a dinner, after which came a cavalcade
through the city, that the “bishop” might bless the people. He had also
to preach a sermon﻿—no doubt written for him.

Examples of such discourses are still
extant,﻿ [14-22](crt22.htm#Note_14-22)<span id="Nanchor_14-22"></span>
and are not without quaint touches. For instance the bidding prayer
before one of them alludes to “the ryghte reverende fader and
worshypfull lorde my broder Bysshopp of London, your dyoceasan,” and “my
worshypfull broder \[the\] Deane of this cathedrall
chirche,”﻿ [14-23](crt22.htm#Note_14-23)<span id="Nanchor_14-23"></span>
while in another the preacher remarks, speaking of the choristers and
children of the song-school, “Yt is not so long sens I was one of them
myself.”﻿ [14-24](crt22.htm#Note_14-24)<span id="Nanchor_14-24"></span>

In some places it appears, though this is by no means certain, that the
boy actually sang Mass. The “bishop's” office was a very desirable one
not merely because of the feasting, but because he had usually the right
to levy contributions on the faithful, and the amounts collected were
often very large. At York, for instance, in 1396 the “bishop” pocketed
about £77, all expenses paid.

The general parallelism of the Boy Bishop customs and the Feast of Fools
is obvious, and no doubt they had much the same folk-origin. One point,
already mentioned, should specially be noticed: the election of the Boy
Bishop generally took place on December 5, the Eve of St. Nicholas,
patron of children; he was often called “Nicholas bishop”; and
sometimes, as at Eton and Mayence, he exercised episcopal functions at
divine service on the eve and the feast itself. It is possible, as Mr.
Chambers suggests, that St. Nicholas's Day was an older date for the
boys’ festival than Holy Innocents’, and that from the connection with
St. Nicholas, the bishop saint *par excellence* (he was said to have
been consecrated by divine command when still a mere layman), sprang
<span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span id="Page_308"></span>the custom
of giving the title “bishop” to the “lord” first of the boys’ feast and
later of the Feast of Fools.

In the late Middle Ages the Boy Bishop was found not merely in
cathedral, monastic, and collegiate churches but in many parish churches
throughout England and Scotland. Various inventories of the vestments
and ornaments provided for him still exist. With the beginnings of the
Reformation came his suppression: a proclamation of Henry VIII., dated
July 22, 1541, commands “that from henceforth all suche superstitions be
loste and clyerlye extinguisshed throughowte all this his realmes and
dominions, forasmoche as the same doo resemble rather the unlawfull
superstition of gentilitie \[paganism\], than the pure and sincere
religion of Christe.”﻿ [14-25](crt22.htm#Note_14-25)<span
id="Nanchor_14-25"></span> In Mary's reign the Boy Bishop reappeared,
along with other “Popish” usages, but after Elizabeth's accession he
naturally fell into oblivion. A few traces of him lingered in the
seventeenth century. “The Schoole-boies in the west,” says Aubrey,
“still religiously observe St. Nicholas day (Decemb. 6th), he was the
Patron of the Schoole-boies. At Curry-Yeovill in Somersetshire, where
there is a Howschole (or schole) in the Church, they have annually at
that time a Barrell of good Ale brought into the church; and that night
they have the priviledge to breake open their Masters
Cellar-dore.”﻿ [14-26](crt22.htm#Note_14-26)<span
id="Nanchor_14-26"></span>

In France he seems to have gradually vanished, as, after the
Reformation, the Catholic Church grew more and more “respectable,” but
traces of him are to be found in the eighteenth century at Lyons and
Rheims; and at Sens, even in the nineteenth, the choir-boys used to play
at being bishops on Innocents’ Day and call their “archbishop” *âne*﻿—a
memory this of the old *asinaria
festa*.﻿ [14-27](crt22.htm#Note_14-27)<span id="Nanchor_14-27"></span>
In Denmark a vague trace of him was retained in the nineteenth century
in a children's game. A boy was dressed up in a white shirt, and seated
on a chair, and the children sang a verse beginning, “Here we consecrate
a Yule-bishop,” and offered him nuts and
apples.﻿ [14-28](crt22.htm#Note_14-28)<span id="Nanchor_14-28"></span>

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span id="Page_309"></span><span
id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span id="Page_310"></span><span
id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span id="Page_311"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. St. Stephen's, St. Johns, and Holy Innocents'
Days](crt18)
