[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Time](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crt20)  [Next](crt22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486233545/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Christmas in Ritual and Tradition*, by Clement A. Miles, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="CONCLUSION"></span>CONCLUSION

The reader who has had patience to persevere will by now have gained
some idea of the manner in which Christmas is, and has been, kept
throughout Europe. We have traced the evolution of the festival, seen it
take its rise soon after the victory of the Catholic doctrine of
Christ's person at Nicea, and spread from Rome to every quarter of the
Empire, not as a folk-festival but as an ecclesiastical holy-day. We
have seen the Church condemn with horror the relics of pagan feasts
which clung round the same season of the year; then, as time went on, we
have found the two elements, pagan and Christian, mingling in some
degree, the pagan losing most of its serious meaning, and continuing
mainly as ritual performed for the sake of use and wont or as a jovial
tradition, the Christian becoming humanized, the skeleton of dogma
clothed with warm flesh and blood.

We have considered, as represented in poetry and liturgy, the strictly
ecclesiastical festival, the commemoration of the Nativity as the
beginning of man's redemption. We have seen how in the carols, the cult
of the *presepio*, and the religious drama, the Birth of the King of
Glory in the stable at midwinter has presented itself in concrete form
to the popular mind, calling up a host of human emotions, a crowd of
quaint and beautiful fancies. Lastly we have noted the survival, in the
most varied degrees of transformation, of things which are alien to
Christianity and in some cases seem to go back to very primitive stages
of thought and feeling. An antique reverence for the plant-world may
lie, as we have seen, beneath the familiar institution of the
Christmas-tree, some sort of animal-worship may be at the bottom of the
<span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="Page_358"></span>beast-masks
common at winter festivals, survivals of sacrifice may linger in
Christmas feasting, and in the family gatherings round the hearth may be
preserved a dim memory of ancient domestic rites.

Christmas, indeed, regarded in all its aspects, is a microcosm of
European religion. It reflects almost every phase of thought and feeling
from crude magic and superstition to the speculative mysticism of
Eckhart, from mere delight in physical indulgence to the exquisite
spirituality and tenderness of St. Francis. Ascetic and *bon-vivant*,
mystic and materialist, learned and simple, noble and peasant, all have
found something in it of which to lay hold. It is a river into which
have flowed tributaries from every side, from Oriental religion, from
Greek and Roman civilization, from Celtic, Teutonic, Slav, and probably
pre-Aryan, society, mingling their waters so that it is often hard to
discover the far-away springs.

We have seen how the Reformation broke up the great mediaeval synthesis
of paganism and Christianity, how the extremer forms of Protestantism
aimed at completely destroying Christmas, and how the general tendency
of modern civilization, with its scientific spirit, its popular
education, its railways, its concentration of the people in great
cities, has been to root out traditional beliefs and customs both
Christian and pagan, so that if we would seek for relics of the old
things we must go to the regions of Europe that are least industrially
and intellectually “advanced.” Yet amongst the most sceptical and
“enlightened” of moderns there is generally a large residuum of
tradition. “Emotionally,” it has been said, “we are hundreds of
thousands of years old; rationally we are
embryos”﻿ [18-1](crt22.htm#Note_18-1.md)<span id="Nanchor_18-1"></span> ;
and many people who deem themselves “emancipated” are willing for once
in the year to plunge into the stream of tradition, merge themselves in
inherited social custom, and give way to sentiments and impressions
which in their more reflective moments they spurn. Most men are ready at
Christmas to put themselves into an instinctive rather than a rational
attitude, to drink of the springs of wonder, and return in some degree
to earlier, less intellectual stages of human development﻿—to become in
fact children again.

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span id="Page_359"></span>Many
elements enter into the modern Christmas. There is the delight of its
warmth and brightness and comfort against the bleak midwinter. A
peculiar charm of the northern Christmas lies in the thought of the cold
barred out, the home made a warm, gay place in contrast with the
cheerless world outside. There is the physical pleasure of “good cheer,”
of plentiful eating and drinking, joined to, and partly resulting in, a
sense of goodwill and expansive kindliness towards the world at large, a
temporary feeling of the brotherhood of man, a desire that the poor may
for once in the year “have a good time.” Here perhaps we may trace the
influence of the *Saturnalia*, with its dreams of the age of gold, its
exaltation of them of low degree. Mixed with a little sentimental
Christianity this is the Christmas of Dickens﻿—the Christmas which he
largely helped to perpetuate in England.

Each nation, naturally, has fashioned its own Christmas. The English
have made it a season of solid material comfort, of good-fellowship and
“charity,” with a slight flavour of soothing religion. The modern
French, sceptical and pagan, make little of Christmas, and concentrate
upon the secular celebration of the *jour de l'an*. For the
Scandinavians Christmas is above all a time of sport, recreation, good
living, and social gaiety in the midst of a season when little outdoor
work can be done and night almost swallows up day. The Germans,
sentimental and childlike, have produced a Christmas that is a very
Paradise for children and at which the old delight to play at being
young again around the Tree. For the Italians Christmas is centred upon
the cult of the *Bambino*, so fitted to their dramatic instincts, their
love of display, their strong parental affection. (How much of the
sentiment that surrounds the *presepio* is, though religiously
heightened, akin to the delight of a child in its doll!) If the Germans
may be called the good, industrious, sentimental children of Europe,
making the most of simple things, the Italians are the lively,
passionate, impulsive children, loving gay clothes and finery; and the
contrast shows in their keeping of Christmas.

The modern Christmas is above all things a children's feast, and the
elders who join in it put themselves upon their children's <span
id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span id="Page_360"></span>level. We have
noted how ritual acts, once performed with serious purpose, tend to
become games for youngsters, and have seen many an example of this
process in the sports and mummeries kept up by the elder folk for the
benefit of the children. We have seen too how the radiant figure of the
Christ Child has become a gift-bringer for the little ones. At no time
in the world's history has so much been made of children as to-day, and
because Christmas is their feast its lustre continues unabated in an age
upon which dogmatic Christianity has largely lost its hold, which laughs
at the pagan superstitions of its forefathers. Christmas is the feast of
beginnings, of instinctive, happy childhood; the Christian idea of the
Immortal Babe renewing weary, stained humanity, blends with the thought
of the New Year, with its hope and promise, laid in the cradle of Time.

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span id="Page_361"></span><span
id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span id="Page_362"></span><span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="Page_363"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes and Bibliography](crt22.md)
