[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm030)  [Next](zdm032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

THE seventh mansion is without visible form, being the highest and most
mysterious of all, enshrouded with a veil which separates it from all
other spheres and mansions, so that no one can perceive the two Cherubim
standing behind it and therefore it is termed The Holy of Holies, for
therein is the, Supreme Spirit that imparts life and light to all
creatures. When the union of all spirits with the Divine takes place,
then the light of this mansion descends out of the Holy Place and
illuminates all worlds. All light coming down from on high is like the
seed of man that unites the male and female, and so is it with this
mansion which unites the higher with the lower spheres. Happy the man
who accomplishes this union, for then is he wholly blessed and beloved
both on high and below. When the Holy One decrees judgments such a man
is able to appease and allay them and yet does not act contrary and in
opposition by so doing, but through his intimate union with the Divine
Being all penal judgments and decrees become self annulled and
innocuous. Oh blessed is he both in this world and the world to come; as
it is written, "The righteous man is the foundation of the world" (Prov.
x. 25). Whilst he lives a voice from on high is ever speaking unto him,
saying: "Thou shalt rejoice in the Lord, thou shalt glory in the Holy
One of Israel" (Is. xli. 16).

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

As the chief priest officiates at the altar of sacrifice and the Levites
chant, the cloud of incense ascends on high; so is the ascent of spirits
to the higher spheres and mansions, until at length they become unified
with the light of light, and abide forever, perfected and wholly divine
through the power of prayer. It is then that all spirits like lesser
lights are blended with the great divine light, and entering within the
veil of the Holy of Holies are overwhelmed with blessings proceeding
therefrom as water out of an inexhaustible and ever-flowing fountain. In
this mansion is the great Mystery of Mysteries, the deepest, most
profound and beyond all human comprehension and understanding, the
eternal and infinite Will, that governs, sways and rules all worlds
throughout the universe, the mighty causal Will, known only by its
effects and silent operations, and that through all ages to come will
ever act until the human and divine wills are blended together in one
eternally harmonious whole, and humanity attains to the Higher and
Diviner Life. Blessed are they who have entered into the enjoyment
accruing from this union of wills as it is written, "Thy father and thy
mother shall be glad and she who hath born thee shall rejoice" (Prov.
xxiii. 25). When perfect union prevails, everything is centered in and
proceeds from the Divine Thought or Mind. All forms and ideas give place
to and disappear in the Divine Mind, that alone animates, vivifies,
sustains and enlightens every human soul. The supreme Will, residing and
acting through pure thought, it follows that by prayer man effects this
union with the Divine Will and attracts it to himself, and therefore it
is written, "Happy is that people who enjoy this greatest of blessings,
whose God is the Lord," for then the world rejoices in mercy and
goodness that come from above, through the prayer of union, which never
proves in vain or resultless. It avails with the Lords as that of a
child with its father and is answered. The suppliant becomes girded
about and endowed with a power felt and feared by all inferior
creatures. It ordains and the Holy One fulfills its behests, as it is
written, "Thou shalt desire a thing and it shall be established, and the
Light shall shine upon thy way" (Job xxii. 28). <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[197:1](zdm031.htm#fr_5.md) Note by translator.
These mansions in their totality correspond to the third heaven
mentioned by St. Paul in the Epistle to the Corinthians. The reader will
find some very interesting information on these spheres and mansions in
the works of St. Dionysius the Areopagite. He will also find a very
interesting reference to the "two witnesses" in Revelation, XI, 1,
pointing to the Kabbalistic origin of this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.](zdm032.md)
