[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm073)  [Next](zdm075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "THE THAUMATURGICAL ERECTION OF SOLOMON'S TEMPLE."

"It is written, 'And the whole earth was of one language and of one
speech' (Gen. XI. 1). Said Rabbi Simeon, 'Scripture relates of Solomon's
temple, it was built of stones made ready before brought to the house.
so that the sound of hammer, nor axe, nor of any tool of iron was heard
whilst it was building' (1 King VI. 7). What is the meaning of the
words, 'whilst it was building?' From the form of expression, we might
infer

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

it was in some marvelous and wonderful manner self-builded. Were not
Solomon and his artizans the builders of it? Ere replying to these
questions let us give the mystical meaning of the words, 'And thou shalt
make a candlestick of pure gold, of beaten work shall the candlestick be
made' (Ex. XXV. 31). Now since the candlestick was to be made of beaten
gold, and scripture distinctly states, it was 'self-made' (yerechah) how
could this possibly be? Our answer is, it was done by the operation of
an unknown and invisible force or power, in other words by a miraculous
agency. When the artisans of Solomon wished to begin their labors, he
instructed them to do work to which they had never been accustomed and
of which they were wholly ignorant, so that it was only through the
blessing of the Holy One, with wisdom and power from on high directing
their hands, that they were able to begin and complete the structure of
the holy temple, and therefore it was as scripture states, "and the
house when it was being [self-built](errata.htm#51.md)" (vehabeth
behibbanothou) through divine power and influence operating in the minds
or wills and hands of the artisans who worked according to a plan or a
certain method, from which they never deviated until the temple was
finished and completed.<span class="margnote">74a</span> It is also
said, it was made of stone ready prepared (shelemah) (which against the
general rule is written without the yod)  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) . This strange marvel is further confirmed
by the word next following, massang (brought or conducted thither)
indicating that the artisans engaged in the construction of the house
simply used or made passes with their hauls and the work was
accomplished though they understood not, nor comprehended the mystery of
its modus operandi. It was further stated, 'There was neither hammer,
nor axe nor any tool of iron used in the house while it was building
itself.' No wonder therefore is it that whilst wielding, controlling and
manipulating such a mysterious and occult power and agent they observed
the strictest silence and refrained from the use of tool and implement
in the erection of the sacred temple. How deep and occult are the
mysteries of the secret doctrine and few are there who have any notion
or idea and knowledge of them. When the Holy One wishes to manifest his
glory and power to humanity, he causes to descend from a part of the
universe termed the 'thought sphere,' whose locus is unknown, save to
himself, and pass through the bodily organ known as the 'larynx,' the
mysterious breath of life which is designated in scripture and described
as 'the living God,' 'the only true God and King eternal.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[302:1](zdm074.htm#fr_8.md) shelemah = ‏שלימה‎,
without the Yod = ‏שלמה‎ = Solomon--JBH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI. The Mystery of the Logos](zdm075.md)
