[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm097)  [Next](zdm099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ESOTERIC EXPLANATION OF LOT'S PARTING FROM ABRAHAM.

"It is further stated of Abraham that there was a strife<span
class="margnote">84a  
Gen 13:7</span> between the herdsmen of Abraham's cattle and the
herdsmen of Lot's cattle. The word strife (riv) is here written with a
yod (i), by which is indicated that Lot wished to return and relapse
into his former state of idolatry and mingle in intercourse with the
people of the land, as it is written, 'And the Canaanites and the
Perizzites dwelled then in the land.' We are further confirmed in this
inference by the words, 'and, Lot journeyed east' (miqqedem), or rather,
'from the east,' the word 'qedem,' as previously expounded, meaning the
worship of God, and, giving way to the inclinations and propensities of
his lower nature, went and dwelt among the inhabitants of the land in
order to enjoy the delights and pleasures of a sensual and worldly life.
Observing this tendency in Lot, Abraham inwardly grieving thereon, said
unto him, 'Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me; let
us separate, for I perceive there can be no unanimity of faith and
worship

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

between us. Thy heart goes out after and is fixed upon the<span
class="margnote">84a-84b</span> phenomenal and sensual, mine after the
one eternal and true God and Lord of the universe.'

"Then it came to pass that they parted, Abraham unwilling to be
associated with his kinsman in a life which he knew would prove a
calamity to both of them because of the sure and unavoidable doom of
everyone who ignores and disregards the divine life and refuses to obey
the precepts of the Good Law. Of this, Jehosephat in allying himself
with the wicked Ahab was a remarkable example. But for divine goodness,
he would have been slain along with his sinful companion, but perceiving
his danger ere it was too late, it is written, 'He cried unto God and He
helped him'; so that he escaped with his life, whilst the King of
Israel, the wicked Ahab, smitten and wounded, died ere the sun went
down. This was the reason Abraham was unwilling to continue his
intercourse with Lot, who chose all the plain of Jordan, preferring to
indulge in the gay pleasures and obscenities of Sodom and Gomorrah
rather than live, following the divine light that had begun to dawn
within him, which would, as it did with Abraham, have led him safely
through and enabled him to avoid and escape the dangers and resist and
overcome the temptations that beset the path of every individual on his
pilgrimage through earth-life. 'And Abraham dwelled in the land of
Canaan,' to progress and go from faith to faith and to attain the higher
knowledge of the hidden wisdom, but Lot dwelled in the cities of the
plain, gravitating slowly and gradually toward Sodom, where he fired his
tent at last to become engulfed in a world of vice from out which no
human means could have entreated and saved him from the fearful and
terrible doom that awaited those amongst whom he took up his abode. For
as it is written, 'They were wicked and sinners before the Lord
exceedingly.' Thus Abraham and Lot parted in peace, each of them going
his own way and living their own lives, the one of the higher and
divine, the other of the worldly and lower self. Blessed the lot of
those who choose that better part that shall never be taken from them
and whose delight is in the study of the Secret Doctrine, its teachings
and principles, and their joy is in the consciousness of the divine
presence. They are the true children of Israel, of whom it is written,
'He that cleave unto the Lord your God are alive, every one of you this
day' (Deut. 1V.4)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XC. Remarks on the Schekina](zdm099)
