[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm052)  [Next](zdm054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

SAID Rabbi Hiya "Since the day that Adam transgressed the command of
God, the world became affiliated with poverty until the advent of Noah,
who, through the sacrifice he offered up, caused it to regain its normal
fertility. "

Said Rabbi Jose, "the earth recovered its fertility, but did not become
freed from the infection of the serpent until Israel stood at the foot
of Mount Sinai and was united with the Tree of Life. And if they had not
broken the law; there would have been no death in the world, Israel
having become purified. When they sinned through their idolatry of the
calf, the first tables of the law that freed it from the power and
influence of the serpent or 'the end of all flesh' were broken. When the
Levites rose up to slaughter and kill, the Israelites engaged in
idolatrous worship the serpent who is the same as the destroying angel,
placed himself at their head, but was unable to inflict any injury on
them, as they were protected by certain amulets that made then
impervious to his attacks. And only when God said unto Moses, 'Put off
thy ornaments from thee' was the serpent able to smite them as it is
written, 'And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their
ornaments by Mount Horeb' (Ex. XXXIII. 5). Why is the word here used
*vaithnatzelon* (they were despoiled) and not *vainatzelon* (stripped
off).<span class="margnote">63b</span> It is in order to show that the
Israelites deprived and despoiled of the protecting ornaments (amulets
or pentacles) they had affixed on themselves at Mount Sinai when
receiving the law, fell under the influence of the serpent who had now
the power to afflict them."

Said Rabbi Hiya: "Why, if Noah was just and upright, did not death
disappear out of the world? It was because it was not

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

altogether purified and freed from the infection of the serpent.<span
class="margnote">63b</span> Moreover, the [antediluvians](errata.htm#39.md)
had lost all faith and belief in the existence of the Holy One and were
really atheists and given up to the worship and service of the evil one,
who after the deluge caused men to sin in a similar manner to those who
lived before it, for the holy law that constitutes the Tree of Life was
not revealed on earth by the Holy One until Israel stood at the foot of
Mount Sinai. Noah was, therefore, unable to suppress death in the world,
but rather, after his exit from the ark contributed to its continuance
and perpetuity therein, as it is written, 'and he drank of the wine and
was drunken; and he lay naked in his tent'" (Gan. IX. 21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. Kabbalistic Explanation of the Feast of Tabernacles
and The Loulab](zdm054.md)
