[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm092)  [Next](zdm094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "ABRAHAM'S DESCENT INTO EGYPT FOR INITIATION INTO THE HIGHER MYSTERIES."

"On observing this general depravation of manners and modes of living,
it is written, 'And Abraham went down into Egypt to sojourn there.' Here
the question may arise, what was the reason and object of his going down
into Egypt? It

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

was because at that time Egypt was a great center of learning, of
Theosophy and the science of the Divine Mysteries, and therefore
referred to in scripture as 'the garden of the Lord like the land of
Egypt.' In it, as in the garden of Eden, of which it is stated, <span
class="margnote">81b</span> 'From the right of it went forth a river
called Pison that encompassed the whole land of Havilah, where there is
gold,'<span class="margnote">Gen. 2:11</span> flowed a great mystical
river of divine knowledge, very precious and unobtainable elsewhere.
Abraham having entered into the garden of Eden and become an adept in
the secret doctrine, desirous of passing through all its grades on two
the higher mysteries in order to become 'teloios' or perfect, went down
into Egypt where there was gold, or the Hidden Wisdom."

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "It is written, 'And it came to pass that when he
was come near to enter into Egypt.' Why is the word 'higrib (come near)'
found here instead of 'carab' the Hiphil and not the Kal form of
expression. The explanation is, that as the same word 'hicrib' is used
when the Israelites were before the Red Sea, it is said, 'And Pharaoh
drew near' (Ex. XIV. 10), and so were excited to fuller dependence on
God for deliverance, so was it with Abraham on his nearing Egypt, where
he was soon to come into contact and intercourse with men whose bad
actions arising from their ignorance of the worship of the true God; it
made him feel a greater need of the divine life and power to preserve
him from the evils of idolatry then prevailing there."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXV.](zdm094.md)
