[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm046)  [Next](zdm048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DIVINE COMPASSION.

Said Rabbi Jose: "It is written, 'And it repented the Lord that he had
made man on the earth and it grieved him at his heart' (Gen. vi., 6).
'Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity and sin as it
were with a cart-rope' (Is. v., 18). The words, 'that draw iniquity,'
refer to those who sin against their "Lord every day and imagine their
wrong-doing is of less consequence and worth than a cart-rope. With this
class of wrong-doers the Holy One is exceedingly patient and
long-suffering, and punishes them not until their misdeeds get beyond
endurance. When the Holy One executeth judgment upon sinners in the
world, yet is he unwilling they should perish; since notwithstanding
their transgression, they are his children, the work of his hands.
Though their punishment is inevitable, yet like as a father pitieth his
children, so doth he pity them; so great is his love and compassion
towards them that even when punishment and suffering overtake the erring
and sinful, he is full of compassion and grieved in heart, if we may so
express it, like the Persian monarch who sought to deliver Daniel, of
whom it is written, 'Then the king went to his palace and passed the
night fasting; neither were instruments of music brought before him, and
his sleep went from him.'" (Dan. vi., 18.)

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

Said Rabbi Isaac: "The words, 'And it repented the Lord that he had made
man on the earth,' have the same meaning as the words, 'And the Lord
repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people.'" (Ex.
xxxii., 14.)<span class="margnote">57a-57b</span>

Said Rabbi Yusa: "The interpretation of the rabbi is favorable to man,
but in the opinion of Rabbi Hezekiah it is otherwise."

Said Rabbi Hiya: "When the Holy One created man to dwell upon the earth,
he formed him after the likeness of Adam Kadmon, the heavenly man, when
the angels gazed upon him, they exclaimed: 'Thou hast made him almost
equal to Alhim and crowned him with glory and honor.' After the
transgression and fall of Adam, it is said the Holy One was grieved at
heart because it gave occasion for repeating what they had said at his
creation, 'What is man that thou shouldst be mindful of him, or the son
of man that thou shouldst visit him.'" (Ps vii. 5.)

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "It grieved the Holy One that he must punish man
severely and thus appear as acting in contradiction to the greatest of
his attributes, (mercy), as it is written. 'And he appointed singers
unto the Lord to march in front of the army, praising the beauty of
holiness and saying, 'Praise the Lord, for his mercy endureth forever.'"
(II. Chron. xx., 21.)

Said Rabbi Isaac: "Why was this song of praise composed like those
psalms that begin with the words, Praise the Lord for he is good, was it
not because the term 'good' (tob) might not be used when Israel was
compelled to destroy people whom the Holy One made and created? When
Israel passed through the waters of the Red Sea, the angels on high
assembled round the throne of the Holy One and sang praises. Then spake
he and said: wherefore sing ye<span class="margnote">Ex. 15:1</span> a
song of praise, seeing so many, the work of my hands, are drowned in the
depths of the sea? So is it when a sinner perishes; the Holy One is
grieved at heart, when he is cut off from the face of the earth."

Said Rabbi Abba: "It is of a truth so; for when Adam fell through
transgressing the divine commandment, the Holy One said: 'Oh Adam! thou
art become dead unto the higher divine life.' At these words, the light
of the Sabbath candle became extinguished and Adam was driven out of the
garden of Eden. Moreover, the Holy One further said: 'I made thee ascend
and placed thee in Eden to offer sacrifices; but seeing thou hast
profaned the altar, it is my decree that henceforth thou shalt be a
tiller of the ground and die at last--for from it was thou taken,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

and unto it shall thou return.' Ere, however, this occurred the Holy One
had compassion on him and permitted him to live and be buried in the
vicinity of Paradise; for Adam had discovered<span
class="margnote">57b</span> a cave from which emitted a light which he
recognized as coming from out of the garden of Eden; and there he, along
with his wife, lived and died. Observe that no one goeth out of the
world without seeing immediately after death his ancestor Adam, who
seeks to know the cause of his decease and what his moral and spiritual
state to which he has attained. Then says the deceased one; Woe unto
thee, for thou art the cause wherefore I have ceased to live; to which
Adam replies: I transgressed but one only of the commandments and
suffered therefrom, but what must be thy punishment who hast broken so
many by thy misdeeds."

Said Rabbi Hiya: "Adam was seen on different occasions by the
patriarchs, to whom he confessed and acknowledged his sin and showed
them the place where he had enjoyed the divine light and glory from on
high and also where his descendants, the righteous, and those who obeyed
the Good Law, through their good deeds now live the diviner life in the
garden of the celestial Eden. Then praised they the Lord and said, 'How
excellent is thy loving kindness, oh God, wherefore do the children of
men put their trust in the shadow of thy wing.'" (Ps. xxxvi., 7.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX.](zdm048.md)
