[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm094)  [Next](zdm096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span class="margnote">82a</span>

### KABBALISTIC COSMOLOGY

IT is written, "And Pharaoh commanded his men concerning him and they
sent him away and his wife and all that he had." Note that the Holy One
is the protector of the upright that they may not fall under the power
of evil and suffer injury from men of the world. Thus he delivered and
saved Abraham and his wife. The Schekina remained with Sarah during the
whole night. Each time that Pharaoh approached her, an angel obeying the
commands of Sara struck him. Abraham, however, trusted in his Lord and
rested assured that He would suffer no one to do her violence and had no
apprehension of any evil befalling her, as it is written, "the righteous
are bold as a lion" (Prov. XXVIII)<span class="margnote">Prov.
28:1</span> and in the hour of trial and danger, remains steadfast and
faithful and trustful in the Holy One.

Said Rabbi Isaac: "Abraham went down into Egypt without first obtaining
permission from the Holy One, who, however, did not forbid or prevent
him going thither, as He knew that after the trial of his faith and
steadfasteness the world would have no occasion to say that though God
had sent Abraham into Egypt, he did not preserve and save him from
enduring trouble on account of Sarah. It is further stated, 'The
righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow like a cedar
in Lebanon' (Ps. XCII, 12). What does this comparison mean? This, that
as the palm owing to pruning takes a long time ere it begins to bud and
bear fruit, so when a righteous man departs out of the world, a long
time elapses before a similar one appears and takes his place. This
comparison may be further extended, for as the male palm must be planted
near a female of its own species in order that fructification may take
place, so is it with the upright, who are always joined and linked with
an upright wife, as was the case with Abraham and Sarah. 'As a cedar in
Lebanon.' As the cedar tree rises higher than all other trees that grow
beneath its branches, even so the righteous in their moral spiritual
life exceed all others, to whom they are a protection. The world
subsists and endures only by

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

the presence in it of the righteous, as it is written, 'The righteous
are the foundation of the world' (Prov. X.25) and by the Just One was it
brought into existence.

Said Rabbi Jehuda: Are we not taught that it is based upon seven
columns, as it is written, 'Wisdom hath built her house, she hath hewn
out her seven pillars' (Prov. IX. 1)."

Said Rabbi Jose: "That is very true, for the Just One upholds the seven
pillars that sustain the world. He it is that waters it and nourishes it
and to him the scripture refers, 'Say unto the Righteous One, it is
good,<span class="margnote">82a-82b</span> for they shall eat of the
fruits of their doings' (Is. III. 10), and also 'The Lord is good to all
and his tender mercies are over all his works'." (Ps. CXLV.)<span
class="margnote">Ps. 145:9</span>

Said Rabbi Isaac: "The words, 'And a river went forth out of Eden to
water the garden' refer to the pillar on which the world stands. It is
the river that watereth the garden of Eden and causeth fruits to abound
that nourish and sustain the world, that also establish the secret
doctrine and bring forth the souls of the just who are the fruits of the
works of the Holy One, and because they are such, they arise each night
and ascend on high, and at midnight the Holy One rules the garden of
Eden to delight himself in their midst. It may be asked, whose souls are
they?"

Said Rabbi Jose: "With all the souls of the just, whether yet living in
the world below or those residing in the heavenly mansions in the world
on high, He rejoices with all of them. Observe, the world above must
first receive an impulse from the world below and when the soul of a
just man ascends into the celestial regions it becomes garbed with a
halo of light transcendently bright, which observing, the Holy One is
pleased, for such a soul is the fruit of the divine operation within.
For this reason such souls are called 'Israelites,' holy children, sons
of God, as it is written, 'Ye are children of the Lord your God'
(Deuter. XIV. 1)."

Said Rabbi Jose: <span class="margnote">Soncino: R. Yesa</span> "How
does the Holy One delight in souls living yet in the world?"

Said Rabbi Jose in reply: "At midnight, all truth-loving and seeking
souls arise and engage in the study of the secret doctrine, and hymns of
worship. It has already been stated, that the Holy One and all the souls
of just men made perfect residing in the garden of Eden on high, delight
to listen to their voices of praise and observe the blessings that

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

accrue to such on the day that follows after their nocturnal studies, as
it is written, 'The Lord will command his loving kindness in the daytime
and in the night I will sing' (Ps. XLII. 9). All worship at this time is
therefore true and perfect worship. Observe when the Holy One caused the
first born in Egypt to be smitten, the children of Israel were safely
enclosed within their houses chanting and singing praises unto him
throughout the night. King David used to rise at midnight, for it cannot
be imagined or supposed that he sang praises and composed psalms in bed.
He therefore said,<span class="margnote">82b</span> 'At midnight I will
arise to give thanks unto thee' (Ps. CXIX. 62). For this reason his
kingdom will abide and he will reign even when King Musiah<span
class="margnote">Musiah = Messiah</span> comes, who, his tradition
states, will be called by his name whether David be yet alive or dead at
the time of his coming, in expectation of which he always rose at
midnight and sang, 'Awake up my glory, awake psaltery and harp, I myself
will awake early' (Ps. LXII. 8)<span class="margnote">Ps. 57:8</span>.
Observe that during the night Sarah was in Pharaoh's house, the angels
on high sang praises and worshipped the Holy One who commanded (them to
go and afflict the great ones in Egypt, and him I intend visiting in the
future, as it is written, 'And the Lord plagued Pharaoh with great
plagues.' After this it is stated, And Pharaoh called Abraham.' How did
he come to know that he was the husband of Sarah? It was through a
dream, as was the case with Abimelech, to whom the Lord spake and said,
'Now, therefore, restore the man his wife, for he is a prophet'." (Gen.
XX. 7.)

Said Rabbi Isaac: 'We read, 'The Lord plagued with great plagues Pharaoh
and his household, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.' Pharaoh, when the
plagues first struck him, heard a voice saying, 'Because of Sarah,
Abraham's wife.' Though God spoke the same words to Pharaoh as to
Abimelech, yet he learned from what was uttered, who Sarah was, and
therefore, as scripture states, 'And Pharaoh called Abraham, and
commanded his people concerning him, 'in order that no injury should be
done unto him.' And they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he
had; that is, they led him to the boundary or frontier of Egypt. The
Holy One said unto Pharaoh, 'Thou wilt in likewise deal with Abraham's
descendants'."

Said Rabbi Abba, "Why was Abraham subjected to such

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

a disagreeable and unpleasant incident, and why did the Holy One suffer
it to befall him? It was in order that the names of Abraham and Sarah
might become magnified and known throughout the world, and especially
amongst the Egyptians, who at that time were regarded as magicians par
excellence, yet were they inferior to Abraham, as it is stated, 'And
Abraham went up (va-iaal) out of Egypt' or ascended higher in Egypt. In
what direction? In or towards the south, or in other words, the higher
and diviner mysteries."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "In the words, 'Abraham went down into Egypt,' and
'Abraham went up in Egypt,' is contained an occult reference to the
mysteries of the Hidden Wisdom, for though Abraham descended into Egypt
to be initiated into the occult science of that country, yet he suffered
himself not to be seduced and deluded thereby, but remained faithful and
steadfast in the faith and worship of his divine lord and master. In
this he was unlike Adam, who, notwithstanding the divine command,
allowed himself to be deceived by the serpent, and thus caused death to
enter into the world. Neither followed he the example of Noah,<span
class="margnote">83a</span> who succumbed to evil as it is written, 'And
he drank of the wine and was drunken and he was uncovered in his
tent'<span class="margnote">Gen. 9:21</span> (oholoh) this word with a
final meaning, Noah appeared naked in the tent of the Schekina. With
Abraham it was otherwise, as it is written, 'And he ascended in Egypt.'
That is, after learning the occultism or secret meaning of evil, he
turned from it and abused not occult science for sensuous gratification
and purposes, owing to the Hidden Wisdom he had previously acquired. It
is stated that Abraham in ascending from Egypt went into the south
(hanegebah), alluding to the high degree in the knowledge of the
mysteries he had attained before his descent into Egypt. If Abraham had
not gone down thither and been put to the test, he could not have
manifested his faithfulness to the Holy One. Also, his descendants,
unless they had been tried and disciplined in Egypt, would never have
come forth distinguished as the only nation that the Holy One chose for
his own portion. Also, if the Holy Land had not been inhabited by the
Canaanites previous to the entry of the children of Israel into it, it
would not have been the land under the rule and governance of the Holy
One. In all these instances the same occult principle and purpose
prevailed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXVII. Kabbalistic Philosophy of the Soul](zdm096.md)
