[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm002)  [Next](zdm004.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE OCCULT ORIGIN OF ALHIM.

Rabbi Eliezar spoke, and said: "Lift up your eyes on high and behold who
hath created these."<span class="margnote">Isa. 40:26</span> Lift up
your eyes on high. Where? To the place whither all eyes are turned.
There is the *pathakh azeen*, or opening of eyes. There you will
recognize the mysterious Ancient One who created these and is the object
of research. And who is he? It is Mi (who) that is called the summit of
the heavens above, for all things exist by his will. Because he is the
object concealed and invisible after which all seek. Therefore is this
mysterious being called Who (Mi), and beyond him search in vain. Rut at
the other extremity is another being known as What! (Mah). What
distinguishes the one from the other? Mi (who), the concealed and hidden
One, is

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

he whom all created beings are seeking to know, but after all their
efforts and endeavors, by the gaining of knowledge, they only come at
last to Mah (the what). Then, what do we know, What understanding of him
have we? What have we found out or discovered, Truly, all is mysterious,
as at first., and this is what the Scripture refers to where it is
written: "*Mah (what) I take thee to witness*." "*Mah (what) shall I
liken thee to?*" When the temple at Jerusalem was ravaged and destroyed
there was heard a voice crying aloud: "*What shall I testify concerning
thee?*<span class="margnote">Lam. 2:13</span> For from the beginning of
creation have I testified to thee." Also, is it written: "*I call heaven
and earth this day to record*."<span class="margnote">Deut. 30:19</span>
"*Mah (what) shall be likened unto thee*." "*I will crown thee with
crowns of holiness and make thee to rule over the world*." So that it
shall be said: "*Is this the city called Beautiful, etc?*"<span
class="margnote">Lam 2:15</span> "*This is Jerusalem, the city most
compacted in beauty*." "*Mah (what) shall equal thee?*" That is, it
shall ascend on high, where thou art sitting, and even as thou observest
below, the holy people do not now enter the holy city; so I say unto
thee I will not ascend there until the people have entered into thy
walls below. Let this console and comfort thee. I will not ascend until,
under the form of Mah, I become like thee in all things. If the overflow
of thy afflictions be like that of the sea, and if thou say there is no
healing or remedy for thee, thou thinkest wrongly. Mi (who) shall heal
thee? This is the highest scale of the mystery--the mystery of the
being, upon whom dependeth all things. He shall heal and strengthen
thee. Mi of the heavens above is the highest pole, Mah of the heavens
below is the lower pole, and the heritage of Jacob stands between these
extremities of the heavens<span class="margnote">Ex. 27:28</span>--Mi
(who) and Mah (what). This is the meaning of the words "*Who (Mi)
created these?*"

Then Rabbi Simeon, interrupting, spake, and said: "Eliezar, my son!
cease thy interpretations of the words, for a profound mystery is about
to be revealed, which the children of the world know nothing of, even
onto this day." Rabbi Eliezar obeyed, and ceased speaking.

Rabbi Simeon for a moment was silent, and then said: "Eliezar, my son,
what is the meaning of Aleh (these)? If thou sayest it includes the
stars, constellations and other heavenly bodies which are visible and
seen always to the eye of man and have been created by Mah, as it is
written, "*By the word of God* 

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span class="margnote">1b-2b</span>

*the heavens were made*." <span class="margnote">Ps. 33:6</span> Aleh
(these) cannot refer to things invisible, but to those that are seen.
The mysterious meaning of the word was revealed to me one day that I was
standing by the seashore, when Elijah, the prophet, suddenly appeared
and said unto me: Rabbi! knowest thou what Aleh (these things) means?
And I answered and said it means the heavens and their hosts, the work
of the Holy One, blessed be He, which it behooves every man to study as
it is written: "*When I consider the heavens the work of that fingers,
etc*."<span class="margnote">Ps. 8:3</span> "*Oh, Lord, our God how
excellent is thy name in all the earth!*"<span class="margnote">Ps.
8:9</span> Rabbi! said Elijah, this word is an occult word, and was
revealed and explained in the heavenly college thus. When the Most
Secret One wished to reveal himself, He first created a point, and it
became a divine Thought, in which were the ideas of all created things
and forms of all things, and also that holy, glorious Light wherein was
the Holy of Holies--a structure of magnificent and lofty dimensions, the
work of that divine Thought and the beginning, or cornerstone, to this
structure, hidden and concealed in the name as yet ineffable find known
only as Mi (who), who wished to manifest itself and to be called by a
name and become arrayed and clothed with a precious and resplendent
garment. He therefore created Aleh (these things), which then became a
part of the divine name; for these words, joined and associated
together, form Alhim, which is composed of Aleh (these things), and Mi
reversed and which existed not previous to this conjunction.

To this mystery the worshippers of the golden calf alluded when they
cried: "Aleh is thy God, Oh, Israel! As on the work of creation, Mi
remains conjoined with Aleh (these), so in the name Alhim they are
always inseparable. And by reason of this unity the world abides as it
is having thus spoken, Elijah disappeared, and I saw him no more. It is
from him I learned the meaning of this mystery of Mi, Aleh and Alhim."

Rabbi Eliezar and the rest of the students went, and prostrating
themselves before their master, said: "If we had come into the world
only to hear and understand the meaning of these words, we should be
satisfied." Rabbi Simeon then commenced speaking again, and said: "Thus
the heaven and all its hosts have been created by means of Mah, for it
is written: "*When I behold the heavens. the work of that fingers, etc.
Oh, Lord, our God, Mah* (what) *that name is excellent in all the
earth*."<span class="margnote">Ps. 8:3</span> Thou who hast set thy
glory above the heavens, signifying and referring

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

to the ascension of Aleh in Mi, after creating one for the other and
forming one name. Thus mean the words berashith, bara. Alhim, God, in
the beginning created Alhim. This junction of the two words being
effected, the mother lent the daughter her garments of splendor <span
class="margnote">2a</span> and arrayed her in her jewels; and when was
this? When all the males appeared before Alhim (God) as it is written:
"*All the males, three times a year shall they present themselves before
the Lord, Alhim*."<span class="margnote">Ex. 34:23</span> Alhim is here
called Adon, or Lord, as it is written: "*Behold the ark of the
covenant, Adon of all the earth*."<span class="margnote">Jos.
3:11</span> So the H from Mah, representing the female principle, went
forth and was replaced by I (representing the male principle) from Mi,
and thus Alhim is formed. This is the signification of the words "*When
I remember Aleh, I pour out my soul within me*."<span
class="margnote">Ps. 43:4</span> "*I have remembered this and have shed
tears*."

That the letters, emanating one from the other, might produce Aleh and
then form Alhim, according as it is written: "*I will bring them down
from on high into the house of Alhim below*," in order to form an Alhim
like Alhim above. How? By songs and thanksgiving. Rabbi Simeon ceased
speaking, and his son, Rabbi Eliezar, exclaimed: "My silence has
resulted in the building of a temple above and a temple below, and the
old proverb has been realized--'if speech is worth a shekel, silence is
worth two.' If my speech was worth a shekel, my silence was worth two;
for I have learned that two worlds have been created--the heavenly and
the earthly--at the same tame."

Rabbi Simeon spake again: We will explain the words following those
which have been quoted and explained: "That bringeth out their host by
number." There are two personalities inferred, viz.: Mi and Mah---the
one above, the other below. That above says "*Bringeth out the host by
number*."<span class="margnote">Is. 40:26</span> It must be confessed
there is none like unto hire, yet is he who bringeth forth bread from
the earth, though below, one and the same. By number, amounting to six
hundred thousand, "who stand together as one man." "*He calls them by
name*." If you say by their own special name, He calls them. It is not
so, because Aleh had not as yet entered into the divine name, and He was
only known as Mi, and was then creating things in their own nature, and
at the same time hidden and concealed in him. But as soon as Alhim was
formed, as stated before, from Aleh, Mi, then, by virtue of this name,
he created the universe. This is the

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span class="margnote">2a-2b</span>

meaning of the words: "*He called by the name*,"<span
class="margnote">Ex. 31:2  
Is 40:26</span> his name. "*By the greatness of his might*"; that is, by
the divine will, which in a hidden and mysterious manner and according
to its good pleasure worketh and doeth all things both in the world
above and the world below. "*Not one faileth*," meaning that of the host
of six hundred thousand created and produced by the power of the name
Alhim, not one is wanting or missing. Like the children of Israel, who,
although punished and afflicted by plagues, yet always continued
undiminished in number as they went out of Egypt, not one was missing of
their six hundred thousand strong; and so shall it be with the host,
both above and below, not one shall be wanting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mysticism of the Alphabet](zdm004.md)
