[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm011)  [Next](zdm013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

AND God said "Let there be light" (Gen. i.14); the word<span
class="margnote">19b</span> meoroth (lights) is defective in the Hebrew,
being written without vau and therefore is it that offspring suffer from
epilepsy and similar complaints. When the primal light was as yet
invisible or unmanifest, a qalepha <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)
(sheath or covering) formed itself around it, which, becoming enlarged,
produced a second that extended itself to "*little form*" <span
id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3) with which it wished to be united and bear
its form permanently. The Holy One dismissed and sent it below. When he
created Adam in order that the "little form" might appear in the world,
the qalepha, seeing Eve was conjoined with Adam, flew towards the
paradise above desiring, as at first, to be joined with and form part of
"little form," but the angel watchers on high would not allow her to
enter and the holy One, having rebuked her, cast her into the depths of
the vast abyss of space. When Adam sinned, however, she was permitted to
ascend thereout and allowed to have power and influence over the
offspring of "little form," who are punishable for the actions of their
progenitors. Thus she goes throughout the world. When she dune to the
gate of the earthly paradise and saw it guarded by cherubim, she seated
herself next to the one that wielded the flaming sword, but, on
observing its threatening attitude towards her, fled back to the world
and finding these little ones as just described, killed them when the
moon was on the wane. This is wherefore the word meoroth (lights) is, as
has

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

been stated, defective. Until the birth of Cain took place, she was
unable to get near Adam, but eventually succeeding in doing so, she
brought forth evil offspring and flying or winged demons.

This association with Adam continued a hundred and thirty years until
the coming of Naamah, by whose great beauty Aza and Azael, sons of God,
were seduced and fell from their high state of light and purity. From
them came forth a brood of evil spirits into the world. Naamah it is who
wandereth through the world at night time, causing men to lose their
virility, and wherever they are found sleeping alone in a house she
acquires power over them, especially in times of physical weakness and
ill health, whilst the moon is waning. When, however, the moon is
increasing, the letters of the word meoroth are changed into the term
imrath (the word), as it is written: "Imrath Jehovah, the word of the
Lord, is refined" (Ps. xviii. 30) as gold tried in the fire. "He is a
shield and buckler to all them that put their trust on him," a buckler
and shield against evil and malignant spirits who roam and fly about in
the world during the decadence of the moon, to such as those whose trust
is in the Holy One.

When King Solomon went down into the garden of nuts, as saith the
scripture: "I went down into the garden of nuts" (Cant. vi. 11) he took
up a nutshell, that gave rise to reflections and ideas that enabled him
to understand the reason and cause why anything that is pure and holy
becomes environed by what is evil, as the nut enclosed within a shell.
He perceived that evil spirits attach themselves to the pure and good,
environing them similar to shells by exciting and producing certain
kinds of pleasing emotions and feelings, the tending of which is to
defile and corrupt, as it is written: "The pleasures of man produce and
bring forth evil spirits" (sadah and sadoth) (Eccle. ii. 8) which occurs
during the hours of sleep. It was necessary that the Holy One should
create them in the world in order that it might be complete.

The universe as a whole is a system of worlds, enveloping the other from
the lowest to the highest, from the most material to the highly
spiritual, from the darkest and most dense to the most luminous and
ethereal, all is a scale of graduated worlds of being and existence, and
therefore the saying: "as above so below, and as below so above." Each
world is a garment or envelope to the next in sequence. From the primal
point of light issue forth luminous rays which extend through and
pervade all the separate encircling worlds of existence, converting them
into

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

palaces of the great king, the splendor, beauty and magnificence of
which are beyond description, and, as with these worlds rising in their
order one above the other, so is it with regard to the human form, which
in its grace and beauty of contour is the highest expression and
approximate image of the divine, more than all other physical forms
below it in the scale of being. All this is in accordance with the
divine plan of creation, man himself being a microcosm or miniature of
the universe, and composed of a series of coverings or envelopes, one
within the other, as spirit, astral form and physical body. As long as
the substance of the moon was conjoined with that of the sun, it shone
with its own light, but becoming separated and disjoined from it and
independent, it reflected a diminished luminosity and became itself
enveloped with zones of decreasing light, so that we may now understand
why the scripture saith: "Let there be lights," using the defective word
meoroth, by which is designated occultly the zones or planes of
existence of varying degrees of light which encircle each star and
planet in the universe, as also this, our earth, through whose
circumambient envelopes of more ethereal substance the primal
life-giving light is reflected, and thus differentiated and adapted to
become a blessing to man and every animate and inanimate creature.

"And God made two great lights" (Gen. i. 16). The Hebrew word vayas,
"and he made," refers to the creation as a whole, everything in its kind
being subject to its law and order. These two great lights were at first
joined together and formed one whole and were of equal light, being both
of them impressed<span class="margnote">20a</span> with the two same
sacred names, Jehovah and Alhim, though this latter name was as yet
manifested only in an occult manner; yet scripture calls them both by
the word great, in the plural, with the article of distinction,
hagedolim (the great), because of their absolute identity, each bearing
the same mysterious name Matspats, understood only by students of the
secret doctrine, and which form the two highest of the thirteen degrees
of divine mercy and goodness upon which the world is founded. The moon,
unable to rule along with the sun, and feeling its loss of dignity in
becoming disjoined from the sun, said: "Where feedest thou" (Cant. 1,
7), or "whence derivest thou thy light and glory?" The sun answered and
said: "Where thou restest thyself at midday." The light of the moon was
therefore diminished in order that the light of the sun might be greater
and more manifest at noon, and accordingly the scripture further adds,
"that

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I may not be as
one that turneth aside from following in the path of the flocks."
Constrained to be similar to the sun, the moon humbled herself,
diminished her light at midday, as it is written. "Go thy way in the
footsteps of the flocks" (Cant. 1, 8). The Holy One said to the moon:
"Go and humble thyself," after which she lost her own light and now
reflects only that of the sun though at first she was the same in rank
and dignity with it, thus intimating occultly that the female can never
fulfil her destiny and discharge her function except in joint union with
her husband. The greater light designates Jehovah; the lesser light,
Alhim; the one being a reflection and manifestation of the other as a
word is of thought.

At first Alhim was expressed by the four letters of the sacred name, or
tetragrammaton, but afterwards through manifesting on lower planes of
existence, was known and distinguished by this name; yet nevertheless it
radiates its power and glory in all directions in boundless space, as
the mediator between the known and the Great Unknown, between the
spiritual and material, the celestial and terrestrial scales and grades
of life and existence as indicated esoterically by the letter H, which
in Alhim conjoins Al with im, Al denoting God and im (or yam) the sea as
symbol of matter. Thus Alhim becomes the word or Logos mediating between
the world of pure emanations and the worlds of creation. The former
being higher or prior in existence, is termed the light that rules by
day, the latter, the light that rules by night.

The scripture further states: "He made the stars also," referring to the
countless and innumerable hosts of angelic and ministering spirits
existing in and by him who is the light and life of the universe, as it
is written: "And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give
light upon the earth" (Gen. i., 17); that is, upon this lower world
which is a replica or reflection of the world above it, and on the
fourth day became illuminated with divine light and termed the Kingdom
of David, the Asiatic world of effects, the fourth pillar of the divine
throne of glory. This being completed, the four letters of the sacred
name became adjusted one to another in their place and position in
creation. Notwithstanding this, the throne was not completed till the
sixth day, when the form of man was created and all the worlds
throughout the realms of space were fixed in their relative orders and
position and classed under the four letters of the divine name, viz.,
the Atzilatic, Briatic, Ietziratic and Asiatic worlds. The fourth day is
called in scripture the day rejected by the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

builders, as it is written: "The stone which the builders rejected" (Ps.
cxviii., 22), and also "My mother's children were angry with me" (Cant.
i., 6), the esoteric meaning of which is: the light of the moon became
diminished on that day and the enveloping worlds were established in
their relative positions around the glittering and resplendent orbs of
light in the firmament, in order to support the throne of David.

All these worlds send forth reflections of their light upon the earth
which they receive from other worlds higher and more glorious than
themselves, which in their totality form the Grand Archetypal Man, whose
image, all who bear it, are called Man. This is the signification of the
words: "Ye are men" (Ez. xxxiv., 21); that is, ye are called by the name
of Adam (man). This, however, does not apply to the idolatrous nations.
Every living spirit is therefore called Adam, for it is a divine
emanation of which the body is a raiment or covering, as it is further
written: "Thou hast clothed me with skin of flesh" (Job. x., 11),
showing that the flesh of man is only a garment, and does not constitute
the man. The souls that became incarnated on the earth plane in animals
are in form similar to the garment that covers them, some of them being
pure animals as mentioned in scripture, the ox, the sheep, stag, wild
goat, giraffe and others.

Those souls who have been created and appear as men take upon them the
human form and are called human souls, whilst the tens, "flesh of beast"
signifies that the soul that has incarnated in this form has the name,
the qualities and nature of a beast. For instance, the ox is a soul
residing in an ox form, the flesh being its garment. This same applies
to the rest of animals, and as idolatrous nations are not in scripture
called men, so those impure souls have nothing in common with the truly
human.

The bodies of idolatrous people are called impure flesh, as it is
defiled by the soul of which it is the covering. The body is impure so
long as the impure stall resides within it. As soon, however, as the
soul quits it, it becomes pure again, being only a shell or covering.
The souls of idolaters who incarnate on the earth plane take upon them
the forms of unclean animals, such as the camel, swine, coney, and
others. It is for this reason that animals have been distinguished into
two classes, the pure and impure. Each have their peculiar tendencies
and natural inclinations, and gravitate to the source whence they first
originated.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

The heavenly lights suspended in the firmament are types<span
class="margnote">20b-21a</span> and figures of things in the world, as
it is written: "And God placed them in the firmament" (Gen. i, 17), the
greater light to rule by day, the lesser light to rule by night. By the
greater light scripture denotes the males who rule by day in that they
provide for and look after the household and its necessary requirements
and needs. On the arrival of night the sway of the female begins, as the
proper manageress of the household, for, as saith the scripture: "She
riseth also while it is yet night and giveth meat to her household and a
portion to her maidens" (Prov. xxxi. 15). *She* and not *he*. Thus the
light ruling by day signifies the male, or husband; the light ruling by
night, the female, or wife. We further read: "He made the stars also."
When the wife relinquishes domestic cares and duties in order to attend
to her husband, she leaveth the direction of them to her maidens who
abide at home to carry on the management, which again reverts to the
husband when day begins.

"And God made two lights"; that of the sun is termed "flames of light"
and go upward; that of the moon is termed "flames of fire" and descend
upon the earth, and exercise their power and influence during week days.
This is why at the close of the Sabbath, the blessing of the fire is
pronounced. "Blessed art thou, Oh Lord, who has created the flames of
fire," for then its rule and influence begins again. The fingers of the
hand are occult symbols of a deep spiritual mystery the back of them
being furnished with nails. It is therefore lawful to regard and fix
attention on them at the close of the Sabbath, for the light of the fire
whose rule begins at that moment is represented by the exterior part of
the fingers, whilst the flame of light that comes from above must only
be meditated upon by regarding the interior part of the fingers to which
it corresponds. This mystery is expressed in Scripture thus: "Thou shalt
see my back part, but my face shalt thou not see" (Ex. xxxiii. 23).
Therefore a man should not regard and meditate upon the interior part of
the hand at the close of the Sabbath when he repeats the prayer ending
with the words: "Who hast created the flame of fire." The words "Thou
shalt see my back part" refer to the back of the fingers symbolizing the
light that rules and prevails during week days. "My face shalt thou not
see," to the front part, the "flames of light," which rule during the
Sabbath. on which day the Holy One himself presides over the invisible
hosts of spirits surrounding his throne of glory, who are under his
special

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

charge. Therefore, on the Sabbath, rest from toil and labor is granted
to all the worlds. The holy nation is the only one upon the earth that
inherits and enjoys this heritage of the "flames of light" proceeding
from the primal light and manifested only on the Sabbath day, and from
which also emanate all the lesser lights that prevail below. At the
departure of the Sabbath these "flames of light" become invisible, but
the flames of fire, each of them in their appointed place and manner,
rule and prevail during the week days. For this reason the nails of the
fingers should be only regarded and meditated on by the glare of a fire.

It is written: "And the living creatures (hayoth) ran and returned as
flashing flames of light" (Ez. i. 14). No human eye is able to view
these angels going to and fro. They are the angels of "The Wheel,"<span
class="margnote">21a</span> the occult meaning of which is this:
Metatron is the chief and highest among the angels. Above him at a
distance of five hundred leagues are those hayoth, or living moving
creatures, whose flight through the realms of space is so rapid as to be
indistinguishable to mortal eye; they are concealed beneath the two
supreme letters of the divine name, Y and H, which rule and dominate the
two remaining letters, V and H, that form their chariot. The great
mysterious, the Unknowable, ruleth over all these hayoth, of whom those
that are invisible rule over those that are visible and reflect their
light end glory down upon them. All these living creatures are placed n
the firmament of heaven, and respecting them it is written: "Let there
be lights in the firmament of heaven" (Gen. i. 14), that is, let the
living creatures called hayoth be in the region called the firmament of
heaven. Above and beyond them, however, is another heaven as it is
written: "And the likeness of the firmament above the heads of the
living creatures was as the color of the terrible crystal" (Ez. i. 22).

It was the higher firmament of heaven whose glory and magnificent
splendor (like that of the starry mist of the Milky Way, which includes
within its dim and remote recesses innumerable and countless worlds of
ineffable brilliancy and beauty) dawned upon the prophet's vision, and
there it exists a universe of light and love hidden and concealed from
mortal gaze like the thought of the Divine Mind, ineffable, transcending
all human comprehension and powers of conception. As man has never been
able to divine and understand the nature of thought, much less can he
gauge the thoughts of Ain Soph (who is as a mighty ocean in which all
thought is drowned) the Infinite

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

and Boundless One, the concealed of all concealments, without beginning
and without end, the great invisible center and fount of all life and
motion existent in worlds known and unknown, careering in their mighty
orbits in the fathomless abysses of space, the Great Being the smallest
portion of whose glory and might and majesty is reflected and seen in
sun and moon and the splendid galaxies of stars and constellations, all
glittering and flashing in a midnight sky, and in the mystic music of
the spheres are forever singing as they shine: "The hand that made us is
divine."

In the present world of shadows and uncertainties, man must have
wandered and lived ignorant, uninstructed and unenlightened, unable to
acquire the faintest glimmer or notion of the mind and nature of the
Divine Being but for the intermediation of the Logos<span
class="margnote">21a</span> or Word that, operating through the
sephiroth kether (crown) produced the letters of the alphabet which, in
their forms, simple and multiplex, are symbols of spiritual ideas by
means of which we obtain conceptions, though inadequate, defective and
incomplete, of Him in whom we live and move and have our being.

The letter aleph symbolizes the beginning and the end. Throughout the
universe, all classes of beings are impressed with its signature, both
those in heaven and those on earth. Though it includes many forms, yet
they are but one full letter. By the higher part of it is symbolized the
divine mind and thought, as also the upper firmament of the spiritual
world. Beneath it and in the middle of aleph is the letter vau, the
numerical value of which is six, denoting the six degrees between the
Supreme Mind and the firmament above the hayoth, or "the hidden living
creatures." The light emanating from the Divine is expressed in the word
"brashith," of which the first part, bra, contains the initial letters
of the name Abraham, to which scripture refers: "And the Lord appeared
to Abraham as he sat at the door of his tent in the heat of the day"
(Gen. xviii. 1), the esoteric meaning of which is as follows: When
Abraham sat at the door of his tent; that is, at the gate separating the
higher and lower world, symbolized by the letter aleph, he felt the
great heat of the day; that is, he became mentally and spiritually
enlightened by the divine light of the First Logos.

The light of the Second Logos was beheld by Isaac when, in the cool of
the evening and the sun was going down, he prayed for the coming of this
light, as it is written: "And Isaac went

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

out to meditate in the field at eventide" (Gen. xxiv. 63). It was<span
class="margnote">21b</span> then he foresaw the contention that would
arise between Jacob and Esau.

The light of the Third Logos, that proceeds from the other two, was that
seen by Jacob, as it is written: "And as he passed, peniel the sun rose
upon him and he halted upon his thigh" (Gen. xxxiii. 31). At eventide he
beheld the light called and known as the Netzach of Israel (victory of
Israel), and he halted on his thigh, because this light of sephirothic
origin constitutes the thigh in the sephirothic figure. His thigh, not
thighs, for as just said, he beheld the light of netzach, which is only'
of the fourth degree.

For this reason, after Jacob no one was endowed with the gift of
prophecy until the coming of Samuel, as scripture states: "The netzach,
the strength or victory of Israel" (1 Sam. xv. 29). "And he touched the
sinew of his thigh." When the angel of Esau who struggled with Jacob saw
he could not prevail against him because he derived his power and
strength from the two first sephirothic degrees or emanations; that is,
from the supreme light and that called Adam Kadmon, the archetypal man,
he touched the sinew of his thigh in which was contained the force
symbolized by netzach (denoting firmness, inflexibility), and from that
time as we have observed, prophecy was not found in Israel until the
coming of Samuel, when it is said: "The netzach or strength of Israel is
not a man"; that is to say, comes not from that sephirothic degree
called man, but from that named netzach. Joshua indeed prophesied but
only in an inferior manner because of his intimate and close association
with Moses, as it is written: "And thou shalt put some of thine honor
upon him" (Num. xxvii. 20). This was the case with David, as he says:
"At thy right hand are the pleasures of Netzach" (Ps. xvi. 11). Not in
but at thy right hand, that is netzach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[103:1](zdm012.htm#fr_2) A term applied to the
world of elementals void and destitute of mind who desired to become
united and associated with humanity.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[103:2](zdm012.htm#fr_3) Little Form, denoting
the world of forms and beings before incarnating as human beings on the
earth plane. The psalmist, speaking of man, says "thou hast made him
'littler' than the angels, that is, in form and mind."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](zdm013)
