[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm068)  [Next](zdm070.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

### "RABBI SIMEON ON MYSTERIES AND THE HIGHER LIFE."

"AND the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark were<span
class="margnote">72b</span> Shem, Ham and Japhet" (Gen. IX. 18). Said
Rabbi Eleazer: Why are these names only mentioned? Had Noah other sons
who did not go with him on his exit from the ark?

In reply Rabbi Abba said: "Noah had other children than the three
mentioned in scripture, who likewise had children of their own, and the
reason this is not explicitly stated is, that grandchildren are in
scripture classed and referred to as sons."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "Had I been incarnated and lived on earth at the time
when the Holy One entrusted the Book of Mysteries containing the secret
doctrine to Enoch and Adam, I would have strongly urged that the
contents of it should never be divulged save to those who by their
upright and unselfish lives had rendered themselves worthy to receive
and understand them; for such only are able to appreciate their value
and importance that distinguish it from all other books. The truly wise
in this world are they who attain to a comprehension and understanding
of its esoteric teachings that under the veil of symbols, emblems,
allegories and enigmas, are concealed from esoteric students whose
thoughts and labors are concentrated and directed merely towards what is
phenomenal and ephemeral. Known only to sages and initiates are the
grand mysteries of the hidden wisdom, the knowledge of which they never
impart to the 'profanum vulgum' and use only in ministering to the
welfare of humanity. Of these great mysteries, one of the most abstruse
and profound is contained in the above cited verse of scripture. When
the divine life or in other words, the consciousness of the Divine, the
cause of all cause, the life of all life, the pleroma of all joy and
happiness rises and dawns within the human soul or man's lower nature,
like the great orb of day

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

sending forth its effulgent rays of light and warmth, it diffuses within
it and makes itself recognized by a feeling, a sensation of enjoyment
and delight greater than that which rich and generous wine causes the
heart of man to pulsate with an ecstasy of delight not to be expressed.
This effluence of the divine life is intermediate between the joy and
pleasure that reaches and flows into human nature from the celestial and
terrestrial planes of existence. There are within us two souls or
natures, the higher and the lower, blended and united together by the
mysterious<span class="margnote">72b-73a</span> Augoides, that
corresponds to the upper triad of Sephiroth in the decenary of the human
constitution. These three souls, or rather natures, manifest themselves
in their differing modes and direction, the Higher Self attaching itself
and approximating towards its superior principle produces three
offspring, symbolized by Noah's sons, Shem, Ham and Japhet, who came
forth from the ark; Shem corresponding to the principle on the right of
the Sephirotic tree, Ham to that on the left, whilst Japhet is the
medium of connection that like the color of purple is a combination and
a reflection of the other two. Ham was the father of Canaan.<span
class="margnote">Gen. 9:18</span> He symbolizes the lower or animal
nature of man susceptive of all material and gross influences that trend
to the excitation of animal instincts, desires and passions. He was also
the father of him who caused the world along with himself to be cursed
and the human face to become blanched and pale through sorrow and
suffering; therefore it is not stated of Shem or Japhet that they were
the father of this or that one. This is also wherefore it is written,
'And Abram passed through the land,' (Gen. XII. 9)<span
class="margnote">12:6</span> neither abode in it because the patriarchs
through their merits and works had not purified it, neither had Israel
made known the sacred name so that it was still suffering under the
primal curse pronounced upon the earth and the serpent, 'Cursed he the
ground because of thee, cursed art thou above all the beasts of the
field.'<span class="margnote">Gen. 3:14, 3:17</span> And of the land of
Canaan it is written, cursed is Canaan, a servant of servants, shall he
be unto his brothers. Furthermore we read, 'These are the three sons of
Noah, Shem, Ham and Japhet, and of them was the whole earth overspread'
(Gen. IX. 19). These words also include within them a great mystery of
the heavenly or superior colors, teaching us that though refracted
throughout the universe, the divine glory remains ever the same both in
heaven above and on earth below."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI. Symbolism of the Colors of the Bow in the
Cloud](zdm070.md)
