[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm064)  [Next](zdm066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "THE DIVINE LEHAEROT ON EZECHIEL'S VISIONS."

SAID Rabbi Hezekiah: "The title of one of the Psalms is thus, 'A psalm
of David Maschil' (for understanding), 'Blessed is he whose
transgression is lifted up and whose sin is covered' (Ps. XXXII. 1).
This verse has already been commented on. There is however an occult
meaning in the word maschil (understanding), and, having reference to
divine wisdom, it requires explanation. We learn from tradition that
King David in composing his hymns and songs of praise to the Holy One,
made use of ten different meters (one of which is termed ("*maschil*")
corresponding to the various progressive states in the divine life
symbolized by the ten sephiroth of the tree of life. In order to attain
to these, David prepared and disciplined himself, that he might become
receptive of their respective states of inspiration and spiritual
enlightenment and thus be able to compose his psalms. The meaning of the
words, 'blessed is he whose transgression is raised on high' is this,
when the Holy One places in the scales of his balance a man's merits and
demerits it sometimes happens that the scale in which his sins are
placed rises, being overbalanced by the scale containing his good deeds.
Such is the meaning of these words. Happy they! whose transgression is
forgiven, that is,--when the scale in which it is placed, ascends. The
words 'whose sin is covered' refer to those whose sins the Holy One,
when his judgments are abroad in the world, covers and hides from the
view of the destroying angel, as was the case with Noah whom he saved
from experiencing the effects and consequences of the sin that was
prevalent in the world through

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

the fall of Adam. As long as sin and wrong-doing subsist on earth, man
suffers, because not in his normal and primal sate of innocency. He
trembles and flees from before wild and savage animals,<span
class="margnote">71a-71b</span> no longer subject to his will and
control. When Noah came forth out of the ark, the world had become
cleansed and purified and humanity entered on a new era of existence and
therefore it is written, 'And Alhim blessed him and his sons and said
unto them, be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth.'"

Said Rabbi Simeon: "Though in these words no mention or reference is
made to his wife and his sons; wives, yet are they included in, the term
'vaathem' (and ye), as also in the word 'ath' before the name of Noah
which includes both males and females, both being subjects and
recipients of divine benedictions. Then was it the Holy One gave unto
them the seven precepts to be observed as rules of life until Israel
should stand before Mount Sinai and receive the full law."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII. The Mystery of the Bow in the Cloud](zdm066.md)
