[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm060)  [Next](zdm062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ADAM SITTING AT THE GATE OF THE GARDEN OF EDEN.

On another occasion Rabbi Simeon spake and said: "It is written, 'I
said, I shall not see the Lord even the Lord in the land of the living;
I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants<span
class="margnote">65b  
Isa. 38:11</span> of the world' (Ps. xxxviii. 11). How great the number
of those who are ignorant and take no interest in the secret doctrine.
They expend their strength and energy in the acquisition of worldly
knowledge, oblivious altogether of that true wisdom which is both
spiritual and divine. When a man departs out of earth life, he has to
account for every act and deed committed in it and meets many with whom
he has been acquainted and held intercourse in the world. Eventually he
beholds Adam seated at the Garden of Eden rejoicing over those who have
faithfully observed and kept the divine commandments. Surrounding him
are the righteous who were wise and avoided walking in the way that
leads down to Gehenna and found the path of light. Such are termed by
scripture 'inhabitants of the world' hadel, not haded. The inhabitants
of this latter are mouselike in their habits of heaping up riches and
know not who shall enjoy them; but the just and upright are termed
dwellers

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

of hadel, which word signifies to shun and avoid, because they have
learned to shun the way to death and found entrance into the Garden of
Eden. Another interpretation is this: by 'the inhabitants of the world'
(hadel) is signified those who through repentance, ceased to do evil and
learned to do well, as did Adam who was afterwards appointed leader into
Eden of all repentant souls, and thus termed inhabitants of hadel, and
therefore is it written, 'that I may know what I lack (hadel)' (Ps.
xxxix. 5), Note the words, 'I shall not see Jah.' 'Who then is able to
see him?'<span class="margnote">65b-66a</span> the other part of the
verse explains, 'Jah in the land of the living.' When souls encircled
with an aura of light, the result of righteous living, ascend on high to
the sphere especially prepared for those who have attained unto the
higher life, they are then able to gaze into the Zohar, the luminous
mirror, or in other words the beatific vision whose splendor and
brightness are reflections from the highest heavenly sphere, since a
soul clothed in any other raiment than this light would be unable to
behold and endure its intense vibrations. For even as souls in their
progress and development on earth life and clothed and girded with an
aura, so in the world on high, they become encircled with one brighter
and still more luminous, by which they are able to contemplate the
transcendent light coming down out of the lightest of the heavenly
spheres known as 'the land of the living.' It was this aura of the
higher life encircling him that Moses was able to behold what he did, as
it is written, 'And Moses went into the midst of the cloud (as it seemed
to human vision) and ascended the mount' (Ex. xxiv. 15). That is, he
became clothed with an aura of divine light, in order to gaze into the
luminous mirror, or beatific vision, similar to that which time just or
perfected human beings' on their entrance into the higher heavenly
spheres are clothed, of which the aura surrounding them during earth
life is only a faint shadow and reflection. We now understand why the
word Jah in the verse just cited is found repeated. 'I shall not see Jah
in the land of the living,' were uttered by Hezekiah and mean that he
feared and had no hope of ever experiencing the joy and delight of
gazing upon the splendor of the light emanating from 'the land of the
living,' through his dying childless, and [therefore](errata.htm#43.md) he
said also, 'I shall not see Adam sitting at the gate of the Garden of
Eden on high.' But why should he be afraid of this? because Isaiah the
prophet had said unto him, 'Thou shalt die, thou shalt not live,'<span
class="margnote">Is. 38:1</span> that is, thou shalt not live in the
world to come as thou shalt die childless;

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

for whoever leaves and quits the world without offspring is not admitted
into the garden of the celestial Eden and is therefore altogether
precluded from contemplating the glory and splendor of its light. If
therefore Hezekiah with all the inherited merits of his forefathers,
besides being an upright and just person, feared lest by dying
childless, he should fail to attain unto the beatific vision, or enter
into 'the land of the living,' so ought he be alarmed who, lacking
ancestral merit and virtues,<span class="margnote">66a</span>
transgresses divine laws. The aura surrounding the just and perfected in
the world to come who have lived the higher and diviner life is known
and designated by initiates of the secret doctrine as 'The Master's
Robe.' Happy they who wear it, for it is on their account the Holy One
has reserved and put by unnumbered joys in the world to come, as it is
written, 'For from the beginning of the world, men have not heard nor
perceived by the ears, neither have seen, Oh God beside thee, what thou
hast prepared for him that putteth his trust in Thee.'" (Ps. lxiv.
4.)<span class="margnote">Is. 64:4</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII. Remarks on the Destroying Angel and the
Antediluvians](zdm062.md)
