[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm031)  [Next](zdm033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

SAID Rabbi Isaac: "It is written, 'And God said, let there<span
class="margnote">45b-46a</span> be light.' (Gen. 1-3). This was the
primeval light that illuminated the world on all sides and which the
Holy One withdrew and hid, that it might not be enjoyed save by the
righteous--"

Said Rabbi Simeon: "By the words, 'And God saw the light that it was
good' is signified that the divine light in itself is a source of joy
and delight; the word 'good' being the same used in connection with
Balaam, thus, 'When Balaam saw that it pleased,' in that it was both
(good) in the eyes of the Lord to bless Israel' (Num. 24-1); and
therefore at the end of the verse, 'And God divided the light from the
darkness' in order that the upright might live in the light and the
wicked in darkness. Note that it is from this primal celestial light
emanates the light which shineth and illumes the world and becomes a
source of joy to every living creature. It was with this higher light
that the Holy One with his right hand formed and engraved crowns as we
have formerly described. It is written, 'How great is Thy goodness which
Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee, which Thou hast wrought for
them that trust in Thee, before the sons of men.' (Ps. 31-19.) 'How
great is thy goodness' refers to the primal light the Holy One hid and
reserved for them that fear him, even the righteous in life. It is
written, 'and the evening and the morning were day, one.' The evening
arises out of darkness and the morning from light and from the
conjunction the day is formed."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "Wherefore is it written of each day, 'It was evening
and it was morning?' It was to show that there is no day without night,
and no night without day and therefore are not to be separated."

Said Rabbi Jose: "'The primal celestial light of the first day is that
which lightened the other days of creation,' and therefore the word YOUR
day is repeated."

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "For the same reason, the scripture uses the word
boqer (morning) in connection with all the days of creation, as it
designates the primal light."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "The first day of the creation is the synthesis of
all the other days, for as there is really no separate fractional moment
in time, they only formed part of the whole. It is written, 'God said
let there be light' meaning angelic beings who are emanations from the
light on high that shineth forth on the world below and were created on
the first day and took up their position on the right hand of the Holy
One. 'And God saw the light that it was good.' The word ath before good,
refers to the luminous and non-luminous mirror, the one 'being the light
by which the Beatific Vision is acquired by prophets, the other that
which enlightens the mind of man for the perception of truth."<span
class="margnote">46a</span>

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "The word ath indicates that in the light that God
called good, are comprehended and included all the angelic hosts that
emanated from it and also when perfect harmony prevails amongst all
orders of beings, will regain their pristine splendor."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "It is written, 'Let there be a firmament in the
midst of the waters,' by which is meant the interior man who is
receptive of the knowledge of spiritual truths (the waters above), and
of earthly things or scientifics (the waters below)."

Said Rabbi Isaac: "On the second day, Gehenna was formed whilst the work
of creation was yet incomplete; the term 'good' is not applied and used
until the third day, when it is repeated twice, as then all discord and
clashing of elements ceased and the lot of the wicked in Gehenna became
alleviated through the decreased intensity of its fiery heat. Wherefore
the second day is considered an incomplete period until junction with
its complement, the third day, took place."

Rabbi Hiya was sitting before Rabbi Simeon and said: "Light coming from
the right appeared on the first day, but darkness from the left attended
with division of the waters and discord amongst the primary elements,
why did not the first day contain and make up what was wanting in the
second?"

Said Rabbi Simeon: "Because as there existed no harmony between the
first and the second day, the third was necessary to equilibrate them
and cause union between them. It is written, 'Let the earth bring
forth.' It was by the green herb that

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

the waters above and below had become blended and made fruitful,
representing thus the union of male and female principles, therefore is
it true that what is above is as what is below.'"<span
class="margnote">46a-46b</span>

Said Rabbi Jose: "That being so, there must be a God above and a
corresponding God below: If you affirm this, I should say that the God
on high is called the living God, whilst the God below is Ahhim,
designated in scripture by the term toldoth (productions), as it is
written, these are the products of the heavens and the earth which are
created (Behibaram). Now we learn from the secret doctrine that this
peculiar word should be divided and read thus, behi-baram; meaning that
God created the heavens and the earth by He. Now He who is above is the
universal Father, who created all beings. He made fruitful the earth so
that it brought forth toldoth (products), in the same way that the
female is made fruitful by the male."

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "All the [fructifying](errata.htm#22.md) powers were
present in the earth, potentially, at the time of its creation, but
only. became manifested in the various productions of the six days; as
it is written, 'And God said let the earth bring forth the living
creature.' If, however, it be said, the words of the scripture are 'Let
the earth bring forth grass,' our reply is that the earth from the third
day was then imbued with generative forces that remained dormant and
hidden until the appointed time for manifestation. The earth was void
and empty, as it is affirmed, of all life, as the targum renders the
meaning of the words 'tohu vabohu,' but it became adapted for the
reception of those generative forces necessary in the production of
grass, herbs and trees, that manifested their existence on the sixth
day. This was the same with the light created on the first day of
creation, but did not become visible only at the appointed time, viz.,
on the third day. It is written, 'Let there be lights in the firmament
of Heaven.' The word Meoroth (light) is here written defectively,
indicating by this that the evil serpent is the author and originator of
discord and separation of what should always be united and blended
harmoniously together viz., the sun and the moon. This word also denotes
the malediction by which, through the serpent, the earth became cursed,
as it is written, 'Cursed is the ground because of thee' (Gen. 3-17),
and being found in the singular, signifies that the moon, designated by
the words, 'Let there be light,' and the sun by the words, 'In the
firmament,' were originally created together and formed one, in order to
give their united light upon the earth,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

but through the serpent they became separated; hence it is written, 'Let
them be for lights in the firmament of the Heaven,' to give light upon
the earth, instead of 'Let them enlighten the earth,' and therefore we
conclude that both in heaven above and on earth below, time is measured
by the courses of the moon."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "By the moon's courses, the solstices and days are
reckoned and determined."

Rabbi Eleazar objected to this statement and said: "Is not frequent
mention made of fractions of time in the world on high?"

Said Rabbi Simeon in reply: "Only in the angelic world is there no need
of the lunar courses as elements for calculating time, and when any
mention is made of them it is by way of accommodation to the
understanding of the dwellers on earth."<span
class="margnote">46b</span>

Again Rabbi Eleazar made objection and said: "It is however written,
'Let them be for signs and seasons,'<span class="margnote">Gen.
1:14</span> that is, for the measurement of time, and these words being
in the plural, we may infer that they apply to both worlds having the
same unit of measure."

Said Rabbi Simeon in reply: "The word othoth (signs) is written
defectively to show that divisions of time exist not in the world above
as in the world below."

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "Why then is it written, 'Let them be for signs and
for seasons,' and from which we may gather that the sun and moon
together were to be used for this purpose that the moon is only needed."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "The moon is designated by a plural term, as it
resembles a casket filled with various jewels that is ofttime spoken of
in the plural. Observe that every numerical calculation begins with
unity, whatever its value and worth may be or whatever it represents.
Now the Divine Unit is that in which everything is included and
therefore beyond and above all mathematical calculation. It is the basic
unit from which all things in the world take their origin and beginning,
and its analogy in the phenomenal material world is the moon, which is
the base of all calculations in connection with the solstices, feasts,
sabbaths; and therefore it is that Israel, who belongs to the Holy One,
begins the division of time from the various phases and aspects of the
moon, symbol of the divine point or unit; and therefore it is written,
'Ye are attached or joined unto the Lord your God' (Deuter 4-4). It is
written, 'And God said

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that has life'
(Gen. 1-20)."

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "The occult meaning of these words has already been
unfolded. They refer to the waters below that signify the lights above,
which are both alike fruitful and generative, 'and fowl that may fly
above the earth.' Why is it not written, 'who fly?'"

Said Rabbi Simeon: "The esoteric meaning of the word bird refers to the
archangel, Michael, as it is written, 'And one of the seraphim flew
towards me' (Is. 6-6). The word 'fly' refers occultly to Gabriel, as
scripture saith, 'And the man Gabriel which I saw at first in vision,
being caused to fly swiftly' (Dan. 9-21). The words 'above the earth'
refer to the prophet Elijah who descends from on high, reaches the earth
in four flights or steps; of him it is written, 'The spirit of the Lord
shall carry thee whither I know not' (Kings 18-12). The first step is
indicated by the words 'The spirit of the Lord,' the second by 'shall
carry,' the third by 'whither,' and the fourth by 'I know not.'
Moreover, the scripture adds, 'in the open firmament of heaven,'
referring to the angel of death who, as we learn from tradition, is
sometimes on earth and sometimes present in heaven, to seduce and tempt
men or accuse them of their misdeeds."

Said Rabbi Abba in reply: "The angel of death was created on the second
day,<span class="margnote">46b-47a</span> whilst the words just
expounded are written of the fifth day. The fact is that the angel
Raphael, who is appointed to heal the earth of its evil and affliction
and the maladies of mankind, was created on the second day; the words,
'In the open firmament' denote the angel Uriel, as indicated by the
words that follow, 'And God created great whales or fishes.'"

Said Rabbi Eleazar, "The words 'great fishes' refer to the seventy
rulers appointed to rule over the seventy nations of the world, but the
words 'Every living creature that moveth' signify Israel whose souls
(nephesh) proceed from 'hahaya' (the living), and therefore is it that
in scripture they are termed, 'The only nation or people.' The words,
'Which the waters brought forth abundantly after their kind,' signify
those who devote themselves to the study of the secret doctrine. 'And
every winged fowl after his kind,' are the righteous in Israel, because
they are really 'The living creatures' (living the higher life). Another
exposition of these words explains them as referring to the messenger
angels sent on earth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Further Kabbalistic Expositions of the Six Days Of
Creation](zdm033.md)
