[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm025)  [Next](zdm027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### THE DEVACHANIC OR HEAVENLY SPHERES.

 

<span class="margnote">NdM p. 174-9 omitted in Soncino</span>SAID Rabbi
Simeon: It is a tradition from the most ancient times that when the Holy
One created the world he engraved and impressed on it in letters of
brilliant light, the law by which it is sustained and governed. Above,
below and on every side of it, it is engraved on every atom that man, by
research and discovery, might become wise and conform himself to it as
the rule of his life. The world below is, in shape and form, the
reflection and copy of the world on high, so that there may be no
discontinuity between them, but reciprocally act and react upon each
other. This being so, we purpose to show that the same principle or law
that operated in the creation of the physical world, operated also in
the origin of man, and that both alike are manifestations of one and the
same law. That this great fact may be more fully perceived, let us first
consider the esoteric meaning of the words, "But they, like Adam, have
transgressed the covenant, there have they dealt treacherously against
me" (Hos. vi. 7).

When the Holy One created man he invested him with a form so
transcendently glorious and perfect in its proportions, and with mental
endowments so great, that all other creatures trembled and stood in awe
at his presence amongst them; for on his visage he bore the imprint or
reflection of the Divine, their

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

creator. Furthermore, the Holy One placed him in the garden of Eden,
that there he might enjoy the pleasures and delights of angelic
existence. In this beautiful abode, angels came round about him and made
obeisance to him and revealed unto him their occult knowledge respecting
the Divine Being, whom they regarded and worshiped as The Lord God of
the universe, in order that he might unite and join them in His worship
and service. Instructed in and taught the most profound celestial
secrets, man became initiated in the mystery of wisdom (hochma), the
first of the Sephiroth, in order that he might become imbued with an
adequate idea and conception of the honor and glory due unto his maker.

In the invisible world, (or heaven, Devachan), there are seven spheres
or states of existence, in which operate all those principles of life
and existence which can only be matters of faith to the generality of
mankind as at present constituted. Corresponding to them there are seven
spheres or states, appertaining to and surrounding the lower world of
humanity. Of these seven spheres, six can be apprehended by the human
mind and only by those initiated into the highest mysteries. As the
lower spheres belonging to the terrestrial world are formed after the
pattern of those of the celestial world, the highest of the terrestrial
spheres which comes between them is that which was at first designed by
The Holy One as the abode and dwelling place of man in his primeval
state of purity and sinlessness. After his expulsion from this Edenic
sphere of existence, it became reserved by His Creator for the souls of
the righteous in which they might enjoy the happiness of the beatific
vision, or divine presence, and take on them the form and appearance of
Adam before his fall.

THE FIRST, of these seven lower terrestrial spheres, is that from which
proceeds an influence that prepares and qualifies dwellers on the earth
plane to acquire a state of perfection, approximate and similar to that
which distinguishes angelic beings. In it are found gathered together
students of the Good Law, engaged in the study of that secret wisdom and
doctrine that is never imparted except to just, upright and unselfish
souls, who are admitted therein that they may enjoy a knowledge both of
heaven and earth, and thus be better able to meditate on Divine
mysteries and become receptive of heavenly delights and enjoyments. It
is altogether invisible to ordinary human perception and the way of
access to it unknown and undiscoverable save to

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

those who, amidst the afflictions and distress attendant on earth life,
render a faithful obedience to the Divine law.

It is written, "A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband" (Prow. xii.
4), in which words there is an occult reference to this sphere which as
stated is a subject of faith and not of sight. A man ought therefore
always to cleave unto and be faithful unto the Divine within him or his
Higher Self and never deviate either to the right or left from its
dictates and injunctions through menace or fear which in scripture is
termed "the adulterous woman or a woman of fornications." Therefore is
it written: "Say unto Wisdom, thou art my sister, and call understanding
(binah) thy kinswoman, that they may keep thee from the strange woman,
from the stranger which flattereth with her words" (Prow. vii. 4, 5). In
this sphere also are gathered the souls of those who have commenced on
the upward track or path to the Higher Life, for when they quit and go
out of earth life, they rest and abide in it for a period more or lese
prolonged, and necessary to prepare them for ascension into the higher
or celestial Eden.

In each of the lower spheres are found souls in various and different
states of progression each arrayed in garments and vestments
corresponding thereto in brightness and color which they continue to
wear until they attain unto the angelic state of existence, when they
are discarded and thrown away. Ere this however takes place they enjoy
the privilege of beholding the denizens of the higher celestial spheres
and contemplating the glory of their Lord. Here are found those who,
though heathen by birth, embraced and conformed their lives to the good
law and from them emanates an aura, so bright that when they ascend,
they become invisible to beholders. This sphere is more splendid and
glittering than gold or precious stones. Through an opening on one side
of it glimpses are obtained of the miserable state and unhappy condition
of the inmates of Gehenna or Avitchi, into which they have been hurled
by destroying angels, because in earth life they were rebels and
disobedient to the good law. Through this same opening, a beam of
celestial light penetrates into their dark abode three times daily, when
for a short period they enjoy an assuagement of their misery and pain.
Again, in this first sphere are upright proselytes such as Obadiah and
Onkelos, who are held in honor above others. When any inmate is judged
worthy to ascend into a higher sphere he retains the rank that
distinguished him from his fellows.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

THE SECOND SPHERE is more interior than the first and is the abode and
resting place of the fathers of humanity. It is illuminated by a light
of many variegated colored rays descending from on high and its
effulgence is far beyond that emitted by the most glittering diamonds.
In it dwell those who were tormented and afflicted in the world yet
renounced they not their worship of and trust in The Divine, nor ceased
in their service to humanity. There too are those who, at all times and
with all their power and strength, hallowed the divine Name, their daily
prayer being, "Let His great name be blessed forever and ever." These,
dwelling more in the centre of his sphere, are more recipient of the
light by which it is illuminated and are better able to catch glimpses
of higher and more supernal rays of light which, singly or in
combination, flash down from the next higher sphere where abides the
Messiah, who occasionally descends in their midst in order to direct and
guide them in the path of ascension.

THE THIRD SPHERE; in it are assembled those who in earth life were
subjects of great suffering and grievous trials, also those who died in
early childhood. Here also are those who mourned and sorrowed over the
destruction of the Holy Temple and are consoled and strengthened by the
Messiah, so that eventually they ascend into the glory and Light of

THE FOURTH SPHERE, which includes those who mourned over the destruction
of Jerusalem and were slain by idolatrous nations. When beholding them,
and thinking over the miseries they endured, the Messiah weeps
sympathetic tears so that the chiefs of the house of David gather round
him in order to share in and thus mitigate his sorrow. In it the Messiah
abides and dwells and in the time of the new moon his cry ceases not
until it is responded to by the voice divine from on high. When he
descends and visits the lower spheres, he is girded with garments of
dazzling light, the sheen of which radiates in all directions, imparting
renewed vigor and energy to those who died and suffered grievously for
his sake. Ere he ascends again he arrays himself in a purple robe into
which are woven the names of those who were slaughtered by idolaters for
and which, after he ascends, are transcribed and impressed on the purple
robe of the great king; and there cometh a time, when the Holy One will
envelop Himself with it and judge the nations as it is written: "He
shall judge amongst the heathen" (Ps. ex. 6). Ere, however, this comes
to pass, the Messiah with an aureole of light, and

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

accompanied with hosts of angels in their chariots, visits his martyrs
to console and comfort there. Within this same sphere live and dwell the
ten famed Rabbis of Israel, Rabbi Akiba and his associates together with
others who all acquire here the faculty of beholding the reflection of
that transcendently Divine light that no mortal can approach unto, of
which it is written: "No eye but thine, oh God, has seen it" (Is. lxiv.
3).

THE FIFTH SPHERE includes all those souls who in earth life repented of
their evil ways and attained a state of purity, and with them are those
who [sacrificed](errata.htm#21.md) their lives for the glory and honor of
God. At its entrance sits Manasseh. the king of Judah, whose repentance
The Holy One graciously accepted and restored unto him His divine favor.
Here also are they who deeply regretted their deeds of selfishness and
evil ere they died, and now enjoy along with the rest, its joys and
delights. There comes a time when the celestial light descends from the
sphere above, filling every one with that degree of happiness of which
he is receptive. It is a sphere of joy so exalted and great, that even
the souls of just men made perfect are unable, through its intensity, to
enter and abide therein, those servants of the Divine who had attained
to the unitive stage in the Higher Life being only admitted into it and
occupy the highest rank.

THE SIXTH SPHERE is the peculiar abode of these latter and of the most
exalted of divine and holy men and women whose love for their Lord
proved itself true and lasting. At its entrance are all those who
proclaimed the word of the Lord and when the time of ascending higher
comes they are the first. At another entry, Abraham, the right hand of
the Holy One, is found, and there too is Isaac who was hound upon the
altar as a perfect offering unto the Most High. At the third entry is
Jacob, surrounded by the chiefs of the twelve tribes each with the halo
of the divine Shekina encircling their heads. When the children of
Israel suffer affliction, all these patriarchs are likewise afflicted
and implore the Shekina to protect them, which then descends and places
a crown over Israel that defends them from all trials and troubles. All
these six spheres are variously connected with each other.

THE SEVENTH SPHERE is the complement of all the others and, being the
most central, its existence is a subject of faith and not of knowledge
to human beings. In this most secret and most interior of the spheres is
a most magnificent column of light of many colors, green, white, red and
black predominating. Each

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

soul, at the end of each incarnation on earth ascends for a moment into
this sphere, and, according to the color that he first beholds, so is he
located in the sphere corresponding to it. The mystery of these six
spheres is expressed in the word Sheth (six) and occultly alluded to in
the first word of holy scripture, Brashith, bra, shith, He created six
lower spheres and their corresponding higher antetypes, both being
included in this word Brashith.

Said Rabbi Jehuda: There were two temples, the first and the second; one
above and one below and one the type of the other, so in the Divine name
I H V H there are two H's. The letter Beth (B) hath this peculiarity. It
represents a house, which is its meaning, with a door or way of entrance
that in whatever way it is turned, remains open, therefore, is this
letter the gate to the scriptures and in a mystical sense symbolizes Him
who is *janua vitae*, the gate of life.

Said Rabbi Isaac: It has been said by Rabbi Eliezar that Brashith
synthesises the universe and everything contained in it, and as such is
referred to in scripture. "This was the appearance of the likeness of
the glory of the Lord" (Ez. I. 28). It was the likeness in which was
contained that of six others. The word Brashith may thus be interpreted
and rendered, bra, shith, that is to say, after the form of brashith,
God created six other worlds or spheres of existence.

Rabbi Jose spake and said: It is written: "The flowers appear on the
earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the turtle dove is
heard in our land" (Cant. ii. 12). The occult meaning of the word
flowers, refers to the six higher and lower spheres; "appear on the
earth," refer to their representatives, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Jachin,
Boaz, and Joseph; "the time of the singing of birds," denotes the
worship and glory rendered by man to the Divine Being after attaining to
a knowledge of these spheres, as scripture saith, "that my glory may
sing praise to thee, and not be silent" (Ps. xxx. 12); therefore is it
that the Psalm containing these words, is termed *mizmor* (a song),
which term is applied only to those psalms that David composed under the
direct inspiration of the Divine Shekina.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Higher Devachanic or Heavenly Spheres](zdm027.md)
