[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm048)  [Next](zdm050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

### TRADITIONS CONCERNING NOAH.

Said Rabbi Jose: "It is written, 'And the Lord said I will destroy man
whom I have created from the face of the earth! (Gen. vi., 7); also, 'My
thoughts are not your thoughts and my ways are not your ways saith the
Lord' (Is. lv., 8). When anyone seeks to wreak his vengeance upon
another, he keeps silent and lets not a word escape his lips lest his
enemy learning his intention takes steps to guard and protect himself.
The Holy One acts not so, when sending forth his judgments upon the
world, but warns it again and again of their coming. He has no fear of
being baffled by those whom he is about to chastise, and no one can hide
from him nor escapes his decrees. He made known through Noah the
judgments<span class="margnote">58a-58b</span> he was about to execute
upon the antediluvians, but they took no heed and therefore sudden
destruction came upon them and they perished from off the face of the
earth. Of Noah it is said, 'And he called his name Noah (rest, comfort)
saying, this same shall comfort us concerning our work and the toil of
our hands, because of the ground which the Lord had cursed' (Gen. v.,
29). How was it that his father could give utterance to these words? The
explanation is that when the ground had been cursed, Adam said to the
Holy One: Ruler and Lord of the universe, how long shall the earth
remain cursed?' Said the Holy One: 'Until one be born like unto thyself
bearing the sign of the covenant.' In hope and expectation mankind lived
on till the birth of Noah, in the anticipation of benefits and blessing
they would enjoy during his lifetime. Before the appearance of this
patriarch, they were unversed in the science of agriculture and the use
of the plough and harrow. Everything was done by hand labor. When Noah
attained to manhood, he invented implements for tilling the ground and
making it fertile; and so, in the words of Lamech, his father, he became
a comforter, a helper unto men, in his work and the toil of their hands,
whereby the curse was taken from off the ground, for as at first when
sown it brought forth thistle, now it produced corn in abundance,
therefore he became known as and called the husbandman."<span
class="margnote">Gen 9:20</span>

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "He was called thus for the same reason that the
husband of Naomi was called Elimelech (Ruth i., 3). Of Noah it is
written also that he was zaddich, just, because by the sacrifices
offered up by him, he freed the earth from its curse, concerning which
we read that 'the Lord smelled a sweet

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

savour' (Gen. viii., 21); or in other words, was pleased with them and
said, 'I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake.' Such
are the reasons why Noah was so called.

Continuing his remarks, Rabbi Jehuda said: "It is written, 'Come and see
the works of the Lord who doeth wonders on the<span
class="margnote">58b</span> earth." (Is. xl., 8.) The words see (hazon)
here has the same signification as in the words, 'The Lord has revealed
unto me, hazouth qashah, a remarkable prophecy or vision' (Is. xxi., 2),
from which we learn this fact, that prophecy is revelation from the Holy
One on high to mankind, and also that the word shamuth is usually
translated, wonders or marvelous things such as desolation, and yet here
it should be read shemoth (names), teaching us that it is God who
inspires the naming of everyone's name that corresponds to and is
expressive of his or her life and character. Another interpretation is
that the word shamoth in the above verse from the Psalms, signifies
really 'destructions' for if the world has been created by the divine
attribute termed Jehovah it would have been indestructible, but as it
is, the work of Alhim (justice) is liable to dissolution and
abolishment. It is written, 'Come and see the works of Alhim, that are
subject to destructions (shamoth) on the earth.'"<span
class="margnote">Ps. 46:9</span>

Said Rabbi Hiya: "I cannot agree to this interpretation, seeing that
Jehovah and Alhim are alike sacred and names of the Divine Being, and
therefore I think in common with several students that shemoth signifies
holy names, as by the combination of the divine names, marvellous and
wondrous things are done on earth."

Said Rabbi Isaac: "These different interpretations with that of Rabbi
Jehuda are all excellent, for if the world was created by the name of
'rakhma,' that is by Jehovah, it is indestructible, if by severity or
Alhim, then is everything in it liable to perish; if there were no
punishment for evil and wrongdoing, the world and society could not
continue to exist. At his birth Noah was named by a term expressive of
solace, or comfort, with the idea that he was to be a source of help and
consolation to his progenitors and descendants, to the world above and
the world below, to this world and the world to come. This was not
however the case with respect to his relations with the Divine Being,
for on reversing the letters of his name, Noah became Khen, meaning
grace, and so it is written, 'But Noah found grace in the sight of the
Lord.' (Gen. VI. 8.) The name of Judah's eldest son Er, when reversed
becomes Ra (evil) and is an anagram

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

expressive of his natural character, therefore scripture describes<span
class="margnote">58b-59a</span> him as 'wicked before the Lord.'<span
class="margnote">Gen. 38:7</span> When Noah came into the world and grew
up to manhood, beholding the perverse lives of men sinning against the
holy One, he retreated from amongst them and devoted himself to the
worship of his Lord, and thus escaped from the general pollution. If it
be asked what was the subject of his studies whilst in retreat? It was
the Book of Adam that had been handed down till at last it came into the
possession of Henoch; and from it Noah learned how essential and
necessary it was to offer sacrifices unto his Lord. From this book he
also learned that the world had been created by Hochma, (the sephiroth
wisdom) and that it was owing to sacrifices it still existed; for
without them or were they not made, neither angels above nor man below
would be able to exist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI.](zdm050.md)
