[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm028)  [Next](zdm030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "DEVACHANIC SPHERES AND MANSIONS."

In the third mansion or higher sphere is the spirit Nogah (splendor),
whose aura is of the most absolute whiteness and purity and without a
shade of color, by reason of which it takes its name. It is altogether
invisible to the lower spheres except when tempered and blended with the
rays that proceed from them. The light of this mansion is most
wonderfully manifested in the appearance of a great and mighty sheaf of
fire, emitting sparks of twenty-two different shades of color,
corresponding to the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet. This
luminous sheaf, however, remains invisible and undistinguished until

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

the time that prayers ascend from the lower spheres, when all these
star-like sparks become united and form a column of light and give rise
and origin to holy and powerful Hayoth or living creatures that separate
themselves into two groups, one having the form of a lion, the other,
that of au ox. Above these are seen the four Ophanim or wheel-like
spiritual beings, under whose rule and control are myriads upon myriads
of subordinate spirits. Each of these Ophanim has eight wings and
derives its power and sustenance from the Hayoth above them and are
stationed at the four cardinal points of the world. Each have four
figures or forms, two of which are turned towards the Hayoth and two are
covered by their wings, that they may not behold the Mercaba or
celestial chariot in its circular motions, and thus avoid being consumed
and annihilated. Their reverence and veneration of the Divine Being give
rise to unnumbered hosts and legions of angelic beings who chant praises
and sing hymns continually to his honor and glory. To this mansion there
are four entrances and gateways, corresponding to the four quarters of
the world, and each of them guarded by ten chiefs. When prayers ascend
from the lower mansions and spheres these gates are opened, when a
general blending and fusion takes place, of chiefs with chiefs. Ophanim
with Hayoth and Hayoth with Ophanim, of angelic hosts and legions with
other hosts and legions, of lights with lights, and spirits with
spirits, all blended together become at length unified with Nogah, the
ruling spirit of the mansion, into one mighty, harmonious whole. In this
mansion is a place glittering and shining like burnished brass, wherein
are vast hosts of angels who are unable to go out therefrom and ascend
on high until this mansion becomes united by prayer with the next higher
or fourth mansion.

These particular hosts of angels are the executive messengers of Karmic
law and sent forth by the chief justice of the tribunal in the fourth
mansion. They are termed *Generals* because they lead their hosts
against nations and inhabitants of the world who violate the good law of
right and justice. On the sixty walls of their abode they suspend their
shields of gold, in number six hundred thousand, are entering into the
fourth mansion from which when they return they descend into the lower
worlds and spheres as far as the planet Mars, in order to execute the
decrees and sentences entrusted unto them. Here they remain until the
time of prayer, which ascends on high from

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

the lower spheres, when they blend and mingle with the angelic
messengers of mercy and goodness, and, together with them, enter into
the great effulgent column of light beaming down from on high, and
ascend into the fourth mansion. Happy he who understands and comprehends
the mystery of this column by which he comes into union with the Divine,
thus escaping all affliction and becoming participant of the blessings
conveyed and imparted to him by these Karmic angels. He is verily the
just man, and a world upholder, for his prayers are always effective and
prevail with heaven, whence he receives his recompense and becomes
enrolled amongst the children of light.

Take note that all these spheres and mansions with their living
creatures, their legions of angels and all their spirits of light, are
coordinate and bound together and linked by indispensable and
indissoluble ties, and as the coats and parts of the eye are necessary
and essential for sight, each of them being unable to operate without
the aid of the other, working together in perfect harmony, so is it with
all these angels and spirits. But for the many gradations in their
orders, prayer would be unable to ascend on high and become effectual.
By this series of gradations it is that prayers proceeding from the
throne find an entry into the fourth mansion and attain to that degree
of holiness which distinguishes true worship and adoration of the Divine
Being.

The fifth mansion varies from all others in that it is a combination of
four mansions, one within the other. Its president spirit is called
*Zacouth* (righteousness) and rules over those who by their lives and
deeds have become justified. Out of this mansion go forth seventy light
rays corresponding to the number of the chiefs that guard its gates,
who, along with two others, constitute a sanhedrim to which Karmic
angels and spirits bring and submit their reports of human action on the
earth plane. These two superior rays are known as "*the witness*." The
mystery respecting them, their existence and office, is indicated in the
words, "Thy belly is as a heap of wheat, set round about with lilies"
(Cant. vii. 2). By these seventy light beings, all actions are weighed
and each man adjudged. On their decisions becoming ratified by the two
witnesses, they are carried out, executed by Karmic ministers whether
for good or otherwise, and this is why this mansion is termed Zacouth,
whose president bears the impress of the letters of the divine name, I.
H. V. joined together similar to the juncture of the male

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

and female and give forth a light that illuminates all sides of the
mansion, and also three other rays corresponding to the three judges
necessary to constitute a legal tribunal. Their jurisdiction extends to
all questions and matters relating to wealth and poverty, sickness and
health. Myriads of angels attend to receive their decisions and
forthwith proceed to execute them throughout the world.

Above this tribunal are seated four flaming Seraphim from whom stream
forth seventy-two bright and shining rays corresponding and similar to
those before mentioned. Beneath them flows a fiery river that consumes
everyone that approaches it. In it are thrown and consumed those angels
who in any way incur condign punishment. It never flows into the fourth
mansion because of the letters I. H. V. borne by the president, for
wherever they are visible no punishment can he inflicted. All decrees,
whether for good or otherwise, affecting mundane affairs, go forth from
the mansion, saving those relative to fecundity, which are adjudicated
on in the higher mansion. In the middle of it exists a place where
assemble all spirits ascending from lower spheres.

This mansion has also twelve gateways at which are stationed chiefs, who
make known to their subordinates the decrees and mandates they have to
discharge and execute in the world, as it is written, "He cried aloud
and said thus; Hew down the tree and cut off his branches, shake off his
leaves and scatter his fruits" (Dan. iv. 14). Having received their
orders, these Karmic angels speed their flight to the firmament of the
Sun, and when it rises despatch them to all quarters of the world to be
executed by demons and elementals of fire, air, earth and water, as also
by birds and other creatures. Until they are carried out they return not
to their abode on high.

In this same mansion, when anyone in the world becomes ill, it is
determined whether and when he shall recover or die. It may be asked:
How so? We have just said that decrees relating to life and death are
not in the jurisdiction of the mansion. This is truly so. Though the
sentence be decreed in it, the final fiat is given from above and is
invariably conformable to it. Happy he who attains unto union with the
Divine, for then his prayers rise on high and return with the blessings
from the mansion symbolized by prostration of the face upon the ground
at the time of prayer, an attitude by which we supplicate that judgment
may be tempered with mercy as it is written, "He is a

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God of truth and
without iniquity, just and right is He" (Deuter. xxxii. 4). The fifth
mansion is the abode of a spirit named *Beraqa* (lightning) because the
light reflected by it upon the lower spheres is similar to lightning,
purple hued in color. It is a combination of different colored rays,
such as white, black, red and green, yet to sight they appear as one.
Beneath it, stand four Ophanim with faces turned to the four cardinal
points and each with its own peculiar color. In proportion as these
Ophanim approach and come into contact with one another, so do their
colors become fused and blended the one with the other. When this occurs
their forms become visible within each other, as it is written, "An
Ophanim in the midst of an Ophanim" (Ez. i. 16). The various colors
prevailing in this mansion are due to the flaming sword mentioned in
scripture, "He placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubim and a
flaming sword" (Gen. iii. 24).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.](zdm030)
