[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm027)  [Next](zdm029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### RABBI SIMEON'S DISCOURSE ON PRAYER.

RABBI SIMEON said: "Who is he that knoweth how to address his prayers to
the Almighty as did Moses in all the circumstances of his life, whether
long or brief in their duration. We have found in an ancient book, that
prayer, in order that it may become effective and enter through heaven's
gates without hindrance or obstacle, should be expressed in terms
suitable and corresponding to existent circumstance, otherwise it is
ineffective and of no avail. Blessed are they who learn and acquire the
true secret of prayer, by which they succeed in obtaining through the
Schekina their requests, and those blessings by which evils are assuaged
or averted and judgment becomes tempered with mercy." For a few moments,
Rabbi Simeon ceased speaking and then, as one inspired, he slowly rose
and standing up, exclaimed: "Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord,
who can show forth all his praise and teach us the mystery and secret of
prayer, but Abraham the patriarch sitting now on the right hand of God?
He can tell us, he to whom were revealed in raptured vision the glorious
mansions of the Great King. Seven are they in number and each with their
entrances, through which the prayers of mankind may ascend up to the
throne of the Eternal from the lips of those whose souls are in harmony
and union with the Lord of the universe, who embraces worlds above and
below with his love and regards them as a glorious whole. Such souls are
they of whom scripture speaks, 'when trouble came they visited thee, and

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

poured out their prayer when thy chastening was upon them' (Is. xxvi.
16).

"The first of these sacred mansions is referred to in the words, 'And
they saw the God of Israel and there was under his feet, as it were, a
paved work of a sapphire stone, like unto heaven in its clearness' (Ex.
xxiv. 10). Its existence is the greatest of mysteries. It is the abode
of a great spirit named *Saphira* whose radiant form is white and in its
brilliancy like unto the precious sapphire stone. The light of this
mansion sendeth forth rays in two directions, glittering and flashing
like sparks from a candle, and though apparently separate and distinct,
yet are they but emanations and scintillations of the one divine light;
as it is written, 'like the color of burnished brass' (Hz. i. 7). This
spirit Saphira is stationed on the right side of the mansion whilst on
the left is stationed another spirit whose color is red and named
*Lebanah*. The rays of these two spirits become blended and mingled
together, the red absorbing the white as the cows of Pharash, of whom we
read that when the lean had eaten up the fat kine it could not be
discerned that they had eaten them (Gen. lxi. 20). There are two
gateways to this mansion leading to the sphere termed 'the heaven of
heavens.'

"From the emanations of these two spirits, *Saphira* and *Lebanah*, are
created and formed those angelic beings called *Ophanim*, who in their
holiness are accounted equal to the *Hayoth*, or living creatures,
described by the prophet (Ezechiel i. 20). The appearance of the Ophanim
was like unto the color of Beryl, but that of the Hayoth was like that
of coals of burning fire and amidst them were fiery flames, glittering
and scintillating like sparks, referring to the Holy Spirit from whom
they all emanate and by whom they shine as it is further written, 'and
the living creatures went and returned as the appearance of flashing
lightning.' When a spirit becomes united and blended with another, there
flashes forth above the four Ophanim a great white and dazzling light,
each of whom takes the form of a lion with the wings of an eagle and
rules over a thousand and three hundred myriads of subordinate spirits
like unto themselves.

"These Ophanim form the wheels of the heavenly Mercaba, or chariot, by
whom it is moved in four directions. In each wheel of his chariot appear
the three different colors of the supreme light, thus twelve altogether.
These Ophanim also constitute the four mystic beings of the Divine
Chariot having the forms of a man, a lion, an ox and an eagle, facing
the four

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

quarters, but when the wheels of the chariot begin moving, they become
faced to each other, as it is written. The loops held together each to
each' (Ex. xxxvi. 12). At the time that the wheels begin moving, a voice
sweet and harmonious is heard resounding by the dwellers in the lower
world. The light emanating from this mansion is perceived by angels
extending to the star *Sabathai* (Saturn), and is a source of
nourishment and sustentation to all who behold it as it is written,
'Everywhere is the spirit, and wherever it went the wheels also went,
for the spirit of the living creatures, or life, was in the wheels.'
(Ez. i. 20). Some behold this light bright and ebullient as the rays of
the sun reflected in clear water, by others it is perceived blended with
the light of *Lebanah*.

"Blessed is he who by the intensity of his prayer is able to ascend into
this mansion for, then by the exercise and performance of rites and
ceremonies that symbolize union with the Divine and the oneness of the
living spirit, his soul becomes filled with a heavenly joy, and he is
encircled by a bright aura by which he is led to the silent
contemplation of the mysteries of the second mansion. By the prayers of
such souls, the four Ophanim become as one, and blended together as fire
with water, and water with fire, as the North with the South and the
South with the North, and also as the East with the West and the West
with the East. Such is the power of a just man's prayer to accomplish
the union of opposites; so that the human becomes Divine, and the Divine
is blended with the human, which union is symbolized by a tall lofty
column of light that extends and reaches from the lowest to the highest
spheres, attracting the attention and regards of all spirits inhabiting
there and by their meditation becoming united with the Divine Spirit as
it is written, 'They have all one breath' (Eccles. iii. 16) that is one
and the same indwelling spirit.

The Second Mansion is that alluded to in scripture, "like to heaven
itself in brightness" (Ez. xxiv. 18) and is the abode of an angelic
being termed Zohar (splendor) who in the luminous brightness of his
form, is ever the same and changeth not. The light in this mansion is
transcendently white and illumines it in all directions. Happy the lot
of those to whom it becomes visible. With the spirit Zohar is associated
another, the color of whose aura resembles that of the hyacinth more
than the pearl or diamond and causes the light of this mansion to be
more pronounced and noticeable by its contrast. From this light

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

emanate the *Seraphim*, heavenly things having six wings according to
the number of the mansion which is the sixth from the highest. It is
they who consume up all those who have no respect nor regard for the
worship and glory of their Lord and they are therefore termed
"Consumers." The mystery attending their office and service is referred
to in an ancient tradition that states, *dasthmsh btga chlph*, i.e.,
whoever makes a selfish use of the Crown, thus profaning it shall be
consumed. He, however, who studies Scripture and the six orders of the
Mishnah is as he who by reverential worship becomes unified with his
Lord. To all such, the Seraphim become adjustants by consuming in their
flames all the descendants of the great Serpent by whom death entered
into the world. These seraphim are under the government and authority of
the presiding spirit of the mansion, When the wheels of the Mercaba or
heavenly chariot begin moving, they fall back and many of them are
consumed in their own flames, but eventually they are resuscitated and,
gaining their pristine state, take refuge beneath the wing of the eagle,
one of the four living creatures surrounding the Divine chariot. When
the divine light is seen beaming within the four living creatures, each
of the wheels begin moving. The wheel belonging to the East, in moving
in that direction becomes hampered by the other three, turning each in
their own direction. This occurs alike with the other wheels of the
North, South and West. Only when their individual motions are
equilibrated, can the Divine chariot be raised and turned in any
direction by the mystical Column of light that unites the higher and
lower spheres. This same Column, according as the chariot is at rest or
in motion, closes or opens the gate of prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Devachanic Spheres and Mansions.](zdm029)
