[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm014)  [Next](zdm016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ON ISRAEL OR THE CHILDREN OF LIGHT.

Now the children of Israel are all included and summed up in the name
Abraham, of whom God spoke as "his friend," and which also applies to
Israel, for Israel is contained in the divine name written in full, IV
D, HA, VAV, HA, the numerical value of which is 45, equaling that of
Adam (man). The scripture states that "He created man (Adam) in his
image," signifying Israel who existed in the divine thought or mind
before the creation of the world, and afterwards was created in the
likeness and image of God. Offspring, life and the means of subsistence
proceed from the middle column of the sephirotic tree of life, called in
scripture, "My first born, even Israel" (Ex. lv. 22), and that
nourisheth all the world. The support of Israel since the destruction of
the temple is prayer, which is accepted in lieu of sacrifices. Its cry
since the time of the first captivity has been: "Give me children or
else I die" (Gen. xxx. 1). When the Shekina vanished from the temple,
the ten sephirotic splendors also departed with it, and, becoming
blended and united together they ascended on high and surrounded the
throne of glory that they might still continue to receive prayers that
go up on high. When man therefore desires that his prayers may ascend to
heaven as a sweet and pleasing melody, or when he yearns to break the
yoke and bondage of the old serpent who seeks always to disturb and
thwart his prayers, he ought first of all to unify himself with the
Divine Presence or heavenly Shekina, and use

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

it as a sling wherewith to combat against and overcome his spiritual
adversary. This living consciousness of the Divine within us and about
us it is that endows us with strength and fortitude to tread the path of
duty calm and unperturbed, and thus become better able to accomplish
life's great mission and achieve its greatest victory, self conquest,
the prelude to the realization of our destiny, i.e.. union with the
Divine. The teachings of Theosophy on this subject of the secret
doctrine<span class="margnote">24a</span> are contained in the names of
the accents used in sacred chanting, such as Zarka (a sling), Shophar (a
trumpet), Segolta (a bunch of grapes), etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Prayer of Rabbi Simeon](zdm016.md)
