[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm075)  [Next](zdm077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE IDOLATRY OF THE POSTDILUVIANS.

It is written, "And the earth was of one language and had the same
words" (Gen. XI. 1) and it is further added "And as they, these words,
went from the east" (miqqedem). This word here signifies he who is the
Alpha or Premier of the world. It is also said, "They found a plain or
valley in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt there." As soon as they
separated themselves from this premier, unity of thought and mind
amongst them was no longer possible, and they became dispersed and
scattered abroad in all parts of the earth. If in opposition to these
remarks, anyone should refer to the words of scripture 'And a river went
out of Eden to water the Garden and from thence it was divided and
became into four heads,' (Gen. II. 10) in order to show that even in
association and close proximity with the Divine Presence, divine
separation occur and therefore it was nothing extraordinary that this
deflection and revolt from the Premier of the world should take place,
just as it was with the river of Eden that it should become parted into
four heads. In reply we admit that it was not impossible it should do so
after but not before its exit from the garden, so with respect to
mankind after the deluge, so long as they remained united together they
were attached to the worship of God, the premier of the world. They had
one in common, one language, one faith, one mode of worshipping the
Divine Being, binding them together in an universal Brotherhood that
prevailed amongst them. But declining in divine knowledge and reverence,
they gradually veered away from allegiance to their great Premier
(miqqedem) until at length they found a plain in the land of Shinar, or
in other words, they became ignorant of God their creator and devoid of
all knowledge of the higher and diviner life. Scripture relates of
Nimrod, 'The beginning of his Kingdom was Babel' from which we gather,
it was he who first seduced the postdiluvians from the worship and
service of the true god, and introducing confusion and disunion amongst
them, he eventually succeeded in usurping rule and sovereignty over them
and led them to a plain in the land of Shinar, by which is meant, that
from that time men forsook the worship of the Divine and began

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

to live in defiance of his law, then degenerated and gave
themselves<span class="margnote">74a-74b</span> wholly up to the pursuit
of and indulged in worldly pleasures and enjoyments, worshipping the
creature rather than their creator who is blessed forever. It is further
related, 'And they said, go to, let us build us a city and a tower whose
head may reach into heaven and let us make us a name (shem)' (Gen. XI.
4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII. The Tower of Babel](zdm077)
