[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm058)  [Next](zdm060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span class="margnote">65a</span>

THIS union and harmony between the finite and the infinite, God and man
is the highest and deepest of mysteries, the mystery of all ages since
the creation of the world. Happy are they in this world and the world to
come who have attained unto a knowledge of it. Observe furthermore that
the destroying angel known as "the end of all flesh" derives benefit and
pleasure from acts of charity in this sense, that as such acts and deeds
of charity and gratitude are a source of joy to the angels on high, so
the material part of sacrifices symbolising the element of the impurity
and imperfection of human nature becomes a source of strength and
enjoyment to the inferior orders of spirits and this being the case, the
Holy Spirit Israel's Watcher that neither slumbers nor sleeps, provides
against their troubling her children and preventing their good deeds
from becoming perfect and freed from impure thoughts.

At the rising of the moon in the early part of each month a goat is
offered up as a supplementary sacrifice which the demon delighting in,
cease [for](errata.htm#41) the time being from troubling Israel who is
thus able to make its offerings in peace that bring them into closer
relationship with their Lord and King. As a he-goat is what demons
delight in, so is Israel the delight and choice of the Holy One as
stated in scripture "for the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto himself and
Israel for his peculiar treasure" (Ps. [CXXXV](errata.htm#42). 4). Still
further, "the end of all flesh" joys only in what is carnal and when he
acquires power and influence over any one, it is over his animal or
lower nature and not over his higher self. This is spiritual and
celestial in origin, that is earthly in its production. So is it with
the two elements or parts in a sacrifice; like goeth to like, the
material part remaineth below, take spiritual part ascendeth on high.
When any one lives the

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

higher and diviner life, there is a continual sacrifice, that in a
measure atones for the sins of humanity in general, whereas the life of
an iniquitous man is of no benefit or advantage whatever<span
class="margnote">65a-65b</span> to the world or it is blemished with sin
and wrong doing and therefore it is written, "Whatsoever hath a blemish
ye shall not offer, for it will not be acceptable" (Lev. XXII. 20)<span
class="margnote">Lev. 22:25</span>. From what has been said we can
understand and gather the true meaning of sacrifice and how the lives of
good men subserve to the benefit and salvation of humanity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI. The Occult Meaning of the Six Hundred Years of Noah's
Life](zdm060)
