[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm053)  [Next](zdm055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Kabbalistic Explanation of the Feast of Tabernacles and The Loulab.

As Rabbi Hiya and Rabbi Jose travelled onwards, they beheld a stranger
approaching them whom they judged by his appearance, to be an Israelite.
After saluting him they asked "Who art thou.?" "I am," he replied, "a
resident of the village of Ramin and as the feast of Tabernacles is
coming on I have been specially deputed to prepare the Loulab and am
therefore on may way to cut down palm branches and prepare them
according to ancient and legal custom. After walking a little together,
the stranger turning to them said, "Do you know why the Loulab must
consist of four different objects in order to secure the blessing of
rain upon the earth?" "With Students of the Secret Doctrine," they
answered, "it has often been a subject of much discussion, but if you
know anything that will further enlighten us, we pray you to impart it
unto us."

Then spoke again the stranger and said, "The village in which I live,
though small and in an obscure locality, is distinguished by the
residence of students of the Secret Doctrine and also of a master, Rabbi
Isaac, son of Jose of Melrozaba, who daily gives discourses and lessons
on occult subjects from which we always gather knowledge new and most
interesting. Once when conversing with him, he stated that during the
Feast of Tabernacles the Israelites are exalted and pre-eminent above
all other people and nations of the world and therefore we carry

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

the Loulab in hand as a trophy of victory over them, inasmuch as only
from Israel, do the great chiefs of idolatrous nations receive and
participate in the blessings that descend from heaven. These chiefs or
governing angels are called in scripture "hamayim hazzedonim" (the proud
waters) as it is written 'Then had the proud waters gone over our soul.
Blessed be the Lord who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth.'
(Ps. CXXI V. 5.) The four components of the Loulab (the palm, willow,
myrtle and citron)<span class="margnote">63b-64a</span> correspond to
the four letters of the sacred name I H V H by which Israel is exalted
above all other nations and to whom is owing the descent of water to
serve as libations upon the altar of sacrifice. From the beginning of
the Feast of Tabernacles to Cippur or day of expiation, the holy One
sits and judges the world, during which period, the Serpent no longer
appears before Him as man's accuser, being attracted to the goat that is
offered to him and therefore heedless of anything of a sacred character.
So is it with him when a goat is offered to him at the time of new moon.
For this reason, the children of Israel pray then the Holy One to grant
them remission and forgiveness of their sins."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI. The Occultism of Sacrifices](zdm055.md)
