[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm017)  [Next](zdm019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

WHEN the Holy One wished to form man and said: "Let us make man in our
image. " He intended to set him over the angelic hosts who should be
subject to his commands. The revolting angels, however, protested and
said: "What is man that he merits Thy regards? (Ps. viii. 5); he will
most certainly sin against Thee and disobey Thy commandments." Said the
Holy One unto them: "If ye were on earth below you would become more
wicked and culpable than he.<span class="margnote">25a-26b</span> And so
it happened, for as it is written, as soon as "they beheld the daughters
of men that they were fair, they took them wives of all which they
chose" (Gen. vi. 2). Therefore, the Holy One hurled them into the
abysmal darkness, where they abide unto this day.

Such was the doom of Asa and Azael, from whom originated and were
engendered those angelic beings who, through sexual intercourse with
their fair and beautiful human wives, became the fallen ones and thus
forfeited the joys of the heavenly world, exchanging its eternal
happiness for the fleeting pleasures and delights of earthly existence,
as it is written, "He repayeth them that hate him, to their faces to
destroy them" (Deuter. vii. 10).

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

The Giborim (mighty ones) formed the third race, and were they whom
Scripture describes as "mighty men which were of old, men of great
renown" (Gen. vi. 4). They it was who, at the building of the tower of
Babel, said: "Go to and let us build us a city and tower whose top may
reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name" (Gen. xi. 4). Becoming
incarnated, they were those who built mansions, colleges, and founded
oracles and temples, not for the worship and glory of the Divine Being,
but for their own self-exaltation, and then tyrannized over Israel as
though they were dust of the earth, by plundering and robbing them of
every thing they possessed. Concerning them the Scripture states, "And
the waters prevailed and were increased greatly upon the earth" (Gen.
vii. 19).

The fourth race was that of the Rephaim or Giants, who, whenever they
beheld the children of Israel in sore straits or distress and
afflictions, scoffed and derided them and treated with contempt the good
law and its students and followers, but regarded with favor and
indulgence the idolatrous and ungodly. Of them it is written, "The
Rephaim (giants) shall not rise again" (Is. xxvi. 14), and when the
redemption and deliverance of Israel shall appear, then will be
accomplished the words of scripture respecting them, "Their memory shall
perish."<span class="margnote">25b</span>

The fifth race was the Anakim (tall ones), a despicable people, of whom
it is said: "The Rephaim were like unto them" (Deuter. xi. 11). It was
through them that the earth reverted back to its previous state of tohu
and bohu, occult words in which is contained the epitome of their
history and final disappearance from off the face of the earth, which
occurred when the light divine appeared in the world.

Another explanation of the words, "These are the generations or
offspring of the heavens and the earth," is gathered from the words,
"And Aaron took them and cast them into the furnace and formed of them a
calf." Then said the Israelites: "These (aleh) be thy gods, oh Israel"
(Ex. xxxii. 4). On the day that all these different races were
exterminated, the Holy One along with the Shekina created the heavens
and the earth anew, as it is written, "For as the new heavens and the
new earth which I make shall remain before me" (Is. lxvi. 22), which
words are the complement to "on the day that God created. . . ."

Then it was that God also made to grow out of the ground

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food" (Gen. ii.
4).<span class="margnote">25b</span> But not until the extermination of
the above mentioned races did the secret doctrine appear in the world,
and the children of Israel flourished and sprung forth as the trees and
green herb out of the ground alluded to in scripture; for till then "the
Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth and there was no man
to till the ground" (Gen. ii. 5). The esoteric meaning of which is, the
children of Israel were not there to do sacrifice and render worship to
the Holy One. A further exposition is that the words, "And every plant
of the field," denote the first Messiah; and the words "every herb of
the field" a second Messiah.

What was the reason for the appearance of these Messiahs? Because there
was no Moses to make intercession with the divine Shekina, and therefore
is it written, "There was no man to till the ground." This esoteric
meaning and interpretation is also that of the words, "And the Sceptre
shall not depart front Judah" (Gen. xlix. 10), referring to the Messiah
son of David; whilst the words, "nor a prince of his posterity," denote
Messiah the son of Joseph,--"Until the coming of Schiloh, "--signifies
Moses; the numerical value of these two names being the same. The Hebrew
words "velo iqhath" (to him shall the nations look) are composed of the
same letters as "velevi, qehath" (hevi and Qohath) the ancestors of
Moses. Also, "every plant of the field," signifies the righteous whose
souls emanated from him who is termed "The Just One," who is the life of
the world and abideth forever. The word "shiah" (plant) is composed of
the letter Sh, the branches of which symbolize the three Patriarchs and
"hai" (life) denoting the Eternal One who alone hath life and
immortality. The following word "eaheb" (every herb) denotes the union
of the seventy-two branches of the celestial tree, and which only became
united with the Shekina on the appearance of Adam (the man) whose name
in its numerical value is equal to that of Jehovah. The words, "and
every herb of the field before it grew out of the ground" denote also
The Just One, of whom it is written, "Truth shall spring out of the
ground" (Ps. lxxxv. 11), and "The Truth shall be sent down upon the
earth" (Dan viii. 12.) These passages signify that students of the
secret doctrine, like the green herb, will spring up during the period
of captivity; that the truth will become recognized and prevail when
Moses cometh again, of whom it is written, "The

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

jaw of truth was in his mouth" (Mal. ii. 1); so that no one was better
able to unfold and expound Divine mysteries than he. When he returns, "a
mist shall go forth from the earth and water the whole face of the
ground" (Gen. ii. 1); that, is. Ad (a mist). shall be taken from Adonai
(Lord) and V and N becoming added to it shall form Adon, master or lord
of the earth, by whom it shall be watered. Then will Israel understand
the full meaning of the secret doctrine. The word Ad, translated in the
targum or Chaldean paraphrase a cloud, designates also him who is
referred to in scripture as "The cloud of the Lord was upon the
tabernacle by day" (Ex. xl. 38). It is by him that the masters of the
secret doctrine and all students of the good law shall be enlightened
and flourish when He cometh again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Symbolisms of Man](zdm019.md)
