[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm091)  [Next](zdm093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

### ABRAHAM'S INITIATION INTO THE LESSER MYSTERIES

SAID Rabbi Simeon: Wherefore on first revealing himself<span
class="margnote">79b</span> to Abraham did the Holy One say unto him,
'Lekh lekha, (Get thee out) when as yet he had not spoken a word to him?
It was that by the numerical value of the letters of these words he
might indicate that when he was a hundred years old <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) , a son should be born unto him. Observe:
everything the Holy One does on earth, is wrought by a mysterious wisdom
and beyond all human comprehension. Abraham at the time of his call was
far from being perfect in his relationship to the Holy One, and
knowledge of divine science; and, in these words first spoken unto him,
allusion is made to the true path and manner of spiritual ascension by
which the soul of man is able to become harmonized and assimilated with
the Divine Being, and this Abraham could not attain unto previous to his
entry into the land of Canaan.

King David experienced the same difficulty ere he could become qualified
to rule. In connection with him it is written, 'And it came to pass
after this, that David enquired of the Lord, saying, 'Shall I go up to
any of the cities of Judah?' And the Lord said unto him, 'Go up,'<span
class="margnote">2 Sam. 2:1</span> and David said 'Whither shall I go
up?' And He said, 'unto Hebron.' As soon as Saul was dead, the kingdom
became David's by right,

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

why, therefore, was he not at once invested with sovereignty over
Israel? By understanding the occult signification of the words of
scripture just quoted, the reason why may be discerned. David could not
merit and qualify himself for the assumption of royalty and pre-eminence
until he had attained to the same degree of spiritual life and esoteric
science as that of the patriarch Abraham, who lay buried in Hebron. Only
by the merit of perfection (telera in the mysteries) could he become
invested with kingly authority. To attain unto this, he was obliged to
live and abide seven years in Hebron in order to qualify himself for the
sovereignty over Israel, similar to Abraham, who was unable to come into
direct covenant with the Holy One until he had entered into the land of
Canaan. <span class="margnote">79b</span>

"Note now what is written, 'And Abraham passed<span class="margnote">Gen
12:6</span> through the land (va-yaaabor)' rather than he marched or
journeyed, indicating the mystery of the Holy Name, the Shemhamphorash
of seventy-two letters, the almost infinite combinations of which form
the signatures impressed upon every living created being and thing. It
is also the synthesis of all other divine names. The same word (yaabor)
is used when it is stated, 'And the Lord passed before him (Moses) and
proclaimed, 'The Lord, the Lord God be merciful and zealous, long
suffering and abundant in goodness and truth.' (Ex. XXXIV. 6), in which
verse is contained the Divine Name implicitly and the seventy-two
letters of which it is composed. In the book of Rabbi Yessa, the Aged,
it is stated that the word (va yaabor) in the verse, 'And Abraham passed
through the land' is also in the words, 'And I will make all my goodness
pass (aaber) before thee' (Ex. XXXIII. 19), and is intended to convey
that the holiness of Palestine proceeds and originates from on high.
Concerning Abraham's journey to Canaan it is further added, 'unto the
place of Sichem,<span class="margnote">Sichem = Shechem</span> unto the
plain of Moreh;' that is, from the impure to the pure part of the Holy
Land. 'And the Canaanite was yet in the land.' These words confirm what
has already been stated, and refer to the evil spirit which after being
cursed, brought maledictions into the world, as it is written, 'Cursed
be Canaan,<span class="margnote">Gen 9:25</span> a servant of servants
shall he be unto his brethren.' 'Cursed art thou above all cattle and
above every beast of the field.'

It was whilst the world was under the rule of the wicked

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

one and had become depraved, that Abraham beginning to live the higher
life, God, as we read, appeared unto him as He had never before revealed
himself to any human being, as the one supreme power and sovereign of
the world. On learning this great truth, until then unknown, Abraham, as
scripture states, 'builded an altar unto the Lord who appeared unto
him,' for the first time causing him to feel assured that the one true
God and Lord of the universe had manifested and made known his existence
unto him. 'And he removed<span class="margnote">79b-80a</span> from
thence unto a mountain (ha-harah)' or the mountain of the 'He,' where
were found all kinds of plants, or in more explicit terms, where existed
a community or sodality composed of various classes and grades of
neophytes (sometimes called plants or little ones). 'And he pitched his
tent (oholoh),' having Bethel on the west and Hai on the east. The word
'oholoh (tent)' is here spelled with a superfluous H, by which is meant
Kaballistically that entering on a course of initiation into the
mysteries of the higher life, he pitched his tent on the sacred mount of
the 'He' and lived there in accordance with the occult teachings
imparted unto him. As soon as he knew that the Holy One was ruler of the
world, he built an altar. In fact, he built two, the first when the Lord
revealed himself unto him, the other when he had attained the science of
the 'Hidden Wisdom' and having passed through the various grades, became
a full initiate. This we gather from the esoteric meaning of the words,
'And Abraham journeyed, going on still towards the south,' until he
reached adeptship, symbolically described as the Holy Land, after taking
the solemn oath and obligation of silence and obedience. After this,
scripture states, 'there was a famine in the land'; that is, 'through
laxity of life and non-observance of the good law, a decline in moral
and spiritual life occurred to such an extent that it is further stated,
'for the famine was grievous in the land.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[343:1](zdm092.htm#fr_9) the numerical value of
‏לך לך‎ = 50 + 50 = 100.--JBH

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXIV. Abraham's Descent into Egypt for Initiation into
the Higher Mysteries](zdm093)
