[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm032)  [Next](zdm034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

### FURTHER KABBALISTIC EXPOSITIONS OF THE SIX DAYS OF CREATION.

SAID Rabbi Abba: "'Nephesh hahaya' (living soul) truly denote the souls
of Israel. They are the children of the Holy One and holy in his sight,
but the souls of the heathen and idolatrous nations whence come they?"
Said Rabbi Eleazar: "They emanate from the left side of the sephirotic
tree of life, which is the side of impurity, and therefore they defile
all that come into contact with them. It is written, 'Let the earth
bring forth the living creature after his kind, and creeping thing and
beast of the earth after his kind' (Gen. 1-24). Wherefore does the word
'lemina' (after his kind) occur twice? It is to confirm what has just
been stated, that the souls of Israel are pure and holy, but the souls
of the heathen being impure and unholy are symbolized by the creeping
thing and beast of the earth, and therefore, like the
[foreskin](errata.htm#23) in circumcision, are cut off. It is written
also, 'Let us make man in<span class="margnote">47a</span> our image and
after our likeness,' indicating that in man exist forces and powers
coming in all directions from on high, which by 'hochma' (wisdom) will
finally attain their culmination within him. The words 'Let us make man'
include and contain the mystery of the male and female principles, of
which every act and function is effected by supreme wisdom. 'In our
image and after our likeness,' denote the dignity of man, as he alone
amongst the animal creation is a complete unit in himself and is thus
able to rule over all creatures below him. 'And God saw everything that
he had made and it was very good.' Here scripture supplies, what was not
said of the second day, the term 'good' not being affirmed of it,
because on the second day death was created. If it be asked, was it
necessary that God should

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

see everything he made before pronouncing it to be good? The<span
class="margnote">47a</span> answer is that God being omniscient knows
all things and to him the past and the future are as the present; the
past with its countless generations of men and the future enfolding
everything that shall be in the course of ages to come, and this is the
meaning involved in the above words, for everything created and made by
God cannot but be good. The scripture adds, 'And it was evening and it
was morning the sixth day.' Why is it that the definite article is
joined to this day and not to the others? Because when the creation of
the world was completed and finished, the union of male and female
principles was established, through the letter H and therefore it is
said, 'The heaven and the earth were finished' (Gen. 2-1), having become
harmonious to each other."

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "It is written, 'How great is thy goodness which
thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee' (Ps. 31-19). Remark, that the
Holy One created and placed man in the world, so that by an upright life
and service he might attain to and enjoy the heavenly light that has
been laid up for righteous souls, of which it is said from the beginning
of the world, 'men have not heard, nor heard by the ear, neither hath
the eye seen Oh God! what thou hast prepared for them that trust in
Thee' (Is. 64-3). How can we attain unto this heavenly light of the
higher life? Only by the study and the knowledge of the secret doctrine,
for he only who meditates therein, conforming and fashioning his life to
its teachings, attains unto it and becomes regarded as though he had
created a world or a new life, as it was by the secret doctrine creation
originated and by it still subsists, as it is written, 'The Lord by
wisdom (hochma) hath founded the earth and established the heavens by
understanding (hinah) (Prov. Ill-19); and further it is said, 'I was
with him as one brought up with him and I was daily his delight,
rejoicing always before him' (Prow. 8-30). These words signify that
whoever makes the study of the secret doctrine his delight contributes
to the welfare and subsistence of the world, for the spirit by which the
Holy One created and still sustains the universe is the same that
operates in the hearts and minds of all true students of the higher
life, as also of young learners. 'How great is Thy goodness' refers to
the special good or blessing the Holy One has reserved for them that
fear Him, and scripture adds, 'Which Thou hast wrought for them that
trust in Thee before

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

children of men.' What is the meaning of the words 'Which Thou hast
wrought?' They refer to the work of creation."

Said Rabbi Abba: "They refer also to the Garden of Eden, the Holy One
planted on earth after the pattern of the celestial paradise, for the
just to dwell therein, and therefore it is written, 'Which Thou hast
wrought for them.' There are, therefore, two paradises, one heavenly,
the other earthly."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "The scripture certainly speaks of a celestial
paradise, and with reference to the words 'before the children or sons
of men,' they mean that those who delighted in the worship and service
of their Lord will dwell therein., The words, 'The heavens and the
earth' denote the written and unwritten or traditional law. 'And all
their host' refer to the expositions and commentaries on them, amounting
in number to seventy. The words, 'were finished' designate the union of
these, the one being complementary to the other. Whilst, 'with all their
hosts or constellations' refer to the divers interpretations of these
laws, as also to things lawful and non-permissible. 'And on the seventh
day God ended his work which he had made,' these words signify the
traditional law, which is the foundation of the world. 'The work which
he has made'; it is not said, 'all his work,' because the written law
which emanated through hochma (wisdom) was not included in it. Therefore
is the term 'seventh day' repeated three times, (1) 'And on the seventh
day God finished,' (2) 'and God rested on the seventh day,' (3) 'and God
blessed the seventh day.' The first has reference to the traditional
law, containing the mysteries of creation, the second, the foundation of
the world. In the book of Rah Yeba, the aged and venerable, this also
refers to the Jubilee and is therefore followed by the words 'from all
his works,' for from the second day everything was produced and brought
forth. The third expression relates to the high priest who blesses all
the world and has the preeminence in all things, as we learn from
tradition that in all offerings the high priest receives the principal
part."<span class="margnote">47a-47b</span>

Said Rabbi Jose, the aged: "The two words, 'seventh day,' denotes the
basis of the world and the middle column of the sephirotic tree of life,
whilst the words, 'and sanctified' show the place of the temple; as it
is written, 'and shew me it and his habitation' (2 Sam. 15-25). Therein
reside and abide all the saints above, and thence comes the sweet
delicious bread which is

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

the delight of the congregation of Israel, as it is written, 'Out of
Asher, his bread shall be fat and be the delight of kings' (Gen, 49-20),
signifying that from Asher<span class="margnote">47b</span> shall come
forth the covenant of peace and the bread of the poor shall become
'lechem panneg' what kings (viz., the congregation of Israel) delight in
as a dainty. It is from this abode on high come all joys and delights
and everything regarded as Holy and sacred in the world, there 'He
hallowed it' (vayikadesh otho), oth here meaning the covenant; 'because
in it He rested, 'therefore, on the seventh day, every creature above
and below rests also, 'from all his work Asher bra Alhim lausoth, which
Alhim created and made.' We know that the injunction 'remember ye' leads
to obedience, that the creative work may become perfected, and the
meaning of these words is that God created the good law that through
study of and obedience to it, man might attain to perfection."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "It is written, 'Who keepeth covenant and mercy with
them that love Him and keep His commandments, to a thousand generations'
(Deuter 7-9). <span class="margnote">Deut. 5:10</span> The words, 'who
keepeth' refer to the congregation of Israel, while 'covenant'
designated the foundation of the world, but 'mercy' here means Abraham.
Thus all the works of God were wrought to be a benefit and blessing to
every one of his creatures, above and below, to all souls, together with
elementals and demons. If it be said these latter are no blessing to the
world, our answer is that every created thing or creature hath its
proper use, and this is so with elementals and demons, for they act as
the executors of karmic law on criminals and wrong doers and
transgressors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.](zdm034)
