[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm079)  [Next](zdm081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GILGAL OR REVOLUTION ANIMARUM.

"Observe when the Holy One shall raise the dead he will form bodies for
them similar to what they were incarnated in during their earthly
existence, whether they lived in a foreign country or in the Holy Land;
for in every body there exists a mysterious bone, like unto a seed
hidden in the earth, and by it the body will be formed anew at the day
of resurrection. It will be to it, what leaven is to bread and by it the
Holy One will reconstitute the whole body, but only those who are raised
again out of the Holy land, as it is written, 'Prophesy and say unto
them, thus saith the Lord God, behold oh my people, I will open your
graves and cause you to come up out of your graves and bring you into
the land of Israel' (Ez. XXXVII. 12). At the time of the resurrection
their bodies reformed and renewed will [revolve](errata.htm#56.md) under
the earth and appear in the Holy Land in order that they may be
incarnated again by their souls, scripture states, "And I will put my
spirit in you and ye shall live and I shall place you in your own land."
Thus will all bodies be reanimated by their souls, excepting those who
have defiled themselves and corrupted the earth by the sin of
self-pollution, for of them is written as of the antediluvians, 'They

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

were destroyed from off the face of the earth.' Though amongst the
doctors and sages of ancient times there have been great disputes and
differences of opinion respecting the exact meaning of the word
va-imahou (and they were destroyed or effaced from), yet by its use, it
is certain that scripture teaches such sinners shall never rise again,
the elements composing their lower selves being dissolved <span
class="margnote">69a</span> and consumed in the primal fire out of which
they were first evolved, equivalent to being effaced and blotted out of
the book of life."<span class="margnote">Ps. 69:28</span>

Rabbi Simeon, in replying to these observations of Rabbi Abba, said: "It
is certain that the antediluvians will have no part in the life to come,
as it is written of them, 'they were destroyed from the earth'; this
word here signifying the future life, as in the words 'they shall
inherit the earth forever' (Is. LX. 21). And even if they do appear at
the judgment day, it is written of them, 'and many of those that sleep
in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting life and some
to everlasting shame and punishment' (Dan. XII. 2). The difference of
opinion that exists arises from the question whether or not the unjust
will ever rise again in the judgment day. On all points the initiates of
the Secret Doctrine are in perfect accord."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII. And Every Living Substance Was Destroyed. .
.](zdm081.md)
