[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm018)  [Next](zdm020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SYMBOLISMS OF MAN.

"And the Lord God formed man" (Gen. ii. 7), that is, Israel. Here the
word vayitzer (formed) is written with two yods or I's, indicating that
the Holy One formed him with two natures, the higher and lower self; the
one divine, the other earthly, and impressed upon his form the divine
name, I V I, expressed by the two eyes and the nose between them, thus:
I. The numerical value of these letters is 26, which is also that of the
divine name, Jehovah.<span class="margnote">25b-26a</span>

It is on this account that scripture saith, "From the top of the rocks I
shall see Him" (Num. xxiii. 9). The word zurim (rocks) denotes also
forms, so that Balaam who uttered these words, meant that in viewing the
form of Israel, he beheld and recognized the divine name.

Another comparison of Israel with this Divine name is in the two tables
of stone containing the law and representing two I's, the letter V
symbolizing what is written on them. Man also in himself represents the
union and blending together of the higher and lower Shekinas, symbolized
by the repeating of the Shema, morning and evening.

The union of the two natures in man is also referred to in the words,
"Bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh" (Gen. ii. 23). We also read that
God planted man, that is, Israel, in the sacred garden of Eden, as it is
written, "And the Lord God took the man and put him in the garden" (Gen.
ii. 15). Jehovah Alhim, the Lord God; that is, the heavenly father and
mother; "garden," the lower Shekina; "in Eden," the heavenly mother;

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the man," the
middle column of the sephirotic tree; from which was formed his wife,
and who being his delight should never be separated from him.

It was then that the Holy One planted Israel, who are the holy branches
of the world, or, in other words, a race purer and better than those
that had formerly existed; as it is written, "The branch of my planting,
the work of my hands, that I may be glorified" (Is. Ix. 21). "And out of
the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the
sight and good for food" (Gen. ii. 9). "The Lord God denoting the
celestial father and mother; "every tree that is pleasant to the sight,"
the Just; and "good for food," the middle column consisting of the
sephiroth kether, tiphereth, yesod, etc., and from which proceed those
stores of food by which the righteous are sustained and which, when
mankind becomes purified and enlightened, will contribute to the life of
the world.<span class="margnote">26a</span> Then will every one take of
the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and eat and live for ever
more.<span class="margnote">Gen. 3:22</span>

The tree of the knowledge of good and evil symbolizes those whose
intellectual faculties are directed only to phenomenal objects that can
be seen and handled, and by whom the presence and operation of the
Shekina in nature, in the life of nations and in the soul of man
himself, are unrecognized and ignored; and thus it will be until the
times of error and darkness pass away; then will they also become
proselytes of the divine life of whom it will be said: "The Lord alone
is their leader and there is no strange god in their midst" (Deuter.
xxxii. 12); and, human nature transformed and enlightened and purified,
mankind will become as a tree that, in its stately form and beauty, is
pleasant to the sight. The tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil
occasioned Israel to fall into error which they should have avoided and
remembered the divine command admonishing them to "Eat not of the tree"
of Good and Evil, on pain and penalty of spiritual death involving loss
of union with the Divine, without which there can be no interior
enlightenment, no spiritual development. This command with its twice
repeated warning, "thou shalt die, thou shalt die," refers also to the
children of Israel who endured two great calamities, the destruction of
the first and second temples, and the loss of the higher and lower
Shekina or manifestation of the Divine presence in their midst, as
expressed and typified in the words, "And the river shall be dried up"
(Ia. xix. 5),

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

and which then became resolved in Ain Soph, the Boundless One, whence it
emanated at first.

This aridity or state of dryness will not however continue always, for
when Israel comes out of captivity then will the river that was dried up
and wasted go forth again out of Eden to water the garden, and divine
knowledge cover the earth as the waters cover the seas.

This recurrence and reappearance of the Divine Presence amongst mankind
is mystically referred to in the words, "Then shalt thou delight thyself
in the Lord" (Is. lviii. 14).<span class="margnote">26a-26b</span> The
word anag (delight or joy) in this passage of scripture is composed of
the initial letters of "Eden," Nahar (a river), and Gan (a garden.) Then
also shall be accomplished and fulfilled the words of scripture: "Then
Moses and the children of Israel shall sing" (not sang, as generally
translated--Ex. xv. 1) for error and idolatry symbolized by
[Pharaoh](errata.htm#11.md) and his hosts will he destroyed and pass away
forever. Furthermore, we read, "the river that went forth out of Eden to
water the ground was parted and became into four heads" (Gen. ii. 10).
These four heads or channels are symbolized on the sephirotic tree by
chesed (mercy) which forms the right arm, teaching that he who desires
to become wise should always turn himself to the south, the quarter
presided over by Michael and his hosts, along with Judah and two other
tribes of Israel, whilst he who prays for wealth should turn towards the
north where is stationed Gabriel with his hosts, along with Dan and two
other tribes.. The third channel is symbolized by Netzach (triumph or
victory), the right limb of the sephirotic tree presided over by Nuriel
with his hosts, along with Reuben and two other tribes. The left limb is
Hod (splendor). It is to this sephira that, what is said of Jacob, is
applied, "And he halted upon his thigh (Gen. xxxii. 31). The fourth head
is presided over by Raphael and his hosts, along with Ephraim and two
other tribes. The mission and work of this ruler is the healing and
assuagement of the afflictions of the captivity.

The words, "and became parted into four heads" refer also to four
individuals who gained entrance into the mysterious garden of Eden, or
Paradise. The first entered it by the channel Pishon, that is, "Pishoneh
halakhoth" (the mouth that teaches the good law). The second, by Gihon
(the place where is buried he who creepeth on his belly--Levit. xl. 42).
It is under the presidency of Gabriel whose name is composed of the
words

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gebra, al (divine
man), and who is alluded to in the words,<span
class="margnote">26b</span> "the man who walks on a hidden path and whom
God has covered as with a veil" (Job. iii. 23), and also in the
following passage: "No man knoweth unto this day the place of his
sepulchre" (Deuter. xxxiv. 6); the esoteric signification of which is
understood only by those initiated in the secret doctrine. The third
individual entered by the channel called Hiddekel or Had qal (the
adapting word), the third part of the secret doctrine imparted to
initiates and known as Darash (exposition). The fourth entered by
Phrath, the channels through which flows the principle of fecundity. Ben
Zoma and Ben Azai, who penetrated into and attained to the knowledge of
the secret doctrine concealed within its esoteric covering, by their
wrong use of it found it a curse instead of a blessing, whilst to Rabbi
Akiba it became a blessing and a source of joy, tranquillity and power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Strange Visitor](zdm020.md)
