[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm065)  [Next](zdm067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "THE MYSTERY OF THE BOW IN THE CLOUD."

"It is written, and Alhim said, This is the token of the covenant which
I make between me and you and every living creation that is with you for
perpetual generations, I do set (nathati) my bow in the cloud! (Gen. IX.
12. 13). The word '*nathati*' here refers to the past, as the bow from
the days of Adam had always been witnessed in the clouds. In his further
comments on these words Rabbi Simeon said: 'In the vision of Ezechiel we
read, "And above the firmament that was over their heads, was the
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone" (Ez. I.
21)<span class="margnote">Ez. 1:26</span>. Preceding these words,
scripture states, 'I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of
great waters, as the voice of Shaddai (Almighty), the voice of speech as
the noise of a host, when they stood they let down their wings.' We have
here given a description of the four celestial cherubic beings by whom
the firmament is supported. They were all joined together by their wings
which covered their forms. When they extended their wings, they uttered
in far resounding tones hymns of praise to the glory of God, that
reverberated throughout the universe incessantly. The burthen of their
song was, 'The Lord hath made known his salvation, his righteousness
hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen' (Ps. XCVIII. 2). It
is also stated that when they moved, there was heard a sound as of a
great host<span class="margnote">Ez. 1:24</span> on the march, like that
of

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

the celestial angelic host when their legions with united voice, utter
their hymns of praise to the Holy One, saying, 'Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord of Hosts, all the earth is full of his glory' (Is. VI. 3). As the
four cherubic angels of the heavenly chariot turn to the four quarters
of the world, their cry is still the same, 'Holy! holy! holy!' Above
them is the glittering firmament, whose cardinal quarters reflect the
image of each of their forms when turned towards them, as also the
colors peculiar to each of them. They are the forms of a lion, an ox, an
eagle and a man. In three of these, the human countenance is so
prominent, that the lion resembles a lion man and so with the two
others, that are termed the eagle man, the ox man, and thus as
scripture<span class="margnote">71b</span> states, 'They four had the
face of a man.'<span class="margnote">Ez. 1:10</span> As the firmament
was above them it not only reflected their forms but also the colors
peculiar to each of them and that correspond to the four letters of the
sacred name I. H. V. H. and visible to man, as green, red, white and
blue, and which when refracted form twelve different shades and hues,
and therefore it is stated, 'as the appearance of the bow that is in the
cloud, in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the likeness of the
glory of the Lord' (Ez. I. 28). This then is the mystical meaning of the
words, 'I do set my bow in the cloud.' The term 'my bow' has the same
signification as that which was said of Joseph. 'This bow abode in
strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob, from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel'
(Gen. XLIX. 24). As Joseph was a just man, it is said of him, 'He placed
his bow in God', that is the covenant, symbolizing equally the bow and
the Only Just One, these two signifying both one and the same thing.
Noah being also a just man, the covenant made with him was symbolized by
the bow and the arms of his hands were made strong (vayapozow). This
word refers to the light proceeding from the bow of the covenant which
is the source of joy and happiness to all the world and of which it is
written, 'More to be desired is it than gold, yet than much fine gold,
sweeter also than honey and the honey comb' (Ps. XIX. 10). This light
was the cause of Joseph's mental and spiritual illumination, and
therefore is he known as and termed, 'Joseph the upright!' It is termed
the bow of the covenant, as the ray in the how though refracted in three
others is one way, so is the celestial light reflected downward by the
firmament supported by the four cherubic forms of the heavenly or divine
chariot. Therefore

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

is it forbidden to gaze at the rainbow that appears in the heaven
because thereby the Schekina of which it is an image is profaned. As the
great archangels standing in presence of the Holy One<span
class="margnote">71b-72a</span> bow their heads, not daring to regard
the divine majesty, so on the appearance of the bow in the heavens ought
we to bend ourselves with feelings of reverence and worship of the
Divine Being. When it appears, the earth feels assured that the lost
harmony between the celestial and terrestrial worlds has been restored.
We have already observed that it consists of a ray of light composed of
three other rays blended and conjoined as one, forming a mystery only
dimly perceptible to initiates of the hidden wisdom. It is further
added, 'and above the firmament that was over their heads was the
likeness of a throne as of the appearance of a sapphire stone' (Ez. I.
26). This stone is the central point (shethiya) of the whole world and
is the basis of the Holy of Holies in the sanctuary at Jerusalem. This
foundation stone is the sacred celestial throne placed above the four
cherubic beings whose forms are engraved on the four sides of the
heavenly or divine chariot and symbolized the traditional law. 'And upon
the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man upon it,'
symbolizes of the written law. Hence we conclude it is to be observed
and regarded as higher and superior to the traditional. This throne
being the foundation stone, Jacob who is the image of the man beheld in
vision by the prophetic seer Ezechiel, placed his head upon it ere he
went to sleep in Bethel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVIII. Rabbi Jehuda's Discussion with the Merchant, on
Jacob's Pillar](zdm067)
