[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm063)  [Next](zdm065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARIOUS KABBALISTIC EXPOSITIONS OF BIBLICAL TEXTS.

Said Rabbi Simeon: "We read, 'And God said unto Noah, enter thou and all
thy house into the ark.' Wherefore in the narrative of the deluge is the
divine name of Alhim used throughout, except in this particular passage
in which the sacred

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

name I H V H is found. The explanation is this. It is not in accordance
with the rules and custom of good society for a wife to receive a guest
into her home without the consent and permission of her husband, so Noah
though desirous to enter into the ark, it was first of all necessary
that the husband of the ark, designated here by the Holy Name,
representing divine goodness, should give Noah authority and permission
to do so, and not before this did he enter the ark; and it is added,
'For thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation,' from
which words we infer that no one should ever be received as a guest in a
house whose character is blemished and has a stain upon it."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "We find written in scripture, Ps. xxiv. 1, 'A psalm
of David. The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof, the world and
they dwell therein.' We know from tradition that wherever the name David
occurs in the psalms, that it was composed by him himself, but whenever
it precedes a psalm it was composed and written by the aid of the Holy
Spirit's influence. The words, 'The earth is the Lord's and the fulness
thereof' refer to the land of Israel which is called the Holy Land,
whilst 'the fulness thereof' signifies the Schekina, as it is<span
class="margnote">76a</span> written 'for the glory of the Lord filled
[ ](errata.htm#45) the houses of God.' (1 Kings v. 11) Why in this
passage is the word mla (full) in place of mile (filled). Thereby is
meant that the Schekina was as the light of the moon at its full. The
Schekina is full of heavenly blessings as a treasure house is with
jewels and gold so long as it remains and abides in the land of Israel
which belongs unto the Lord. According to another exposition these words
refer to heaven on high wherein the Lord delights to dwell, but 'the
fulness (oumloah) thereof' are the souls of the righteous filled with
the principle of justice, the divine attribute that sustains the
universe. Should it however be said, 'Is the earth sustained only by a
single pillar?' observe what is written. 'For He lath founded it upon
the seas (yammim) and established it upon the floods or rivers
(recharoth).' He here refers to the Holy One, of whom it is written, 'It
is He that hath made us.' (Ps. c. 3). 'For He looketh to the ends of the
earth and seeth under the whole heavens' (Job xxviii. 24). These words
also designate the seven pillars or columns upon which the world stands
and when these columns fill the earth then, as scripture states, the
earth is said to be full; that is, when the number of the just
increases, the earth becomes fertile and fruitful. When however they are
outnumbered by the wicked then as it is written, 'The waters fail

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

from the sea, and the flood decayeth and drieth up' (Job xiv. 11).<span
class="margnote">67a</span> 'The waters fail from the sea' signify the
Holy land watered by rivers of life from on high, but the 'stream
(naahr) decayeth and drieth up' refer to the column of justice and
righteousness repaired in the Holy Land in order to enlighten it and
have the same meaning as the words, 'The righteous perisheth and no man
layeth it to heart.'" (Is. lvii. 1.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVI. The Divine Lehaerot On Ezechiel's Visions.](zdm065)
