[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm105)  [Next](zdm107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span class="margnote">93b</span>

"I WOULD like," said the host, "each one of you to give forth, according
as he is able, some new idea or thought relative to the secret
doctrine."

Then spake one of the guests and said: "It is written, 'Praise ye the
Lord, for the avenging (biproa peraoth) of Israel when the people
willingly offered themselves' ( Jud. V. 2). Wherefore did Deborah and
Barak begin this song with these words? We learn from tradition that the
world stands and is established only on the divine covenant. As long as
Israel continues to obey and conform to it by the rite of circumcision
it will abide stable, but if it should, be which God forbid, that Israel
neglect their duty and ignore the covenant, then the blessings accruing
from the observance of it will cease coming into the world. Observe, no
other nation or people will ever rule over Israel so long as it abides
true and faithful to the covenant. What mean these words,
'[Faithful](errata.htm#79) to the covenant?' They indicate that when the
command respecting the rite attached to the covenant is ignored, or in
other words, when the worship of God is forsaken as was the case in the
time of Deborah, as it is written, 'And the children of Israel did evil
in the sight of the Lord and served Baalim and He delivered them into
the hands of Sisera' (Jud. IV. 2); the meaning of these words is that
they forsook God; that is, they neglected to perform the initiatory rite
attached to the covenant which their forefathers, the patriarchs, had
inaugurated and performed. When Deborah, however, appeared, she brought
them to a sense of their infidelity towards God, so that they willingly
and of their own accord (behithnadeb) returned to the observance of the
law respecting the

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'persia' <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) and found that obedience brought them
blessings, together with overthrow and defeat of their enemies. We also
learn from tradition that the Holy One said unto Joshua, 'The children
of Israel are impure, they have ceased obeying<span
class="margnote">93b</span> the law respecting 'persia' and so have not
entered into the covenant, and thou wishest to lead them into the holy
land and overthrow their enemies, go and circumcise the children of
Israel again.' And not until they had conformed to this injunction were
they able to enter the Promised Land and conquer their foes. The same
thing occurred when Deborah appeared; and when by
[obedience](errata.htm#80) they returned to the path of duty, victory
attended their arms and blessings were again showered upon them and the
world. This is why it is written, 'biproa peraoth' and by obeying the
law respecting it willingly and of their own accord, they were able to
say, 'barcou Iehovah,' praise for the renewal of his blessings."

Said another guest: "It is written, 'And it came to pass as Moses was
journeying, the Lord met him in the inn and sought to kill him' (Ex. IV.
24). The question may here b asked, kill whom? Moses or his son. Moses
most certainly, for the Holy One had said unto him: 'Thou art going to
bring forth Israel out of Egypt and vanquish a great king and ruler, yet
thou forgettest and neglectest to circumcise thy own son.' For this
gross neglect on his part, he [sought to](errata.htm#81) kill him. Now
we learn from tradition that the archangel Gabriel descended at this
moment, enveloped in flaming fire to consume Moses and a serpent leaped
out of it to destroy him. But why a serpent? The Holy One had said to
Moses: 'Thou intendest to go and kill a mighty and powerful despot
(pharaoh) and hast not circumcised thy son.' Then made he a sign to the
serpent to kill him. At that moment Zepporah, his wife, appeared and,
taking the boy, performed the rite at once, when the
[serpent](errata.htm#82) let go his hold on Moses, as it is written,
'Then Zepporah took a sharp stone (tzour) and circumcised the son' (Ex.
IV. 25). What does the word 'tzour' here denote? A remedy, an antidote,
which was the rite of circumcision, to the performance of which she was
impelled by an inner inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and thus saved the
life of her husband."

Then spake another guest and said: "It is written, 'And Joseph said unto
his brethren, come near me, I pray you' (Gen. XLV. 4); and they came
near. Wherefore spake Joseph

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

thus, as his brethren were already near him? It was because when he said
unto them, 'I am Joseph your brother' they became filled with amaze and
astonishment, seeing him head ruler of Egypt. Then said Joseph: "This is
the cause of my elevation to the high position I occupy," and manifested
the sign of the covenant he bore upon him. From this we infer that
success and prosperity in life [accrue](errata.htm#83) sooner or later
to everyone who observes the rite of the covenant and keeps himself pure
and chaste. We are confirmed in. this by the example of Boaz, concerning
whom we read, 'As the Lord liveth, lie down until the morning' (Ruth
III. 13). The tempter wished to lead Boaz into sin; but faithful and
true to his oath, he resisted the temptation and thus kept pure the sign
of the covenant. Therefore, he was honored in giving birth to those
whose offspring became kings and rulers over all other kings, and also
of becoming the ancestral progenitor of King Messiah who is called by
the name of the Holy One.

Another guest spake and said: "It is written, 'Though a host should
encamp against me, my heart shall not fear, though war should rise
against me, in this (bezoth) will I be confident' (Ps. XXVII. 3). The
word "bezoth" here denotes the sign of the covenant a man bears here
below as on high, and this is why David said, 'In this will I be
confident.' It is written, 'Zoth is the sign of the covenant' (Gen. IX.
12). 'Zoth is my covenant.' These zoths refer to one and the same sign
of the divine life. We learn from tradition that ze, male, and zoth,
female, are one and never separate. If it be said, then everyone,
whether bearing the mark of the covenant or not, enjoys the blessings of
it. Why should not everyone, as well as David, say the same words? But
David was united with and enjoyed the presence of the Schekina, of which
he was an image by virtue of the royal crown or diadem he wore. Observe,
it was owing to his failure in preserving zoth in all its purity, that
the kingdom was taken from him for a period, as tradition states. This
zoth is impressed on the celestial kingdom as on Jerusalem the Holy
City. When David by his sin in connection with Bathsheba transgressed
against it, a voice from on high called unto him and said, 'Thou shalt
reap the fruit of thy deeds. Thou shalt be ejected out of Jerusalem and
the kingdom shall be taker from thee.' We learn this from the words of
scripture, 'Behold,

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will raise up
evil against thee out of thine own house' (2 Sam. XII. II). Thus was
David punished for breaking the covenant by his unchastity; and, as it
was with him, so will it be with all others who likewise transgress
against it."

Another guest spake and said: "It is written, 'Unless the Lord had been
my help, my son would have dwelt in silence (duma)' (Ps. XCIV. 17).
Through what are the children of Israel blessed that they descend not
into Gehenna and come under the power of the angel Duma like other
idolatrous nations' Because, as tradition informs us, when a man leaves
the world, hosts of angels, the executors of justice, approach him, but
on perceiving the sacred sign or token of the covenant he bears on him,
they leave him and trouble not to deliver him unto the hands of Duma who
sentences men to descend into Gehenna, the fate and doom of all those
who are delivered into his power. The man who by chastity preserves
himself pure, fears no judgment for he is united with the name of the
Holy One. David failed to do this and in consequence lost his kingdom
and was driven out of Jerusalem and feared greatly that the avenging
angels would consign him into the hands of Duma, which would have meant
for him eternal death (the annihilation of the soul through absolute
separation from the higher self). This fear and terror abode with him
until Nathan, the prophet,<span class="margnote">94a</span> announced
unto him the good news, 'The Lord hath taken away thy sin so thou shalt
not die.'<span class="margnote">2 Sam. 12:13</span> Then was it that
David said, 'If the Lord had not been my help, my soul would have dwelt
in hell.'"

Another guest spake and said: "'If I shall find favor in the eves of the
Lord, he will bring me again and make me to sec his sign (otho) and his
tabernacle' (2 Sam. XV. 25). Who can see the Holy One? Tradition states
that when judgment was decreed and passed upon David, he knew it was
owing to his sin in violating the sign of the covenant, for punishment
attends everyone who transgresses against it and observes not its
obligatory duties, which, if not performed, no one is accounted just, if
he keep not himself pure and chaste in deed and thought. Knowing this,
David prayed, 'If I find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will answer
me and make me to see his sign (otho) and tabernacle,' or as these words
may be paraphrased, God grant me to see his holy token, for I tremble
and fear because I have lost

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

mine. What is meant by 'the token of God?' It denotes the sovereignty of
Israel and Jerusalem. Nov he who lives unchastely forfeits the mark or
token of God, that is. the divine life in the soul."

Another guest spake and said: "It is written, 'And in my flesh shall I
see my God, Eloha' (Job XIX. 26). What is meant by this expression, 'in
my flesh'? Why said he not, rather, 'in myself'? If he really said 'in
my flesh,' what did he mean? Job here alludes to the flesh which
scriptures mentions, 'The holy flesh they have soiled' (yaabrou) (Jer.
XI. 15), and also, 'My covenant shall be in your flesh for an
everlasting covenant' (Gen. XVII. 13). We are taught whenever a man
bears this token on him, he sees the Holy One himself, and when this
occurs it is through the unification of the lower and higher selves,
resulting in the Beatific Vision. If, however, he does not preserve
purity of thought and act, scriptures states, this union ceases and
becomes broken, and the soul or lower self perishes, going back and
becoming resolved into its original elements out of which it has been
prepared and built up, like as the material body returns to the dust out
of which it has been formed; and therefore it is written, 'They lose the
breath divine (minishmath Eloha).' The divine Schekina never separates
from one who by his pure life and faithful obedience observed the good
law, or covenant. If it be asked, when does the holy Spirit or divine
life manifest itself in a man? it is when the union we have just
mentioned is effected. It is the true, the divine, marriage when they
twain become one flesh. From tradition we learn why the letters V and H
are placed together in their alphabetical order. Vau being the symbol of
the male and He that of the female principle, which are united and
operate in combination with each other, as husband and wife, and from
one becoming invested with a nimbus or covering of divine light that
emanates from the male principle and known in scripture as grace
(chesed), as it is written, 'The goodness (chesed) of God endureth
continually' (Ps. LII. 1). This ray of divine light comes through the
[Sephira](errata.htm#84) "supreme Wisdom" and penetrates the male
principle, which is communicated to the female. Another tradition states
that the name Aloha is separable into, al, V and H, al designating the
light of wisdom, V the male principle and H the female principle, and
their totality form Aloha.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The holy soul or
higher self, as it has been stated, is in intimate relationship with the
nephesh or soul only so long as it keep itself pure and preserve intact
the holy covenant, and therefore it is written, 'In my flesh shall I see
God' (Aloha) (Job XIX. 26). A pure life, a pure soul, are reciprocal and
convertible terms and never separated. Happy the lot of those who,
attached to the Holy One, live the divine life, both in this world and
the world to come. Of them it is written, 'Ye who have become joined
unto the Lord your God are alive everyone of you this day' (Deuter. IV.
2). For theirs is the one true and divine life that they live."

After the guest had ceased speaking, Rabbi Abba addressed them thus:
"How is it," said he, "that so mentally and spiritually enlightened, you
are content to reside and live in such an obscure place, and are so
versed in the teachings of the secret doctrine?"

They answered and said: "When the young birds leave their nests they
know not whither to go, as it is written, 'As a bird wandereth from its
nest so is a man that [wandereth](errata.htm#85) from his place' (Prov.
XXVII. 9). Now this place is our nest and is suitably adapted for study
of the secret doctrine. During the first part of the night we sleep. The
other part we devote to study. When daybreak begins, the refreshing
morning breezes and the light of the sun so invigorates us that we apply
ourselves with renewed energy to meditation, and readily assimilate,
digest and understand the teachings that come into our minds. A great
calamity once happened in this place and a great many of illustrious and
learned teachers perished, and which they might have escaped but for
their neglect [in](errata.htm#86) the study of the secret doctrine. Made
wise from their example and fate, we study assiduously by day and night,
preferring to remain here because its situation is highly favorable and
helpful to a student of life. He who leaves it would be as foolish as he
who takes away his own life."

On hearing these words, Rabbi Abba raised his hands and blessed them.
They were all sitting together and when day began to dawn, it was said
to the young people who were there, "Go out and see if it is daybreak,
and if it be so, then let each one address something to our excellent
and esteemed guest, Rabbi Abba, and some remarks on the secret
doctrine."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[378:1](zdm106.htm#fr_10) ‏פרהסיא‎, from ‏פרס‎,
to declare openly--JBH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCVIII.](zdm107)
