[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm104)  [Next](zdm106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

### A FEAST OF THE CIRCUMCISION.

SAID Rabbi Abba: "Scripture states, 'All thy people are<span
class="margnote">93a</span> righteous.' These words have been explained
by the students initiates. Why are thy people called righteous? Were all
the children of Israel upright and just? Were there not amongst them
sinners and transgressors against the commandments of the law? Certainly
there were. But let us learn from tradition what it teaches us
respecting the esoteric meaning of these words. Blessed the lot of
Israel who offer up sacrifices. The will of the Holy One is that they
should sacrifice their sons to him on the eighth day after birth, from
which time and after they become recipients of the good part that will
never be taken from them, as it is written, 'The righteous One is the
foundation of the world' (Troy. X. 25). When the rite of the covenant is
duly performed, children enter into the blessing of the Holy One and are
then accounted just and righteous, and therefore it is written of them,
'They shall inherit the land forever,' and also, 'Open unto me the gates
of the righteous (zadecq) one that I may enter in; and further, 'This is
the gate of the Lord, and the righteous shall enter therein' Ps. CXVIII.
20). Those who are circumcised are therefore termed righteous, and as we
read, 'They shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting'
(Is. LX. 21),<span class="margnote">Ps. 37:39</span> which the Holy One
has planted in the garden of Eden. Now the earth below is one of these
plants, and therefore the children of Israel have a good part in the
world to come and, as just stated, shall inherit the land

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

forever. The esoteric meaning of the word "forever" has already been
explained. The letter He (H) is not found in<span class="margnote">93a,
86b</span> the name of Abraham until after his circumcision, when from
Abram it was changed to Abraham. Then it was that the Schekina became
attached to and abode with him, and therefore it is written, 'These are
the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were created.'
Now from tradition we are informed that the word 'behibaram' (when they
were created) should be read, 'behe baram' (by or through Abraham). It
may be objected, how can it be said the heavens and the earth were
created by Abraham, who corresponds to the Sephir Hesed (mercy) on the
Tree of Life, since we know also from tradition that the word
'belubaram' signifies that the heavens and the earth were created by the
Schekina, of which the letter H is the symbol? Our reply is that these
two traditions are not really contradictory to each other, but refer and
amount to the same thing."

Said Rabbi Jacob to his father, Rabbi Abba:<span class="margnote">from
"Said Rabbi Jacob" to "As a token of his covenant" (next paragraph)
omitted in Soncino</span> "The letter H in 'behibaram' is found written
smaller in size than the other letters composing the word, but in the
word halayehorah, which is found beginning the verse, 'Do ye thus
requite the Lord, oh foolish people and unwise' (Deuter. XXXII. 6)., it
is written larger than the other letters in the
[Pentateuch](errata.htm#78). What is the reason of this difference
between the two H's?"

Said Rabbi Abba: "The first H denotes that degree of divine life within
the soul or lower self, that corresponds in signification with the
sabbatical year that symbolizes it; the second larger H, that heavenly
state of which the Jubilee is the symbol. Now, though the moon is at one
time new and at another full, yet it is always one and the same
notwithstanding its various phases, so is it with the mysterious
Schekina that is distinguished by the smaller or larger letter H.
Blessed is the lot of Israel in whom the Holy One delights more than any
of her nation or people. As a token of his covenant with them, they
perform the rite of circumcision, which whoever bears it shall never
enter into Gehenna, for if he lives a chaste life, he will never be
overcome by temptation nor break the vow taken in the name of the
heavenly king. When a parent arranges and prepares for his son to enter
into the covenant of circumcision, the Holy One summons all his
celestial angels and says, 'Observe the child I have created in the
world.' Then the prophet Elijah immediately

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

descends at the time of the ceremony and takes the<span
class="margnote">93a-93b</span> seat that has been placed apart for him
and which the father is bound by law to declare at the same time, 'This
seat is for Elijah the prophet.' Otherwise, the prophet refrains from
taking it and forthwith ascends and testifies before the Holy One of
what has occurred. Observe that at first the scriptures state, 'And the
Lord came unto him and said, 'What doest thou here, Elijah?' And Elijah
answered and said, 'I have been very zealous for the Lord God of hosts,
because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant a,' (1 Kings
XIX. 9-10). Then said God unto him, 'I swear by thy life that wherever
and whenever my children shall practice and obey my covenant, there
shalt thou be present and thy mouth which now testifies that the
children of Israel have forsaken my covenant, shall also testify when
they keep it.' We are also taught by tradition that Elijah was punished
for making himself the accuser of God's children."

Thus they continued their studies in the secret doctrine until the day
began to dawn, when Rabbi Abba and his son prepared to go their journey.
Then spake the inn-keeper and said: "Ere you leave us, finish your
remarks on the subject on which you have discoursed." On asking him what
subject he meant, he answered: "Tomorrow you will behold and come into
the presence of the Master who will be present here. It is the earnest
desire and wish of my wife that you stay with us, as our son who has
just been born unto us will be circumcised tomorrow."

Said Rabbi Abba: "The wish is a command, and we shall rejoice in seeing
the Schekina and will postpone our departure." They stayed until the
following night, when there was a gathering of all the friends of the
host, who spent the time in the study of the secret doctrine, and no one
slept that night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCVII.](zdm106)
