[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm102)  [Next](zdm104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ON THE STUDY OF THE SECRET DOCTRINE.

Said Rabbi Jose: "We read, 'And Abraham was ninety-nine years old' (Gen.
XVII. 1), and also, 'Thy people are all righteous, they shall inherit
the land forever' (Is. LX. 21). Blessed is Israel above every other
people, for the Holy One calleth them righteous. We learn by
tradition<span class="margnote">92a</span> that there are a hundred and
twenty-eight thousand winged messengers who fly throughout the world,
listening to the cry of sorrow and the voice of joy or pain and
suffering, proceeding from man and beast and bird, all of which with
their prayers are gathered and borne by these angelic beings up before
their lord, who judges accordingly as intimated by the words, 'Because a
bird of the air shall carry the voice and that which hath wings shall
tell the matter' (Eccles. X. 20). When are the judgments resulting from
these voices and cries and prayers executed and carried out?"

Said Rabbi Hiya: "When a man falls asleep, his nechama or higher self
leaves him and, ascending on high, gives account of his deeds and acts
and words; therefore is it written, 'Keep the doors of thy mouth even
from her who sleepeth near thee' (Mich. VII. 5), alluding to the soul of
man."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "Every deed, act or word a man speaks or does, the
higher self or 'neshama' has to give an account of it. It was the
teaching of Rabbi Eleazar, that ere the evening begins with the setting
of the sun, the angels or mighty ones of the signs of the zodiac, close
the gates of its constellations that have been open during the day. Then

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

the voice of a herald cries aloud: Assemble and [gather](errata.htm#76.md)
yourselves together! As they ascend in silence on high, those who gather
up the world cries and prayers descend and go on their mission through
the world. When the moon begins to shed her light upon the earth, these
winged messengers sound their trumpets in unison and give forth a sound
as the shout of great joy. They blow them again when a plaintive sound
is heard and then presently myriads of angelic beings begin chanting
hymns and praises before their Lord and Master, after which the judgment
of the world commences. Then it is when we sleep, our higher selves quit
us and give in their account of us and by the grace and goodness of the
Holy One are ordered to return and come back again to us, even when we
have done and said things we ought not to have done. After midnight when
the cock crows and birds begin to waken up, a wind from the northwest
commences to<span class="margnote">92a-92b</span> blow, which is met by
a current from the south. Then it is that the Holy One delights himself
in the souls of the just in the garden of the heavenly Eden. Happy and
blessed is he whose delight is to rise and study and meditate on the
Secret Doctrine, for then the Holy One with all the souls of the just
made perfect, listen and attend to his voice, as it is written, 'Thou
who dwellest in the gardens, thy companions listen to thy voice, cause
me to hear it' (Cant. VIII. 13). More than this, the Holy One surrounds
him who rises at midnight for study with an aura of light (chesed) to
keep and protect him whilst on earth, so that angels above and below
become his guardians, as it is written, The Lord will command his loving
kindness in the day time and in the night season, his song shall be with
me' (Ps. XLII. 9)."

Said Rabbi Hezekiah: "Everyone who, rising at midnight, studies and
meditates on the secret doctrine enjoys a lasting (thader) portion in
the world to come."

"What," said Rabbi Jose, "does the word 'thader' mean?" Said Rabbi
Hezekiah: "Hear what I have been taught. Every midnight when the Holy
One enters the garden of Eden, all its plants (the souls of the Just)
are then refreshed by the water of the river Qedumim, known as the
beautiful stream" (nahaladanim) that flows through the universe, and he
who studies the secret doctrine at midnight comes into relationship and
communion with the souls of the just made

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

perfect on high, and finds himself refreshed and strengthened for as
soon as they hear his voice, they are filled with great delight and
impart to him the water of life by which they are themselves refreshed
and which continually flows forth from under the throne of God on high.
This being so, is the<span class="margnote">92b</span> reason why he who
studies at midnight the secret doctrine is sure of a lasting (thader)
supply each night from the water of the river of life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCV. Rabbi Abba's Visit and What Occurred](zdm104.md)
