[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm100)  [Next](zdm102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RABBI JOSE ON THE SEVEN HEAVENS OR FIRMAMENTS.

Said Rabbi Jose: "It is written, 'And it came to pass, in the days of
[Amrafel](errata.htm#74) King of Shinar' (Gen. XIV. 1). In the prophecy
of Isaiah we read, 'Who (mi) raised up the Just One from the east and
called him to follow after him' (Is. XLI. 2). This verse has already
been the subject of comment to the neophytes, being replete with the
mystery of the hidden wisdom that teaches that the Holy One created
seven firmaments or heavens above, wherein to manifest his glory, all of
them being based and founded on principles beyond human comprehension,
which therefore remain subjects of faith and not of knowledge. The
highest of these heavens is altogether invisible and rules all those
below it, and is therefore called mi (who), as it is written, 'From the
womb of Mi came forth the ice' (Job XXXVII. 28).<span
class="margnote">Job 38:29</span> The lowest of these firmaments or
heavens is void of light and non-luminous; and, because so, it is
attached to those above it to receive it from them. It is distinguished
from them by the letters 'y' and 'm' and called yam (the sea), and such
it really is to the highest heavens termed Mi (the same letters changed
in their order). All the higher firmaments pour their light into it, as
rivers discharge their waters into the sea, so that this lower heaven
produces fruit, fish, after their species. David refers to it in the
words, 'The great and wide sea wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

small and great beasts' (Ps. CIV. 25). 'Who raised up or called the Just
One to come from the east' alludes to Abraham, and 'to follow him' refer
to this lower heaven that forms, as just stated, a sea to the higher
heavens above it. It is further added, 'and cast down nations before
him.' To whom are these words to be applied? To the lower heaven, also
that avenges the oppressed and causes their enemies to fall and be
destroyed. In speaking of it David said, 'Thou hast given me the necks
of my enemies and destroyed them that hate me' (Ps. XVIII. 40). The
above words refer also to Abraham, whose enemies the Holy One caused to
be destroyed. Again it is further added, 'and made him rule over kings,'
that is, those celestial chiefs that are set over nations as rulers, and
protectors who are chastised at the same time that the nation or peoples
under their control are afflicted<span class="margnote">86a</span> with
divine judgments. 'He pursued after and passed safely'<span
class="margnote">Is. 41:3</span> refer to Abraham, who pursued his
enemies without harm or suffering to himself, for the Holy One destroyed
them from before him and 'he passed safely,' or rather, 'peace went
before' (yaabor shalom), leaving no traces behind; that is, the Holy One
who is sometimes called 'Peace,' intimating that either concealed and
hidden by a cloud, or carried in a chariot, Abraham passed through the
land instead of marching through it on foot. Now scripture states it was
no angel or divine messenger, but the Holy One who went before him;
'with his feet,' that is, with angels that are subordinate to him; as it
is written, 'And his feet shall stand in that day,' etc. (Zach. XIV. 4).
According to another interpretation of the words, 'Mi (who), raised up
or brought the just One from the east,' it is affirmed that after
creation of the world the Holy One determined to bring Abraham into it,
that he might serve him and become a progenitor of Jacob and the twelve
tribes of Israel, who, like their forefathers, were servants of the Holy
One. The esoteric meaning of these words, therefore, is that he called
Abraham, the just One, out of the east to serve him and do his will, as
it is stated, 'Get thee out and all the people that follow thee' (that
are at thy feet) (Ex. XI. 8). A further exposition is that the words
refer to the east, where the light first dawns and illuminates the south
and is pressed by Mi heir (who raised), whilst by 'called the Just One
to follow him' have reference to the west. The mystic meaning of the
whole verse is that

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

the West will eventually be able to subdue all other nations receiving
accessions of power and numbers from the East, in the world."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "Who has called the Just One to come from the east'
refer certainly to Abraham, for from observing the rising of the sun in
the east he obtained the first true conception of the Holy One and
reasoned then within himself, 'This sun is the king who created me.' He
therefore bent in adoration before it and worshipped it all that day.
Then, however, the sun set and the moon arose and began to shine. 'This
truly,' said he, 'is the deity and rules over the sun whom I have been
worshipping all the day, whose light and splendor have faded and given
way to that of the moon who now rules supreme.' He thereupon worshipped
it all through the night. In the morning he observed the moon disappear
and the sun arising again from the east, and said to himself, 'Surely
above those kings there is some other and higher power that rules and
governs and commands their obedience.' Then the Holy One, seeing the
desire of Abraham for divine knowledge rising within him, manifested
himself unto him and spake<span class="margnote">86a</span> unto him as
it is written. He called the just One to follow him; that is, he made
himself, both by sight and speech, known unto Abraham."<span
class="margnote">NdM omits pages 86b-91b</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCIII. Kabbalistic Remarks on Marriage](zdm102)
