# Why I Am An Agnostic

## Clarence Darrow

An agnostic is a doubter. The word is generally applied to those who
doubt the verity of accepted religious creeds of faiths. Everyone is an
agnostic as to the beliefs or creeds they do not accept. Catholics are
agnostic to the Protestant creeds, and the Protestants are agnostic to
the Catholic creed. Any one who thinks is an agnostic about something,
otherwise he must believe that he is possessed of all knowledge. And the
proper place for such a person is in the madhouse or the home for the
feeble-minded. In a popular way, in the western world, an agnostic is
one who doubts or disbelieves the main tenets of the Christian faith.

I would say that belief in at least three tenets is necessary to the
faith of a Christian: a belief in God, a belief in immortality, and a
belief in a supernatural book. Various Christian sects require much
more, but it is difficult to imagine that one could be a Christian,
under any intelligent meaning of the word, with less. Yet there are some
people who claim to be Christians who do not accept the literal
interpretation of all the Bible, and who give more credence to some
portions of the book than to others.

I am an agnostic as to the question of God. I think that it is
impossible for the human mind to believe in an object or thing unless it
can form a mental picture of such object or thing. Since man ceased to
worship openly an anthropomorphic God and talked vaguely and not
intelligently about some force in the universe, higher than man, that is
responsible for the existence of man and the universe, he cannot be said
to believe in God. One cannot believe in a force excepting as a force
that pervades matter and is not an individual entity. To believe in a
thing, an image of the thing must be stamped on the mind. If one is
asked if he believes in such an animal as a camel, there immediately
arises in his mind an image of the camel. This image has come from
experience or knowledge of the animal gathered in some way or other. No
such image comes, or can come, with the idea of a God who is described
as a force.

Man has always speculated upon the origin of the universe, including
himself. I feel, with Herbert Spencer, that whether the universe had an
origin-- and if it had-- what the origin is will never be known by man.
The Christian says that the universe could not make itself; that there
must have been some higher power to call it into being. Christians have
been obsessed for many years by Paley's argument that if a person
passing through a desert should find a watch and examine its spring, its
hands, its case and its crystal, he would at once be satisfied that some
intelligent being capable of design had made the watch. No doubt this is
true. No civilized man would question that someone made the watch. The
reason he would not doubt it is because he is familiar with watches and
other appliances made by man. The savage was once unfamiliar with a
watch and would have had no idea upon the subject. There are plenty of
crystals and rocks of natural formation that are as intricate as a
watch, but even to intelligent man they carry no implication that some
intelligent power must have made them. They carry no such implication
because no one has any knowledge or experience of someone having made
these natural objects which everywhere abound.

To say that God made the universe gives us no explanation of the
beginnings of things. If we are told that God made the universe, the
question immediately arises: Who made God? Did he always exist, or was
there some power back of that? Did he create matter out of nothing, or
is his existence coextensive with matter? The problem is still there.
What is the origin of it all? If, on the other hand, one says that the
universe was not made by God, that it always existed, he has the same
difficulty to confront. To say that the universe was here last year, or
millions of years ago, does not explain its origin. This is still a
mystery. As to the question of the origin of things, man can only wonder
and doubt and guess.

As to the existence of the soul, all people may either believe or
disbelieve. Everyone knows the origin of the human being. They know that
it came from a single cell in the body of the mother, and that the cell
was one out of ten thousand in the mother's body. Before gestation the
cell must have been fertilized by a spermatozoon from the body of the
father. This was one out of perhaps a billion spermatozoa that was the
capacity of the father. When the cell is fertilized a chemical process
begins. The cell divides and multiplies and increases into millions of
cells, and finally a child is born. Cells die and are born during the
life of the individual until they finally drop apart, and this is death.

If there is a soul, what is it, and where did it come from, and where
does it go? Can anyone who is guided by his reason possibly imagine a
soul independent of a body, or the place of its residence, or the
character of it, or anything concerning it? If man is justified in any
belief or disbelief on any subject, he is warranted in the disbelief in
a soul. Not one scrap of evidence exists to prove any such impossible
thing.

Many Christians base the belief of a soul and God upon the Bible.
Strictly speaking, there is no such book. To make the Bible, sixty-six
books are bound into one volume. These books are written by many people
at different times, and no one knows the time or the identity of any
author. Some of the books were written by several authors at various
times. These books contain all sorts of contradictory concepts of life
and morals and the origin of things. Between the first and the last
nearly a thousand years intervened, a longer time than has passed since
the discovery of America by Columbus.

When I was a boy the theologians used to assert that the proof of the
divine inspiration of the Bible rested on miracles and prophecies. But a
miracle means a violation of a natural law, and there can be no proof
imagined that could be sufficient to show the violation of a natural
law; even though proof seemed to show violation, it would only show that
we were not acquainted with all natural laws. One believes in the
truthfulness of a man because of his long experience with the man, and
because the man has always told a consistent story. But no man has told
so consistent a story as nature.

If one should say that the sun did not rise, to use the ordinary
expression, on the day before, his hearer would not believe it, even
though he had slept all day and knew that his informant was a man of the
strictest veracity. He would not believe it because the story is
inconsistent with the conduct of the sun in all the ages past.

Primitive and even civilized people have grown so accustomed to
believing in miracles that they often attribute the simplest
manifestations of nature to agencies of which they know nothing. They do
this when the belief is utterly inconsistent with knowledge and logic.
They believe in old miracles and new ones. Preachers pray for rain,
knowing full well that no such prayer was ever answered. When a
politician is sick, they pray for God to cure him, and the politician
almost invariably dies. The modern clergyman who prays for rain and for
the health of the politician is no more intelligent in this matter than
the primitive man who saw a separate miracle in the rising and setting
of the sun, in the birth of an individual, in the growth of a plant, in
the stroke of lighting, in the flood, in every manifestation of nature
and life.

As to prophecies, intelligent writers gave them up long ago. In all
prophecies facts are made to suit the prophecy, or the prophecy was made
after the facts, or the events have no relation to the prophecy. Weird
and strange and unreasonable interpretations are used to explain simple
statements, that a prophecy may be claimed.

Can any rational person believe that the Bible is anything but a human
document? We now know pretty well where the various books came from, and
about when they were written. We know that they were written by human
beings who had no knowledge of science, little knowledge of life, and
were influenced by the barbarous morality of primitive times, and were
grossly ignorant of most things that men know today. For instance,
Genesis says that God made the earth, and he made the sun to light the
day and the moon to light the night, and in one clause disposes of the
stars by saying that "he made the stars also." This was plainly written
by someone who had no conception of the stars. Man, by the aid of his
telescope, has looked out into the heavens and found stars whose
diameter is as great as the distance between the earth and the sun. We
know that the universe is filled with stars and suns and planets and
systems. Every new telescope looking further into the heavens only
discovers more and more worlds and suns and systems in the endless
reaches of space. The men who wrote Genesis believed, of course, that
this tiny speck of mud that we call the earth was the center of the
universe, the only world in space, and made for man, who was the only
being worth considering. These men believed that the stars were only a
little way above the earth, and were set in the firmament for man to
look at, and for nothing else. Everyone today knows that this conception
is not true.

The origin of the human race is not as blind a subject as it once was.
Let alone God creating Adam out of hand, from the dust of the earth,
does anyone believe that Eve was made from Adam's rib--that the snake
walked and spoke in the Garden of Eden--that he tempted Eve to persuade
Adam to eat an apple, and that it is on that account that the whole
human race was doomed to hell--that for four thousand years there was no
chance for any human to be saved, though none of them had anything
whatever to do with the temptation; and that finally men were saved only
through God's son dying for them, and that unless human beings believed
this silly, impossible and wicked story they were doomed to hell? Can
anyone with intelligence really believe that a child born today should
be doomed because the snake tempted Eve and Eve tempted Adam? To believe
that is not God-worship; it is devil-worship.

Can anyone call this scheme of creation and damnation moral? It defies
every principle of morality, as man conceives morality. Can anyone
believe today that the whole world was destroyed by flood, save only
Noah and his family and a male and female of each species of animal that
entered the Ark? There are almost a million species of insects alone.
How did Noah match these up and make sure of getting male and female to
reproduce life in the world after the flood had spent its force? And why
should all the lower animals have been destroyed? Were they included in
the sinning of man? This is a story which could not beguile a fairly
bright child of five years of age today.

Do intelligent people believe that the various languages spoken by man
on earth came from the confusion of tongues at the Tower of Babel, some
four thousand years ago? Human languages were dispersed all over the
face of the earth long before that time. Evidences of civilizations are
in existence now that were old long before the date that romancers fix
for the building of the Tower, and even before the date claimed for the
flood.

Do Christians believe that Joshua made the sun stand still, so that the
day could be lengthened, that a battle might be finished? What kind of
person wrote that story, and what did he know about astronomy? It is
perfectly plain that the author thought that the earth was the center of
the universe and stood still in the heavens, and that the sun either
went around it or was pulled across its path each day, and that the
stopping of the sun would lengthen the day. We know now that had the sun
stopped when Joshua commanded it, and had it stood still until now, it
would not have lengthened the day. We know that the day is determined by
the rotation of the earth upon its axis, and not by the movement of the
sun. Everyone knows that this story simply is not true, and not many
even pretend to believe the childish fable.

What of the tale of Balaam's ass speaking to him, probably in Hebrew? Is
it true, or is it a fable? Many asses have spoken, and doubtless some in
Hebrew, but they have not been that breed of asses. Is salvation to
depend on a belief in a monstrosity like this?

Above all the rest, would any human being today believe that a child was
born without a father? Yet this story was not at all unreasonable in the
ancient world; at least three or four miraculous births are recorded in
the Bible, including John the Baptist and Samson. Immaculate conceptions
were common in the Roman world at the time and at the place where
Christianity really had its nativity. Women were taken to the temples to
be inoculated of God so that their sons might be heroes, which meant,
generally, wholesale butchers. Julius Caesar was a miraculous
conception--indeed, they were common all over the world. How many
miraculous-birth stories is a Christian now expected to believe?

In the days of the formation of the Christian religion, disease meant
the possession of human beings by devils. Christ cured a sick man by
casting out the devils, who ran into the swine, and the swine ran into
the sea. Is there any question but what that was simply the attitude and
belief of a primitive people? Does anyone believe that sickness means
the possession of the body by devils, and that the devils must be cast
out of the human being that he may be cured? Does anyone believe that a
dead person can come to life? The miracles recorded in the Bible are not
the only instances of dead men coming to life. All over the world one
finds testimony of such miracles: miracles which no person is expected
to believe, unless it is his kind of a miracle. Still at Lourdes today,
and all over the present world, from New York to Los Angeles and up and
down the lands, people believe in miraculous occurrences, and even in
the return of the dead. Superstition is everywhere prevalent in the
world. It has been so from the beginning, and most likely will be so
unto the end.

The reasons for agnosticism are abundant and compelling. Fantastic and
foolish and impossible consequences are freely claimed for the belief in
religion. All the civilization of any period is put down as a result of
religion. All the cruelty and error and ignorance of the period has no
relation to religion.

The truth is that the origin of what we call civilization is not due to
religion but to skepticism. So long as men accepted miracles without
question, so long as they believed in original sin and the road to
salvation, so long as they believed in a hell where man would be kept
for eternity on account of Eve, there was no reason whatever for
civilization: life was short, and eternity was long, and the business of
life was preparation for eternity.

When every event was a miracle, when there was no order or system or
law, there was no occasion for studying any subject, or being interested
in anything excepting a religion which took care of the soul. As man
doubted the primitive conceptions about religion, and no longer accepted
the literal, miraculous teachings of ancient books, he set himself to
understand nature. We no longer cure disease by casting out devils.
Since that time, men have studied the human body, have built hospitals
and treated illness in a scientific way. Science is responsible for the
building of railroads and bridges, of steamships, of telegraph lines, of
cities, towns, large buildings and small, plumbing and sanitation, of
the food supply, and the countless thousands of useful things that we
now deem necessary to life. Without skepticism and doubt, none of these
things could have been given to the world.

The fear of God is not the beginning of wisdom. The fear of God is the
death of wisdom. Skepticism and doubt lead to study and investigation,
and investigation is the beginning of wisdom.

The modern world is the child of doubt and inquiry, as the ancient world
was the child of fear and faith.
