[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](emec01)  [Next](emec03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE EGYPTIAN MYTHOLOGY.

<span id="img_1"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/00100.jpg)

Fig. 1.--The Winged Sun of Thebes.

THE history of religious error is the history of the mind wandering in
its search after Truth. We meet among the gross idolatry of one nation,
as in the purer religion of another nation, the same acknowledgment that
man is not his own creator, and that he is dependent for his welfare
upon the will of some being or beings more powerful than himself.

The cultivated man, when studying the wonders of the creation around
him, traces them back through numerous secondary causes to one great
First Cause, and thus arrives at the belief in One Undivided God; and
feels more sure of the truth of his reasoning in proportion to the
simplicity to which it leads him. On the other hand, an observing but
unphilosophical man, in the childhood of the world when he had noted the
various secondary causes which produce all the effects which meet his
senses, would perhaps look no further; and he thus arrived at the belief
in a variety of gods. But this is not always the case. Some nations
seem, like the modern Turks, to have arrived at a belief in one God, as
if from indolence of mind, from blind fatalism, from mere want of
observation of the numerous causes which are working around them. Thus

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

many of the Arabic races in the neighbourhood of Egypt, as well as the
Israelites, traced the hand of one only God, or Great First Cause, in
all they enjoyed and all they suffered. But the Egyptians, like the
Greeks and Romans, seeing so many causes at work, and not perceiving
that they might all be set in motion by One First Cause, thought that
every blessing that they received, and every misfortune that befel them,
was the work of a different god. They thus peopled the seen and the
unseen world beyond with a variety of beings or powers. To these they
returned thanks for the blessings that they enjoyed, or more often, as
led by a melancholy and less grateful disposition, addressed entreaties
that they would withhold their injuries and punishments. The sculptured
monuments of the country teach us the figures and sometimes the
characters of these imaginary beings, together with the cities and parts
of the kingdom in which each was more particularly worshipped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Religion of Upper Egypt](emec03)
