[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](emec10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

# AUTHOR'S AFTERWORD

THE study of error is often only a little less important than the study
of truth. The history of the human mind. in its progress from ignorance
towards knowledge should tell us the mistakes into which it has
sometimes wandered, as well as its steps in the right path. We turn,
indeed, with more pleasure to review the sources from which the world
has gained any of its valuable truths, in the hope of there finding some
further knowledge which may be equally valuable; while for our errors,
so long as we are unwilling to acknowledge them to be errors, we too
often shut our eyes, and refuse to be shown their origin.

The Emperor Marcus, Antoninus, in his philosophical work, mentions the
several tutors and friends from whom he gained his good habits, and
those views of life which he chiefly valued; but though we must suppose
that he was aware of some failings in his character, he does not tell us
to which of his companions he owed them. And so it is with the benefits
of civilisation, arts, and religion; and also with the evils of
superstition. Modern Europe readily acknowledges how many benefits it
received from

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

Rome, from Greece, and from Judea, but has been willing to forget how
much of its superstition came from Egypt.

When Christians shall at length acknowledge that many of those
doctrines, which together now make up orthodoxy, or the religion of the
majority, as distinguished from the simple religion which Jesus taught
and practised; when they shall acknowledge that many of them are so many
sad and lamentable errors; then, and not till then, will they seek to
know their origin, and enquire from which of the several branches of
Paganism they sprung. They will then see that most of the so-called
Christian doctrines, that have no place in the New Testament, reached
Europe from Egypt, through Alexandria.

All nations borrow from others--at least, from. those who are before
them in the race of civilization. They borrow from each of their
neighbours in those branches of knowledge in which they think they can
do so wisely, and what they have taken often shows itself in the
language. This can be best explained by instances from our own language.
Thus, when we speak about the array, our words show that the French were
our instructors in military matters, and we talk of "aide-de-camp,"
"chevaux de frise," "captain," "lieutenant," "ensign," "cadet."

When we speak of the church we use Latin wards, as "vestry," "rector,"
"vicar," "curate," "incumbent," "ordination," "font," "creed,"
"doctrine."

Words more strictly religious are often Greek, as "baptism," "liturgy"
"litany."

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

The Italians gave us our words belonging to bookkeeping and banking, as
"debtor," "creditor," "cambist," "ditto," "bankrupt," "usance."

The Spanish have given us a few words relating to their social life,
such as "alcove," "verandah," "duenna."

From the Arabs, through scientific treatises, we have taken "almanach,"
"alchemy," "chemistry," "algebra."

The Italians also have given us many words relating to art, such as
"mezzotint," "fresco-painting," "chiaroscuro," "pianoforte,"
"violoncello," "opera."

These few instances are, perhaps, enough to justify us in thinking that
when the Greeks, Romans, and Jews have made use of Coptic words, it has
arisen from their having borrowed these branches of knowledge from the
Egyptians.

The aim of the following pages is not only to explain the Mythology of
Egypt, but to show the extraordinary readiness with which its religious
opinions were copied by the neighbouring nations, particularly by the
Greeks and Romans. In matters of religion, the more ignorant part of
those two nations bowed in reverence to the greater earnestness and
seriousness of the Egyptians, who were at the same time so remarkably
rich in mythological invention. Pagan Greece, received from Egypt all
that part of its religion which related to a future state of rewards and
punishments, and though Christian Greece was for a short time too
intelligent to take the whole of the Egyptian mysticism and
superstition, yet Christian Rome, from which our own opinions were
chiefly learned, had no such hesitation, and was at all times a most
willing pupil.

These facts may receive some explanation from two known laws of the
human mind. First, among religious persons the fear of doing wrong makes
them more afraid of falling into scepticism than into credulity; and
those who believe more, whether they believe wisely or unwisely, are apt
to think themselves on safer ground than those who believe less. In the
case of a proposition in science, when the arguments for it and against
it seem equal, the reasoner withholds his assent; but in the case of a
religious dogma or article of faith, the mind in its weakness fancies it
safer to accept it than to reject it. The reasoning powers are in part
over-ruled by the feelings. In religious controversy, both parties, the
believer and the doubter, usually feel that the reproach of disbelief,
which it is in the power of one to throw against the other, hits a much
harder blow than the reproach of credulity and superstition, which is
all that the other can fling back again. It is only among irreligious
persons and scoffers that the feelings strengthen the other side, and
that disbelief can shut the door against argument by an equally blind
and unfair claim to superiority. Hence arises the power which
superstitious and complicated systems of religions have of spreading
themselves, and hence the weakness of good sense when setting up its
simple truths against the encroachments of such many-sided errors.

Secondly, earnestness and sincerity are the most powerful helps by which
we enforce our opinions and convert our neighbours. And there was far
more real conviction of the truth of their religion among the Egyptians
than among their Greek and Roman neighbours. Hence the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

opinions of the more ignorant lived and spread, while the opinions held
with hollowness and insincerity by the more enlightened died away.

The following are the principal doctrines which are most certainly known
to be common to Egyptian Mythology and modern orthodoxy, as
distinguished from the religion of Jesus. They include the Trinity, the
two natures of Christ, and the atonement by vicarious sufferings.

1st. That the creation and government of the world is not the work of
one simple and undivided Being, but of one God, made up of several
persons. This is the doctrine of Plurality in Unity.

2nd. That happiness, or the favour of the judge of the living and the
dead, could scarcely be hoped for, either from his justice or his mercy,
unless an atoning sacrifice had been paid to him on our behalf, by a
divine being; and that mankind, or some part of them, may hope to have
their sins forgiven because of the merits and intercession .of that
being, and to be excused from punishment because he consented to he
sacrificed for them. With the Egyptians there were four such chief
mediators.

3rd. That among the gods, or persons which compose the godhead, one,
though a god, could yet suffer pain and be put to death.

4th. That a god, a man, or being half god and half man, once lived upon
earth, who had been born of an earthly mother, but without an earthly
father.

It may amuse, while it will help our argument, to mention also a few of
the less important Egyptian opinions

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

which are still common among us. Trifles sometimes declare their origin
more certainly than opinions and habits of greater importance, which may
be thought common to the human mind. Among the most interesting is the
wedding ring. The Egyptian gold, before the introduction of coinage, had
been usually kept in the form of a ring; and the Egyptian at his
marriage placed one of these pieces of gold on his wife's finger in
token of his entrusting her with all his property. The early Christians,
says Clemens, saw no harm in following this custom; and in our own
marriage ceremony the man places the same plain ring of gold on his
bride's finger when he says, "With all my worldly goods I thee endow."

It was one of the duties of the priests of Philæ to purchase of the
river Nile a bountiful overflow by throwing a piece of gold into the
stream once a year, and hence, probably, the Venetians borrowed their
custom of wedding the Adriatic by throwing a gold ring into the sea. At
the same time the Doge's cap was copied from the crown of Lower Egypt.

Our Christmas game of drawing lots for the title of King and Queen, is
Egyptian. It was called by the Alexandrians, as Julius Pollux tells us,
the game of Basilinda; and Tacitus mentions the quarrel between Nero and
Britannicus when they were playing at this game in Rome.

The Egyptian day for eating sugared cakes had been our twentieth of
January, but in the fourth century, says Moses of Chorene, it was
changed to be kept fourteen days earlier; and the sugared cake of the
Egyptians now marks the feast of Epiphany, or Twelfth Night.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

When the Roman Catholic priest shaves the crown of his head, it is
because the Egyptian priest had done the same before. When the English
clergyman, though he preaches his sermon in a silk or woollen robe, may
read the liturgy in no dress but linen, it is because linen was the
clothing of the Egyptians. Two thousand years before the bishop of Rome
pretended to hold the keys of heaven and earth, there was an Egyptian
priest with the high-sounding title of Appointed keeper of the two doors
of heaven, in the city of Thebes.

Christian art also owes much to the Egyptian imagination. The Virgin
Mary rising to heaven, standing upon a crescent moon, very closely
resembles Isis as the dog star rising heliacally (see Fig.
[104](emec09.htm#img_104)). The figure of the Almighty, with head and
outstretched arms at the head of the picture, particularly in the early
pictures, when the head hung downwards, is the same in design as that of
Horus at the top of many a funeral papyrus (see page
[87](emec07.htm#page_87)). The figure of a triangle to represent the
Trinity was clearly borrowed from Pagan Egypt (see page
[99](emec08.htm#page_99)).

The supposed arts of astrology and witchcraft were more particularly
Egyptian; the conjuror's word of Abracadabra is a corruption of the
Greek word Abrasax, which is itself a corruption of the Egyptian *hurt
me not*, by which they hoped to warn off evil spirits; and
fortunetellers are even yet called Egyptians or Gypsies. When
Shakespeare brings upon the stage the queen of the witches, she bears
the name of Hecate, one of the well-known names of Isis.

These fanciful customs and foolish opinions and traditions

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

of art help to show that although the old Egyptian race has ceased to be
a nation for more than twelve hundred years, during which its history
has been neglected, and its very existence often forgotten, yet the
Egyptian mind still has a most important influence upon our modern
civilisation. Protestant Europe is even now struggling to throw off the
graver errors of the Nicene Creed and the Atonement, which Rome received
from Egypt fifteen centuries ago.

HIGHBURY PLACE,

June, 1863.

\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~

This Second Edition has been enlarged to the extent of four pages by the
MS. additions which the Author left ready for publication.

E. S.

1896\.
