[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](emec04)  [Next](emec06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# THE RELIGION UNDER THE PERSIAN CONQUERORS.

THE Persians, on their conquest of Egypt, in the year B.C. 523, began
with insulting the Egyptians in their religious feelings, by killing the
bull Apis, and by breaking to pieces the statues of the gods. They
afterwards made an earnest attempt to bring about some changes in the
religion, and the chief was to abolish the worship of all statues and
figures of the gods, and to introduce the more simple worship of the
sun. Of this we see traces in the sculptures, made by a native Satrap,
who governed the country under Artaxerxes Longimanus (see Fig.
[83](#img_83).md). We there see Thaomra, the son of the late king Adon-Ra
Bakan, or Thannyras,

<span id="img_83"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/07300.jpg.md)

Fig. 83.

the son of Inarus, as Herodotus calls him, worshipping the sun, Adon-Ra,
which is distinguished from the sun of the Egyptians by the absence of
wings or asps, and by its

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

sending forth a number of rays, each ending with a human hand, and yet
more particularly by the absence of the human figure or statue of the
god. In this the sculptor borrows a figure from the name of the Persian
king, who was called Longimanus, because his arm was supposed to over
Asia, reach Africa, and part of Europe. And when we see a sculpture with
one of the early Theban kings worshipping the figure of Amun-Ra, with
the same sun, as in Fig. [84](#img_84.md), we may suppose that the rays
ending in human hands were an after addition made by order of the
Persians.

<span id="img_84"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/07400.jpg.md)

Fig. 84.

It was in the fourth century before the Christian era that Plato, the
Athenian, visited Egypt to study at Heliopolis, where was then a
celebrated school of philosophy. The country was at the time
independent, and under the rule of a native sovereign, but it had been
for a century oppressed by the Persian conquerors. Heliopolis was on the
Phenician side of the Delta, in the neighbourhood of the district
inhabited by the Jews, who by this time had very much acquired the use
of the Greek language, from the colonists on the other side of the
Delta. Hence Greek, Hebrew, Phenician, Persian, and Egyptian opinions
had been there freely, brought into comparison, and the consequence was
a burst of free thought which made Heliopolis for a time an important
centre of learning.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

\[paragraph continues\] That Plato's opinions were very, much the fruit
of his visit to this celebrated school is clear from his writings. Here
he may have gained better views of a future state of rewards and
punishment; but here he may have lost somewhat of the pure morality
before taught to him by Socrates. He seems to have been more
particularly pleased with the Egyptian mysticism. But had Plato's
philosophy died with himself it would claim little notice here; it is
the writings of his followers that make us note its rise as important in
the history of Egyptian opinions.

<span id="img_07500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/07500.jpg.md)

"Pharaoh Thaomra, his name successor to Adonra."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Religion Under the Ptolemies](emec06.md)
