[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl01)  [Next](bl03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

<span id="img__00700"></span> ![](img/_00700.jpg)

# INTRODUCTION.

THE study of the recent science of Comparative Mythology is one of the
most popular and attractive of minor scientific pursuits. It deals with
a subject-matter which has interested most of us at one period of our
lives, and turns the delight of our childhood into a charm and
recreation for maturer age. Nor is it without more useful lessons. In it
we see more clearly than perhaps elsewhere the reciprocal influence,
which none can wholly escape, of words and language upon thought, and
again of thought and fancy upon words and language; how mere words and
syllables may modify both conception and belief; how the metaphor, which
at first presented an object more clearly and vividly to the mind than
any more direct form of speech could do, soon confuses and at last
wholly distorts the original idea, and buries its meaning under a new
and foreign superstructure. We may mark here, too, by numerous examples,
how slowly the human mind rises to the conception of any abstract truth,
and how continually it falls back upon the concrete fact which it is
compelled to picture to itself in order to state in words the simplest

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

mental abstraction. The phrase, "The dawn flies before the sun," passing
into the myth of Daphne and Apollo, is a lesson in psychology no less
than in philology and in comparative mythology.

Now, both the interest and the value of these studies are enhanced in
proportion as they become complete. Our conclusions approach nearer to
certainty, and will gradually pass from theory to demonstration, as we
find the same legends and modes of thought and expression on natural
phenomena constantly reappearing among the most distant and the most
isolated peoples, in languages which in their complex forms tell of the
infancy of human speech, and also in those whose worn-down frame speaks
of the world's old age.

Of the peoples now settled in Western Europe, the Basques are those
which are the most separate from other populations; distinct in
language, they represent, in a more or less mixed state, some older
stratum of European ethnology. Their language, too, as regards the mass
of the people, is still practically unwritten. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Here there is a chance of finding legends in
a purer and older form than among any other European people; and in what
they have borrowed from others, we may have an almost unique crucial
test of the time which it takes for such traditions to pass orally from
people of one language to another and totally different one. None of
these legends have been published or even noticed till within the last
two years, when M. d'Abbadie read the legend of the Tartaro, before the
Société

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

des Sciences et des Arts de Bayonne, and M. Cerquand his "Légendes et
Récits Populaires du Pays Basque," before the sister society at
Pau. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

Of course, we must expect to find such legends very much altered, and in
a state of almost inextricable confusion, and this not only through
forgetfulness, and through the lapse of time since their origin, not
only by the influence of a total change of religion, but they are also
mingled and interpenetrated with totally new ideas; the old and the new
will be found side by side in striking and sometimes grotesque contrast.
As in Campbell's "Tales of the West Highlands," personages of mythical
antiquity go to kirk, and indulge in other decidedly post-Reformation
practices, so in these Basque tales the reader must not be startled by
the introduction of maize and tobacco, of cannon and gunpowder, of
dances at the mairie, and the use of the guillotine, in stories which,
perhaps, originally told of the movements of the stars, of the wars of
the forces of the atmosphere, of the bright beauty of the rising, or of
the glowing glory of the setting sun. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2)
The body is the same in all ages, but the dress varies with the changing
fashions. To borrow an illustration from a slightly older science, this
is not a simple case of contorted and overlying strata to be restored to
their original order, but rather of strata worn down,

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

reconstructed, and deposited anew, and even modified in their latest
stage by the interference of human action. And thus our problem becomes
an exceedingly complex and difficult one, and our readers must not be
disappointed if our conclusions are not so clear and positive as might
be wished. The present is merely a tentative, and not, in any sense, a
final essay towards its solution.

How are these legends told now, and how have they been preserved? They
are told by the Basque peasants, either when neighbours meet--after the
fashion made familiar to us by American novelists in the "Husking
Bee"--for the purpose of stripping the husks from the ears of maize, an
operation generally performed in one or two long sessions; or at the
prolonged wedding and other feasts, of which we have evidence in the
tales themselves, or else in the long nights round the wintry hearth of
their lonely dwellings. For it is one of the charms of the Basque land
that the houses are scattered all over the face of the country, instead
of being collected into crowded villages; and it is, perhaps, to this
fact chiefly that we owe the preservation of so much old-world lore, and
of primitive ideas, among this people. The reader must not be surprised
at the length of some of our specimens. The details of the incidents of
the longest are religiously preserved, and, as told at home, they are
probably more lengthy (as anyone will understand who has ever taken
anything down from recitation) than as here given. Many an unlettered
Basque peasant could serve an irritable stranger as Glendower did
Hotspur, when he kept him "at least nine hours

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

in reckoning up the several devils' names that were his lackeys."

In La Soule the "Pastorales," or Basque dramas, which last from six to
eight hours of uninterrupted action, are learnt in the same way by word
of mouth during the long evenings of winter.

These legends are still most thoroughly believed in. They still form
part of the faith of these simple people--not at all, we need hardly
say, in, the use of mythological or atmospheric allegory, but as
narratives of veritable fact. They believe them as they do the histories
of the Bible or the "Lives of the Saints." In fact, the problem of
reconciling religion and science presents itself to their minds in this
strange guise--how to reconcile these narratives with those of the Bible
and of the Church. The general solution is that they happened before the
time of which the Bible speaks, or before Adam fell. They are "Lege
zaharreko istorriguak"--"histories of the ancient law"--by which is
apparently meant the time before Christianity. "This happened, sir, in
the time when all animals and all things could speak," was said again
and again by our narrators at the commencement of their story; not one
doubted the literal truth of what they told. Their naive good faith
occasionally severely tested our own gravity. Appeal was often made to
our supposed superior knowledge to confirm the facts. The varying tone
of the voice told how truly the speakers sympathised with what they
uttered. At times sobs almost interrupted utterance, when the frequent
apostrophe came: "Think how this poor so-and-so must have suffered!"
More often bursts

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

of laughter at traditional jokes, too poor to raise a smile on less
unsophisticated lips, broke the recital. Very determined, too, is their
adherence to what they believe to be the genuine text of these old
tales. "I don't understand it, but the history says so;" "It is *so*;"
"The story says so," was positively affirmed again and again--*e.g.*, in
one of the Peau d'Ane or Cinderella stories, when the lady has dazzled
her admirer by her dress of silver (moonlight?) then of gold
(sunlight?), then of diamonds (dew-drops?) at last, on the wedding-day,
the bride and bridegroom *dress each other*. "I don't know why,"
interrupted the story-teller, "but the story says so." Could anything
tell more quaintly of the marriage of the sun and dawn? The sun decking
the morning clouds with his light and beauty, and they again robing him
in their soft and tender colouring.

But we must pass on to the tales themselves. None of these, we think,
will be found to be genuinely or exclusively Basque; the oldest we take
to be those most widely known, and which are most distorted. The heads
under which we have arranged them are: (1) Legends of the Tartaro, or
Cyclops; (2) of the Heren-Suge, the Seven-Headed Serpent; (3) of purely
Animal Tales, which are neither fables nor allegories; (4) of
Basa-Jauna, Basa-Andre, and of the Lamiñak, or Fairies; (5) Tales of
Witchcraft; (6) those which, for want of a better name, we have entitled
Contes des Fées, in which the fairy is an Eastern magician--these we
have divided into sections, (*a*) those which resemble the Keltic and
other tales, and (*b*) those which are probably borrowed directly from
the French; our last division (7),

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Religious Tales
and Legends, are probably from mediæval sources common to Latin
Christianity, but they are interesting as specimens of the tales which
probably delighted the highest born of our own ancestors in the middle
ages, and now linger only among the peasantry in out-of-the-way corners
of Europe. Some of these tales seem to us to be more gracefully told,
and have more of human interest in them, than any of the others.

We fear scientific men will be disappointed in this collection.
Notwithstanding that we have been careful to collect from those who know
the Basque only, or who certainly knew only Basque when they first
learnt these tales, yet they are evidently much mixed with French and
Spanish. Our translations are literal to baldness; the only liberty we
have taken is in softening down the exceeding directness and grossness
of some portions. Not one tale is in the least licentious--but the
Basque language calls a spade a spade, and not an implement of
husbandry. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) The Carlist war of the last
four years has prevented our getting any legends from the Spanish Basque
provinces, and has even to some extent hindered our work in the French
Pays Basque, by providing an almost exclusive object of interest. In the
more remote districts of the Pays Basque itself, which we have not been
able to revisit since we commenced this collection, purer forms of some
of these legends may be found, and others of which we have no
example; <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) but these

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

which we give are really representative. Though collected mainly in the
neighbourhood of St. Jean de Luz, we have tested them by enquiry of
natives of all the provinces, and find that they are equally well known
in La Soule and in Basse Navarre as in the Labourd. We never met with a
Basque peasant who could not tell us what are the Tartaro, the
Heren-Suge, Basa-Jaun, and the Lamiñak.

As a curious coincidence, we may notice how closely some of the Basque
names of the stars parallel those given in Miss Frere's delightful "Old
Deccan Days." In the narrator's narrative, pp. 27, 28, we read, "She
(the grandmother) would show us the hen and chickens" (the
Pleiades)--the same in Basque, "Oiloa chituekin;" "The three thieves
climbing up to rob the Ranee's silver bedstead"--the three stars in
Orion's belt, in Basque, the three kings, or brothers, or *robbers*; the
milky way, "the great pathway of light on which He went up to heaven,"
has also obtained in Basque a Christianized name--"Erromako zubia, or
Bidea," "the bridge or road to Rome." Again, "All the cobras in my
grandmother's stories were seven-headed," so the Heren-Suge in the
Basque country is always seven-headed. Little or nothing can be gathered
from the names of the actors, the heroes or heroines of these tales.
They are mostly anonymous, but the name, when given, is almost always
borrowed from the French. This is disappointing, and much increases the
difficulty of tracing the origin; but it is analogous to the fact that
scarcely a single purely

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Basque name is to
be found among the so-called kings and chieftains of the Basques during
the early middle ages. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) Among the
classic writers, too, and among the soldiers and followers of our
Anglo-Gascon princes, hardly a name indubitably Basque is to be found.

For all more special details and discussions we refer to the
Introductions to the separate sections. The few references given to the
parallel legends of other countries are not intended to be at all
complete, much less exhaustive. The Pays Basque is not a land of
libraries, and it is not easy to collect these legends on the spot, and
at the same time to get together the books necessary for a comparison of
them with those of other countries. The few we offer are only those
which have fallen in our way, and though worthless to the specialist,
may be of some little aid as suggestions to the ordinary reader. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) For the same purpose we annex a list of the
first publication of the chief collections of foreign legends in
France. <span id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7) It is curious to remark that,
while the masterpieces of French literature seem never to have
penetrated beyond the surface of society, these legends have pierced to
the very bottom of the social mass, and have become real living
household words, even to those many millions of Frenchmen who do not
understand one word of French.

There remains the pleasant task of thanking some of

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

the many friends who have assisted us in this collection. I had hoped to
have joined the name of M. J. Vinson, the well-known Basque and
Dravidian scholar, to my own as joint-author of this simple work. I
should hardly have had the courage to have undertaken it had I not been
assured of his invaluable assistance in difficulties about the language
of the originals. Unavoidable circumstances have, however, prevented his
seeing the Basque of many of the later tales, and he therefore prefers
that the "Essay on the Basque Language" should alone bear his name. I
cannot but accede to his wishes; but, at the same time, I offer him my
most grateful thanks for the, unfailing and unwearied help which he so
kindly afforded me for many months. The legends contributed by him are
noticed in their proper place. Our first acknowledgments are due to M.
d'Abbadie, of Abbadia, the well-known "Membre de l'Institut," for his
kind assistance and ready communication of the legends in his
possession, and which were the starting point of our work. Next, and
even more, to Madame M. Bellevue, of Dajieu-baita, through whose kind
intervention the majority of these tales were collected, and who
assisted in the translation of almost all. And then to the sisters
Estefanella and Gagna-haurra Hirigaray, who contributed more than twenty
tales; to Dr. Guilbeau and other friends at St. Jean de Luz who have
taken a friendly interest in our work, and to all those whose names are
appended to the tales they furnished. It would be presumptuous to hope
that our readers will find as much pleasure in perusing these tales as
we have had in collecting them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:1](bl02.htm#fr_0) See on this head M.
Vinson's Essay in Appendix.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[ix:1](bl02.htm#fr_1) The second part of M.
Cerquand's "Légendes et Récits Populaires du Pays Basque" (Pau, 1876),
appeared while the present work was passing through the press. It is
chiefly occupied with legends of Basa-Jaun and Lamiñak.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[ix:2](bl02.htm#fr_2) Not that we suppose all
these tales to be atmospheric myths; we adopt this only as the
provisional hypothesis which appears at present to cover the largest
amount of facts. It seems certainly to be a "vera causa" in *some*
cases; but still it is only one of several possible "vere causæ," and is
not to be applied to all.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xiii:1](bl02.htm#fr_3) *Cf.* Campbell's
"Introduction," p. xxviii.:--"I have never heard of a story whose point
was obscenity publickly told in a Highland cottage; and I believe such
are rare. If there was an occasional coarse word spoken, it was not
coarsely meant."

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiii:2](bl02.htm#fr_4) One class, of which we
have given no example, is that of the Star Legend given by M. Cerquand,
"Légendes et Récits Populaires du <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> Pays
Basque," p. 19, and reprinted, with variations, by M. Vinson, "Revue de
Linguistique," Tom. VIII., 741-5, January, 1876.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xv:1](bl02.htm#fr_5) *Cf.* "Etudes Historiques
sur la Ville de Bayonne, par MM. Balasque et Dulaurens," Vol. I., p. 49.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xv:2](bl02.htm#fr_6) We have purposely omitted
references to Greek and Latin mythology, as these are to be found
"passim," in the pages of Max Muller and of Cox. The preparation for the
Press was made at a distance from our own library, or more references to
Spanish and patois sources would have been given.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xv:3](bl02.htm#fr_7) See page
[192](bl60.htm#page_192).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](bl03)
