[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl08)  [Next](bl10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE THREE BROTHERS, THE CRUEL MASTER, AND THE TARTARO.

LIKE many others in the world, there lived a mother with her three sons.
They were not rich, but lived by their work. The eldest son said one day
to his mother--

"It would be better for us if I should go out to service."

The mother did not like it, but at last she let him go. He goes off,
far, far, far away, and comes to a house, and asks if they want a
servant. They say "Yes," and they make their agreement.

The master-was to give a very high salary--100,000 francs--but the.
servant was to do everything that the master ordered him, and, if he did
not do it, the master was to tear the skin off his back at the end of
the year, and to dismiss him without pay. <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

The servant said to him,

"All right; I am strong, and I will work."

On the morrow the master gives him a great deal of

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

work, but he does it easily. The last months of the year the master
presses him much more, and one day he sends him into a field to sow
fourteen bushels of wheat in the day. The lad goes sadly, taking with
him a pair of oxen. He returns to the house very late in the evening.
The master says to him,

"Have you done your work

He says, "No."

"Do you remember the agreement we made? I must tear the skin off your
back: that is your salary."

He tears the skin off, as he had said, and sends him away home without
anything. His mother was in great grief at seeing him come home so thin
and weak, and without any money.

He tells what has happened, and the second brother wishes to start off
at once, saying that he is strong, and that he will do more work. The
mother did not like it, but she was obliged to let him go.

He goes to the same house as his brother, and makes the same terms with
the master. When he had almost finished his year, his master sends him
too to sow fourteen bushels of wheat. He starts very early in the
morning, with two pair of oxen; but the night came before he had sown it
all. The master was very glad at the sight of that. He strips his skin
off his back also, and sends him away without any money. Think of the
vexation of this mother in seeing both her sons return in this fashion.

The third wishes to start off at once. He assures his mother that he
will bring back both the money and the skin of his back. He goes to this
same gentleman. He tells this one, too, that he will give him a high
salary, on condition that he will do all that he shall tell him to do,
otherwise he shall have the skin torn off his back, and be sent away
without anything, at the end of the year.

He had made him work hard and well for ten months, and then wished to
try him. He sent him to the field, and told him to sow fourteen bushels
of wheat before night. He answers, "Yes."

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

He takes two pairs of oxen, and goes off to the field. He ploughs a
furrow all round the field, and throws his fourteen bushels of wheat
into it. He then makes another furrow, to cover it up, and at night time
he goes home to the house. The master is astonished. He asks him if he
has sown it.

"Yes, it is all under ground; you may be sure of it."

The master was not pleased; he had his fears.

The next day he sends him with sixteen head of cattle to such a field,
and says to him,

"You must take all these cattle into the field without unlocking the
gate or making a gap."

Our lad takes a hatchet, a hoe, and a fork. Off he goes, and when he
gets to the field he kills them all, one by one. He cuts them up with
the hatchet, and throws them with the fork into the field.

He comes home at nightfall, and says to his master that all the cattle
are in the field as he had told him. The master was not pleased, but he
said nothing.

The next day he told him to go to such a forest and to bring a load of
wood from there, but all the sticks quite, quite straight. Our lad goes
off and cuts down in the chestnut copse all the young chestnut trees
which his master had planted, and which were very fine ones; and he
comes home. When the master saw that, he was not pleased, and said to
him,

"To-morrow you shall go again with the oxen; and you must bring a load
of wood quite crooked, all quite crooked if you bring only one straight,
so much the worse for you."

The lad goes off, and pulls up a fine vineyard. After he had loaded his
cart, he comes home. When the master saw that, he could not say
anything; but he did not know what to think of it.

He sends him into a forest. There was a Tartaro, there; and all the
persons, and all the animals who went there, he ate them all. The master
gives him ten pigs, and also food for ten days, telling him that the
hogs would fatten themselves

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

well there, because there were plenty of acorns, and that he must return
at the end of ten days.

Our lad begins, and he goes on, and on, and on. He meets an old woman,
who says to him:

"Where are you going to, lad?"

"To such a forest, to fatten these pigs."

The woman says to him:

"If you are not a fool, you will not go there. That horrible Tartaro
will eat you."

This woman was carrying a basket of walnuts on her head, and he said to
her:

"If you will give me two of these walnuts I will beat the Tartaro."

She willingly gives them to him, and he goes on, and on, and on. He
meets another old woman, who was winding thread. She says to him:

"Where are you going, lad?

"To such a forest."

"Don't go there. There is a horrible Tartaro there, who will be sure to
eat you, and your pigs as well."

"I must go there all the same, and I will conquer him, if you will give
me two of your balls of thread."

She gives him them, willingly; and he goes on farther, and finds a
blacksmith, and he, too, asks him where he is going? And he answers, "To
such a forest, to fatten my pigs."

"You may just as well go back again. There is a terrible Tartaro there,
who will be sure to eat you."

"If you will give me a spit, I will beat him."

"I will give it you, willingly," and he gives it him with goodwill.

Our lad goes on, and comes to this forest. He cuts off the tails of all
his pigs, and hides them in a safe place. The Tartaro appears, and says
to him:

"How did you come here? I am going to eat you."

The lad says to him:

"Eat a pig if you like, but don't touch me."

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

He takes his two nuts, and rubs them one against the other. "I have two
balls here, and if one of them touches you, you are dead."

The Tartaro is frightened, and goes away in silence. After having eaten
a pig, he comes back again, and says to him:

"We must make a wager--which of the two will make the greatest heap of
wood?"

The Tartaro begins to cut and to cut. Our lad leaves him alone, and when
he has made a. terrible big heap, he begins to go round all the trees
with his balls of thread, and says to him.

"You, that; but I, all this;" and he goes on tying and tying. The
Tartaro gives in, saying "that he is more clever than he." As he had
stopped his ten days, he makes in the night a great fire, and makes his
spit red-hot in it and while the Tartaro was sleeping, he plunges this
spit into his only eye. After having taken his pigs' tails, he goes away
from the forest without any pigs, because the Tartaro had eaten one
every day. Near his master's house there was "a well of the
fairy." <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) Our lad sticks in there the
tails of all his hogs, excepting one, as well as he could. He then goes
running to his master, telling him that all the pigs were coming home
very gaily, and that they had got so hot in coming so fast that they had
all gone under the mud. "I wished to drag one out by pulling, but only
the tail came away; here it is."

He goes off then with the master to this marsh; but the master did not
dare go in there to pull them out. He goes off sadly with his servant
home, not knowing what to think about it. There he counts him out his
100,000 francs, and he went home proudly to his mother and his brothers.
There they lived happily, and their master was left with 100,000 francs
less. That served him right for having so much.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[11:1](bl09.htm#fr_16) This agreement is found
also in the Norse and in Brittany. See Contes Populaires de la Grande
Bretagne," by Loys Brueyre, pp. 25, 26. This is an excellent work. The
incident of Shylock, in the "Merchant of Venice," will occur to every
one.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[15:1](bl09.htm#fr_17) Literally, "Marsh of the
Basa-Andre." The "Puits des Fées" are common in France, especially in
the Landes and in the Gironde.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tartaro and Petit Perroquet](bl10)
