[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl27)  [Next](bl29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WITCHES AND THE IDIOTS.

ONCE upon a time there were two brothers, the one an idiot, and the
other a fool. They had an old mother, old, old, very old. One morning
early the elder arranges to go with his sheep to the mountain, and he
leaves the fool at home with his old, old, mother, and said to him:

"I will give my mother some chocolate now, and you will give her a hot
bath (afterwards), quite, quite, hot."

He goes to the mountain with his sheep. The second son put the water on
to boil, and said to his mother:

"My mother, the water is hot, what bath would you like?" <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

She says to him:

"A bath with wood-ashes."

And he carries it to the bed while it is boiling; and as she did not get
up, he said to her:

"Would you like a little broth?" And she said "Yes."

"My mother, get up quickly!" and she did not get up.

He takes her, and puts her himself into this boiling water, so that he
boiled his poor mother. And he said to her,

"My mother, get up again; the water is not cold."

She did not answer. The night comes, and the other brother returns from
the mountains, and says to him

"How is our mother?"

"All right."

"Have you given her the bath?"

"Yes; but she is still there, and she is asleep in her bath."

"Go and see if she is still asleep."

He goes, and says, "No, no; she is laughing--she keeps on laughing."

The other brother goes there, and perceives that their mother is quite
dead. He did not know what to do. They both go into the garden, and
there they make a great hole and bury her.

They then burn the house, go into the woods, see the witches, cure the
king's daughter, whom one of them marries, and they live happily. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)

 

It is *possible* that this first part may be a narrative of fact. We
knew at Asté, near Bagnères de Bigorre, a brother, an idiot "crétin,"
who deliberately began to chop up his sister (also an idiot and
"crétin"), who offered no resistance. He had chopped off several of her
fingers, when they were [accidentally](errata.htm#0) interrupted. In
spite of the blood and pain, she was only laughing at it.

We have another tale of this kind, which may be also founded on fact, so
sad is often the condition of the crétins

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

in the mountains. It is of a mother and her imbecile son; he nearly
kills himself by chopping off the branch of the tree on which he was
sitting. Then he believes himself dead, and commits various other
follies. His mother thinks a wife might be able to take care of him, and
tells him to cast sheeps' eyes at the young girls coming out of church
after mass. He takes this literally, cuts out the eyes of all their
flock, and so kills their sheep, the only thing they had, and throws
these at the girls, who are disgusted, and quarrel with him. He goes
home, and mother and son end their lives together in wretchedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[67:1](bl28.htm#fr_64) That is, one with bran,
or herbs, wood-ashes, &c., or plain water.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[68:1](bl28.htm#fr_65) M. Cerquand gives this
tale at length, Part II., pp. 10, 11. The incidents are very slightly
changed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witch and the New-Born Infant](bl29)
