[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl59)  [Next](bl61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARIATIONS OF OTHER FRENCH FAIRY-TALES.

We have also, in Basque, a version of Madame d'Aulnoy's "Abenan." It
seems to be a mixture of various legends strung together by this
fanciful writer; but we do not think it worth either our own or our
readers' while to try to disentangle its separate parts. The pretty
little tale of "The Faded Roses" has been told us from two quite
different sources. This tale, though without doubt derived from the
French, we can trace up in Basque further than any other. It was told us
by a lady of between seventy and eighty, who heard it as a child from an
old nurse, whom *she* distinctly remembers to have told her that she
learnt it as a child from her mother. It must thus have existed in
Basque over a century.

We have also two versions of Tom Thumb, who is called in the one
"Ukhailtcho," or "Baratchuri"--"a clove of garlic;" <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_169) in the other, "Mundua-mila-pes," both
containing the episode of his being swallowed by an ox; in the last, he
himself is swallowed, as they are washing out the ox' entrails, by "a
thief of a dog"--"Ohoñ chakhurra." It is singular that the same episode
is preserved in the Gaelic; *cf.* Campbell, Vol. III., p. 114.

We have in MS. a long Rabelesian legend, which opens like
Cenac-Moncaut's tale of "Le Coffret de la Princesse," in his
"Littérature Populaire de la Gascogne" (Paris, 1868). A king will give
one of his daughters to whoever can guess what the skin of a certain
animal is. It is the devil who guesses it, and who marries the princess.
She is saved by the "white mare," which appears in so many of our tales.
She then dresses as a man, but, nevertheless, a prince falls in love
with her; and then follow a lot of scenes, the converse of the adventure
of Achilles in Scyros. They marry;

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

but, after seven years, the devil-husband reappears. After strange
adventures, they are again succoured and united by the "white mare," who
binds the devil for ever, and then flies to heaven-as a white pigeon,
and the rest live happily ever after. This legend is from "Laurentine,
Sister of Toutou," and may be mingled with Cascarrot legends. We have
given it as derived from the French, partly because the heroine's name
is Fifine, and because this, and "Petit Perroquet and the Tartaro," are
the only tales in our collection in which the term "prince" is employed
in the Basque instead of "the king's son." *Cf.* Campbell's "Highland
Tales," *passim*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[191:1](bl60.htm#fr_170) This was recited to M.
Vinson, and has been published by him in the "Revue de Linguistique," p.
241 (Janvier, 1876). We have since heard of a longer form preserved at
Renteria, in Guipuzcoa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of Publications of Foreign Legends in France](bl61)
