[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl69)  [Next](bl71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

#### AN ESSAY

###### ON THE

# BASQUE LANGUAGE,

### By M. JULIEN VINSON.

THE Basque Language is one which is particularly attractive to
specialists. Its place in the general series of idioms has at last been
well defined--it is an agglutinative and incorporating language, with
some tendency to polysynthetism. It consequently finds a place in the
second great morphological linguistic group, between the Finnic and the
North American family of languages. I shall now attempt a very short
sketch of its general features; but I must ask permission, first,
briefly to state some of the most essential principles of the science of
language.

It is acknowledged that the science of language--that is to say, the
science of the characteristic phenomenon of the human species, is a
purely natural science. It has nothing in common with philology, which
is mainly a historical study. Whether it be called *linguistique*,
glottology, phonology, or even, by a too common abuse, comparative
philology, the science of language follows the same method as the other
natural sciences, and advances by observation and experience. The direct
subject-matter of this science is

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

those vocal organisms which express, by sensible sounds, thought and its
divers modes of existence. These organisms are the spontaneous and
unconscious product of organs which, as natural phenomena, fall under
the general law of perpetual variation, acted on by their surroundings,
climate, &c.; but as incapable of being modified by the external or
internal exercise of human volition as any other of the organized beings
which surround us.

But as the object of language is to express thought in all its niceties,
both the fact that gives rise to it, and the modifications of it caused
by time and space, so it is seen that different idioms have adopted
different methods of expressing, in the best and readiest manner, the
idea, the conception or intuition, with its variable forms, in order to
translate with precision its *signification*, and its relations. From
this point of view language has been divided into three great groups:
the first, that of isolating languages, wherein the monosyllabic roots
all retain their meaning, and wherein the relations are only expressed
conventionally, *i.e.*, were not originally expressed at all; the
second, that of agglutinative languages, in which the relations are
expressed by roots once significative, but now reduced to a secondary
and subordinate office; lastly, the third, that of inflectional
languages, in which the change of relations is expressed by a
modification in the root itself, and even in the radical vowel. It is
clear that the idioms of the second group were once isolating, and that
inflectional idioms have passed through both the former states. We
conclude from this that language is essentially progressive and variable
in the sense of a constant improvement in the expression of relations.
And yet, in the study of existing languages we find, on the contrary,
that they are often in this respect inferior to their ancestors.

This contradiction, however, is only an apparent one. Thus, as
Schleicher has demonstrated, languages are born,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

grow up, become stationary, decline and die; in a word, live after the
same fashion as do organized beings. There are in every language two
principal periods--that, of *formal development*, during which the idiom
passes from the first (monosyllabic) stage to the second (agglutinative)
by reducing certain roots to a secondary and dependent office, then from
the second to the third (inflectional) by a new effort to express
simultaneously signification and relation; and that of *formal decay*,
during which the original meaning of the relative affixes is more and
more forgotten, they get worn out, change by degrees, and often end by
perishing altogether. *Formal decay* begins when a language becomes
historical, and it often gives rise to remarkable cases of *regressive
metamorphosis*. One remark which we must make on this subject is that
the known agglutinative languages have not spontaneously arrived at
historical life--that is to say, have not commenced their decay, except
under the influence of a foreign idiom either isolating or inflectional.
Nevertheless, during their decay, languages can adopt fresh forms, but
these are merely composed, of words already in use; man in the
historical period has no longer bare roots at his service. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_176)

These linguistic elements are, moreover, subject to the terrible law of
the struggle for existence, and of vital competition. Many of them have
perished and have left no trace; others are preserved to us merely in
some scanty records. The Basque, pressed hard by Latin and its derived
languages, has lost ground, especially in Spain. Beyond its actual
limits, there are in Navarre many villages, the names of which are
Basque, but in which Spanish only is spoken; and all along the frontiers
of the actual region of the Basque

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

in the Spanish provinces this idiom is spoken only by a minority of the
inhabitants. It is, moreover, undergoing modification everywhere; the
children often replace the old expressive native terms by a vocabulary
drawn from the Romance tongues. In those places which are most in
contact with strangers, and in which the movement of modern life is most
keenly felt--at St. Sebastian and at St. Jean de Luz, for instance--the
language has become exceedingly debased and incorrect. Everything
presages the speedy extinction of the Escuara or Euscara, which is the
name given to the Basque by those who speak it. The word, apparently,
means merely "manner of speaking." All people have, in a greater or less
degree, the pretension which caused the Greeks to treat all foreigners
as barbarians--that is, as not properly-speaking men.

Prince L. L. Bonaparte reckons the actual number of the Basques, not
including emigrants established in Mexico, at Monte Video, and at Buenos
Ayres, at 800,000, of whom 660,000 are in Spain, and 140,000 in France.

The phonetic laws of the Escuara are simple; the sounds most frequently
employed are the sibilants, nasals, and hard gutturals; the soft
consonants are often suppressed between two vowels. The mixed sounds,
between palatals and gutturals, characteristic of the second large group
of languages, are also frequently met with. One of the predominant
features is the complete absence of reduplication of consonants, the
aversion to groups of consonants, and the care taken to complete the
sound of final mute consonants by an epenthetic vowel. It is probable
that originally the words were composed of a series of syllables formed
regularly of a single consonant and a vowel. We must mention, besides,
the double form of the nominatives, one of which is used only as the
subject of an active verb; the other serves equally for the subject of
the intransitive,

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

and the object of the active verb. This is absolutely the same
distinction remarked by M. Fried. Müller in the Australian languages
between the subjective and the predicative nominative.

Formal derivation is accomplished by means of suffixing the elements of
relations; pronominal signs are nevertheless not only suffixed, but also
prefixed to verbs. Except in this respect, nouns and verbs are not
treated in two distinct manners; they are both equally susceptible of
receiving suffixes which mark the relations of time and space, and many
of which have preserved in their integrity both their proper
signification and their primitive sonorous form. The article is the
remote demonstrative pronoun. The pronouns "we" and "ye" are not the
plurals of "I" and "thou," but have the appearance of special
individualities. There are no possessive derivative terms; "my house,"
for example, is expressed by "the house of me," and has no analogy with
"I eat," or any other verbal expression. There are no genders, although
some suffixes are specially replaced by others in the names of animate
beings; and in the verb there are special forms to indicate if a man or
woman is being spoken to. There is no dual. The sign of the plural is
interposed between the article and the suffixes. In the singular alone
can there be an indefinite or indeterminate declension without the
article.

The conjugation is exceedingly complicated. The Basque verb includes in
a single verbal expression the relations of space; of one person to
another--(1) *subjective* (the idea of neutrality, of action limited to
its author), (2) *objective* (the idea of action on a direct object),
and (3) *attributive* (the idea of an action done to bear on an object
viewed indirectly, the idea of indirect action); the relations of time;
the relations of state, corresponding to as many distinct moods; the
variations of action, expressed by different

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

voices; the distinctions of subject or object, marked by numerous
personal forms;. the conditions of time and state which are expressed by
conjunctions in modem languages to each of these relations is
appropriated an affix, often considerably abbreviated and condensed, but
almost always recognisable.

The primitive Basque verb--that is to say, in its full development--did
not differ from that of other languages of the globe. It comprised only
two *moods*, the indicative, and the conjunctive, which was derived from
the indicative by a suffix; and three *tenses*, the present, the
imperfect, and a kind of aorist indicating eventual possibility. There
was only one *secondary voice*, the causative, formed by a special
affix. To these forms it joined the signs of the direct and indirect
object, which is the essential characteristic of incorporating idioms.

During its historic life, during its period of formal decay, the verb
has experienced in Basque modifications which are not found to a similar
extent elsewhere. The primitive conjugation, or, so to say, the simple
and direct one of verbal nouns, has little by little fallen into disuse,
and has been replaced by a singular combination of verbal nouns, of
adjectives, and of some auxiliary verbs. Thus it is that the Escuara, in
all its dialects, has developed eleven moods and ninety-one tenses (each
of which has three persons in each number), variable according to the
sex or rank of the person addressed; it receives besides a certain
number of terminations, which perform the office of our conjunctions.
Moreover, from the totality of these auxiliaries two parallel series
have been formed, which, joined alternatively to nouns of action,
produce the active and middle voices, or rather the transitive and
intransitive. The auxiliaries of the periphrastic conjugation are almost
the only verbs that have been preserved belonging to the simple
primitive system.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

With regard to syntax, the Basque resembles all agglutinative languages.
The sentence is always simple. The phrases are generally short; relative
pronouns are unknown. The complexity of the verb, which unites many
ideas in a single word, contributes to this simplicity of the sentence,
in which the subject and the attribute, with their respective
complements, tend to form but one expression. This object is attained by
the invariability of the adjectives, and especially by composition.

The adjective is placed after the noun it qualifies, whilst the
genitive, on the contrary, precedes the governing noun.

Composition is of such common use in Basque, that it has caused several
juxta-posed words to be contracted and reduced, so as to be partially
confounded one with the other. This phenomenon is familiar to languages
of the New World; it is this which properly constitutes
*polysynthetism*, and which we must carefully distinguish from
*incorporation*. This last word should be reserved to designate more
particularly the phenomena of objective or attributive conjugation
common to idioms of the second form.

The Basque vocabulary appears to be very poor. Although it is still
imperfectly known (for the old books, and the names of places, as well
as certain little studied dialectic variations, must have retained some
words generally forgotten), we are yet able to assert that pure Basque
terms do not express abstract ideas. Except in words borrowed from the
Gascon, French, Spanish, and Latin, we find no trace of any advanced
civilization, and we can discover but very few expressions which imply
collectivity or generalization--*e.g.*, there is no word which has the
wide signification of our word "tree," of our "animal." "God" is simply,
by anthropomorphism, "the Master on High." One and the same Word
translates our ideas of "will, desire, fancy, thought." Borrowed words

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

are more numerous, from the fact that the influence of Aryan dialects
has been felt through many ages; it is probably owing to their contact
with the Indo-European races that the Basques, or those who used to
speak the Basque, have any historical existence.

Thus, in order to study this singular idiom, it is necessary to
understand thoroughly the history of the intervention of Latin in the
Pyrenean region. No assistance is to be obtained from written documents,
for there is not (and there cannot have been) any primitive Basque
literature. The oldest book was published in 1545. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_177) The second is the Protestant version of
the New Testament, printed at La Rochelle by order of Jeanne d'Albret,
in 1571. <span id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_178)

Another difficulty arises from the extreme variability of the language.
There are, perhaps, not two villages where it is spoken absolutely in
the same manner. This is natural enough among an unlettered people, and
one which can only rise to the level of the surrounding civilization by
forgetting its ancient language. These different varieties are easily
grouped into secondary dialects. Prince L. L. Bonaparte recognises
twenty-five of them, but they are reduced without difficulty to eight
great dialects. A closer inspection further reduces these eight
divisions to three; that is to say, the differences between the eight
principal dialects are unequal, and admit of partial resemblances.

The eight dialects are: (1) The Labourdine, (2) The Souletine, (3) The
Eastern Lower-Navarrese, (4) The Western Lower-Navarrese, (5) The
Northern Upper-Navarrese, (6) The Southern Upper-Navarrese, (7) The
Guipuzcoan, (8) The Biscayan. The Souletine and the two

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lower-Navarrese
dialects form the first group, which may be called the Oriental
division. The Biscayan alone forms the Western, and the four others form
the Central group. These names are taken from territorial divisions. *La
Soule* was formerly a province feudatory to Navarre, and now embraces,
within the French department of the Basses-Pyrénées, the cantons of
Mauléon and Tardets, as well as some parishes of the canton of St.
Palais, in the arrondissement of Mauléon. The *Labourd*, a viscounty,
vassal of the Duchy of Aquitaine, corresponded to the cantons of Bayonne
(excepting the city itself and three other parishes), of St. Jean de
Luz, of Ustaritz, of Espelette, and part of Hasparren, in the
arrondissement of Bayonne. The remaining part of the two French
arrondissements which we have just named composes Lower Navarre, which
is again subdivided into the districts of Cize, Mixe, Arberoue,
Ostabaret, and the valleys of Osses and Baigorry. This was originally
the sixth merindad of Navarre, a kingdom which extended into Spain as
far as the Ebro, from Garde and Cortés on the one side to Vera and Viana
on the other. Basque is still spoken along the French frontier and in
several valleys forming the upper part of the territory. *Guipuzcoa*
contains the cantons (*partidos*) of St. Sebastian, Tolosa, Azpeitia,
and Vergara. *Biscay* comprises all the territory between Ondarroa and
the river of Sommorostro, between La Carranza and the Peña de Gorbea.

The dialects do not correspond exactly to the territorial subdivisions
whose names they bear. Thus the Western Lower-Navarrese is spoken in a
part of the ancient Labourd; the Biscayan in Guipuzcoa. Lastly, on the
Spanish maps, there is another Basque province, Alava; but Basque is
scarcely spoken there, excepting in a narrow strip along the northern
frontier. The dialect of these Alavese districts is included in the
Biscayan. To resume, the Biscayan dialect

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

is now spoken in Alava, Biscay, and the western third part of Guipuzcoa,
in Vergara, and in Las Salinas; the Guipuzcoan in almost all the rest of
Guipuzcoa; the Northern Upper-Navarrese in some villages of Guipuzcoa on
the French frontier, in Fontarabie, Irun, and in the northern part of
Navarre; the Southern Upper-Navarrese in the rest of Basque Navarre; the
Labourdine in the south-western part of the arrondissement of Bayonne;
the Western Lower-Navarrese in the north-eastern part of the same
arrondissement; the Souletine is spoken in the two cantons of Mauléon
and Tardets, and at Esquiule in the arrondissement of Oloron; the
Eastern Lower-Navarrese extends into the arrondissement of Bayonne as
far as St. Pierre d'Irube, by Meharrin, Ayherre, Briscous, Urcuit.

Of these arrondissements, of these provinces, none is entirely Basque in
a linguistic point of view, except Guipuzcoa, Navarre is only half so,
Alava only a tenth part. A little less than a fourth part has to be
subtracted from Biscay, and certain Gascon villages from the
arrondissements of Mauléon and Bayonne in France. Neither Bayonne, nor
Pampeluna, nor Bilbao are Basque. <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_179)
And, moreover, skirting the districts where the Basque is the native
idiom of the majority of the inhabitants, on many points there is an
intermediate zone in which Basque is known only by a minority of the
population; nevertheless, this zone must be included in the geographical
area of the idiom, since the persons who speak Basque in it know it as
their native language, and have never learnt it. This zone is most
extensive in Navarre, but exists also in Alava and in Biscay. In France
there is no analogous mixed zone; and, as M. P.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Broca remarks
("Sur l'Origine et la Repartition de la, Langue Basque," Paris, 1875, p.
39), "the demarcation is brusque, and may be indicated by a single
line." The Basques, moreover, in this respect, present some curious
points for study. "In the valley of Roncal the men speak Spanish
together; with the women they speak Basque, as do the women to each
other. A similar state of things is to be observed at Ochagavia in
Salazar. But this custom is not observed in the Roncalese villages of
Uztarroz and Isaba, where the men among themselves speak indifferently
Basque or Spanish." (Prince L. L. Bonaparte, "Etudes sur les Dialects
d'Aezcoa," &c.) p. 3).

The preceding description justifies the opinion advanced at the
beginning of this notice. The Basque is an agglutinative idiom, and must
be placed, in a morphological point of view, between the Finnic family,
which is simply incorporating, and the North American incorporating and
polysynthetic families. But we must not conclude thence that the
Escuara, is a near relation either of the Finnic or of the Magyar, of
the Algonquin or of the Irokese. The relationship of two or more
languages cannot, in fact, be concluded merely from a resemblance of
their external physiognomy. To prove a community of origin, it is
indispensable that (if compared at the same stage of development) their
principal grammatical elements should not only be analogous in their
functions, but should also have a certain phonetic resemblance, in order
to render the hypothesis of their original identity admissible. It is
better to abstain from asserting that such languages are derived from
the same source, if the significant roots--which, after all, constitute
the proper basis, the true originality of a language--should be found to
be totally different. At present, no language has been discovered which
presents any root-likeness to the Basque, analogous to that which exists

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

between the Sanscrit, Greek, and Gothic, or between Arabic and Hebrew.

Nevertheless, there are in the world minds so devoted to the worship of
their own fixed ideas, so smitten with their own metaphysical dreams, so
full of faith in the necessity of the unity of language, that they have
acquired the habit of torturing the radical elements of a language, and
of making them flexible and variable to an inconceivable degree. They
pass their lives in seeking etymologies, such as those which Schleicher
calls "*Etymologizerungen ins blanc hinein*," and in discovering
phonetic miracles--worthy children of those students of the last
centuries who, in the general ignorance of the science of language,
traced up all languages to Hebrew. The adventurous spirits to whom I
allude have invented a theory of languages in which the vocabulary is
incessantly renewed, and have formed the great "Turanian" family, in
which everything which is neither Aryan, nor Semitic, nor Chinese, must
be perforce included. In this *olla podrida*, where the Japanese elbows
the Esquimaux, and the Australian shakes hands with the Turkish, where
the Tamul fraternizes with the Hungarian, a place is carefully reserved
for the Basque. Many amateurs, more daring still, have wedded the
Escuara, or at least those who speak it, to the *soi-disant* Khamitic
tribes of Egypt; others have united them to the ancient Phoenicians;
others have seen in them the descendants of the Alans; others again,
thanks to the Atlantides, make them a colony of Americans. It is not
long since it was seriously affirmed, and in perfect good faith, that
the Basques and the Kelts, the Welsh or Bretons, understood each other,
and could converse at length, each using his native tongue. I refer
these last to the poet Rulhière:

La contrariété tient souvent au langage:  
On peut s'entendre moins parlant un même son,  
Que si l'un parlait Basque et l'autre Bas-Breton." <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span>

The more serious of these foes of negative conclusions, of these
refiners of quintessences, assert that the ancestors of the Basques are
incontestably the Iberians. In the first place I will remark that,
supposing this proved, the Basques, or, if you will, the Iberians, would
not be the less isolated; for how could the Iberian, any more than the
Basque, be allied to the Keltic or to the Carthaginian? But this Iberian
theory is not yet at all proved, and it will be easy to show it to be so
in a few words. It reposes first of all on the following a *à
priori*--the Iberians have occupied all Spain and the south of Gaul, but
the Escuara lives still at the foot of the Pyrénées; therefore the
Escuara is a remnant of the language of the Iberians. The error of the
syllogism is patent; the conclusion does not follow, and is wrongly
deduced from the premises. As to the direct proofs, they are reduced to
essays of interpretation, either of inscriptions called Iberian or
Keltiberian, or of numismatic legends, or of proper, and especially of
topographical names. <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_180) The
inscriptions and legends are written in characters evidently of
Phoenician origin, but their interpretation is anything but certain. All
the readings, all the translations into Basque, proposed by MM. Boudard,
Phillips, and others, are disputed by the linguists who are now studying
the Basque. The names collected from ancient authors form a more solid
basis; but the explanations proposed by W. von Humboldt, and after him
by many etymologists without method, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[2](#fn_181) are equally for the most part
inadmissible. The Iberian theory is not proved, though it is perfectly
possible.

The Basques do not present, in an anthropological point of view, as far
as we know at present, any original and well-defined

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

characteristic other than their language. <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_182) Nothing in their manners or customs is
peculiar to them. It is in vain that some writers have tried to discover
the strange custom of the "couvade" among them, a custom still observed,
it is said, by the natives of South America and in the plains of
Tartary. It consists in the husband, when his wife is confined, going to
bed with the new-born infant, and there he "couve," "broods over it," so
to say. No modern or contemporaneous writer has found this custom among
the Basques; and as to historical testimony, it is reduced to a passage
of Strabo--which nothing proves to be applicable to the ancestors of the
present Basques--and to certain allusions in writers of the last two
centuries. These allusions always refer to the Béarnais, the dialect
whence the word "couvade" is borrowed.

Prince L. L. Bonaparte has discovered that in the Basque dialect of
Roncal the moon is called "Goicoa;" Jaungoicoa is the word for "God" in
Basque, and would mean "the Lord Moon," or rather "our Lord the Moon."
He cites, with reference to this, "the worship of the moon by the
ancient Basques." The only evidence in favour of this worship is a
passage of Strabo (Lib. iii., iv. 16), where it is said that the
Keltiberians, and their neighbours to the north, honour a certain
anonymous God by dances before their doors at night during the full
moon. But it must be proved that the Keltiberians and their neighbours
to the north were Basques.

Another passage of Strabo has furnished arguments to the "Iberists." He
says (Lib. iii., iv. 18) that among the Cantabrians the daughters
inherited, to the detriment of their brothers. M. Eugène Cordier has
endeavoured, after

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Laferrière
("Histoire du Droit Français"), to establish that this arrangement is
the origin of the right of primogeniture without distinction of sex, and
which is found more or less in all the "coutumes" of the Western
Pyrénées. He has developed this theory in an interesting essay, "Sur
l'Organisation de la Famille chez les Basques" (Paris, 1869). But an
able lawyer of Bayonne, M. Jules Balasque, has shown in Vol. II. of his
remarkable "Etudes Historiques sur la Ville de Bayonne" (Bayonne,
1862-75) that there is nothing peculiar to the Basques in this fact; and
we can only recognise in it, as in the opposite custom of "juveignerie"
in certain northern "coutumes," an application of a principle
essentially Keltic or Gallic for the preservation of the patrimony.

In conclusion, I beg my readers to excuse the brevity of the preceding
notes; but, pressed for time, and overwhelmed with a multitude of
occupations, it has not been possible for me to do more. If I am still
subject to the reproach which Boileau addresses to those who, in
striving to be concise, become obscure, I have at least endeavoured to
conform to the precept of the Tamul poet, Tiruvalluva--"To call him a
man who lavishes useless words, is to call a man empty straw" (I. Book,
xx. chap., 6th stanza).

Bayonne, *August* 28, 1876.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span id="img_23400"></span> ![](img/23400.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_176"></span>[221:1](bl70.htm#fr_177) I am not unaware that
certain portions of the theory above stated have been recently disputed,
especially by Mr. Sayce ("Principles of Comparative Philology," Trübner,
London, 1874). But I am unable, for the present at least, to accept all
these criticisms, and I have here no opportunity of discussing them
fully, or to good purpose.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[226:1](bl70.htm#fr_178) "Poésies Basques de
Bernard Dechepare." A most careful reprint, word for word, was published
by Cazals, Bayonne, in 1874.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[226:2](bl70.htm#fr_179) An exact reprint of
the Gospel of St. Mark in this version, with notes, &c., by M. J.
Vinson, was also published at Bayonne (Cazals), 1874.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[228:1](bl70.htm#fr_180) For more minute and
complete topographical details, see the excellent linguistic maps of
Prince L. L. Bonaparte, which are models of the application of geography
to the aid of philological study. The peculiar dialect spoken in every
village, and, in some instances, in almost every house, may be there
traced.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[231:1](bl70.htm#fr_181) M. Van Eys has
consecrated an excellent article to these etymologies in the "Revue de
Linguistique," Juillet, 11874, pp. 3-15.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[231:2](bl70.htm#fr_182) It must, however be
acknowledged that M. Luchaire, in various pamphlets relating to the
ancient toponymy of Spain, has made certain of these explanations more
acceptable.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[232:1](bl70.htm#fr_183) A form of skull,
postero-dolichocephalous, with good facial angle, ortho- or
opistho-gnathous, but of comparatively small cerebral content, is
claimed by some as peculiar to the Basques.--W. W.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.--Pastorales](bl71)
