<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](boe077) 
[Next](boe079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0037Z6LLW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Enoch*, by R.H. Charles, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXXV.

1\. And the leaders of the heads of the thousands, who are placed over
the whole creation and over all the stars, have also to do with the four
intercalary days, being inseparable from their office, according to the
reckoning of the year, and these render service on the four days which
are not reckoned in the reckoning of the year. 2. And owing to them men
go wrong therein, for those luminaries truly render service on the
world-stations, one in the first portal, one in the third portal of the
heaven, one in the fourth portal, and one in the sixth portal, and the
exactness of the year is accomplished through its separate three hundred
and sixty-four stations. 3. For the signs and the times and the years
and the days the angel Uriel showed to me, whom the Lord of glory hath
set for ever over all the luminaries of the heaven, in the heaven and in
the world, that they should rule on the face of the heaven and be seen
on the earth, and be leaders for the day and the night, *i.e.* the sun,
moon, and stars, and all the ministering creatures which make their
revolution in all the chariots of the heaven. 4. In like manner twelve
doors Uriel showed me, open in the circumference of the sun's chariot in
the heaven, through which the rays of the sun break forth: and from them
is warmth diffused over the earth, when they are opened at their
appointed seasons. 5. \[And for the winds and the spirit of the dew†
when they are opened, standing open in the heavens at the ends.\] 6. As
for the twelve portals in the heaven, at the ends of the earth, out of
which go forth the sun, moon, and stars, and all

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the works of heaven in the east and in the west. 7. There are many
windows open to the left and right of them, and one window at its
(appointed) season produces warmth, corresponding (as these do) to those
doors from which the stars come forth according as He has commanded
them, and wherein they set corresponding to their number. 8. And I saw
chariots in the heaven, running in the world, above those portals in
which revolve the stars that never set. 9. And one is larger than all
the rest, and it is that that makes its course through the entire world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVI](boe079)

</div>
