<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bata12)  [Next](bata14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574IW/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Babylonian Talmud in Selection*, by Leo Auerbach, \[1944\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### Betrothals

### (<span class="smallcaps">Tractate Kiddushin</span>)

A WIFE is acquired in three ways, and she can get her freedom in two
ways. She is acquired through money, through a deed, or through sexual
intimacy. And she can get her freedom by divorce, or through her
husband's death.

(*Mishna*)

 

THIS Mishna is in accord with Rabbi Simon, for Rabbi Simon taught: Why
did the *Torah* say (*Deuteronomy* xxii, 13) *If a man take a wife*, and
not if a woman is taken by a man? Because this is the way of the male to
go out and look for the female, and it is not the custom for the female
to look for the male. This is the same when someone loses an object. Who
is looking for whom? The loser looks for the object, and not the object
for the loser.

By money. How so? We have learned that the father exercises authority
over his daughter in regard to her betrothal by money contract, or
intercourse. How do we know that she can be acquired through money,

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

and that the money belongs to her father? Rab Yehuda replied in the name
of Rab: The scriptures say: (*Exodus* xxi, 11) *Then shall she go out
free without money*. Her master does not receive any money, but money is
given to another master, namely, the father. How about the money
belonging to the girl? How is it that her father has authority over her
betrothal? For it is written: (*Deuteronomy* xxii, 16) *I gave my
daughter unto this man*, and she should get the money. Possibly this
refers to a minor who has no right to accept her betrothal contract; but
how about a grown girl, who has the right to accept her betrothal
contract? She can betroth herself and take the money. It is written
(*Numbers* xxx, 16) *In her youth in her father's house*. All gain of
youth belongs to her father. The Rabbis taught: How is a wife acquired
through money? If a man gave a woman money, or its equivalent, and said
to her: Thou art betrothed to me; Thou art consecrated to me; Thou art a
wife to me,—then she is betrothed to him. But if she gives the money to
the man and says: I am betrothed to thee; I am consecrated to thee; I am
a wife to thee,—she is not betrothed.

(*Gemara*)

 

A HEBREW slave is acquired by money or by a deed: and can free himself
in the "seventh" year, or in the year of Jubilee or by paying for the
outstanding time of his service. The Hebrew female slave has the
advantage of being freed by signs of puberty. The slave who does not
want to be freed in the "seventh" year is secured by having his ear
bored, and is made free in the Jubilee or on his master's death.

(*Mishna*)

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

THE Rabbis taught: If the man stole a thousand, but he is worth five
hundred, he is sold once and then sold again. If he stole five hundred,
and he is worth a thousand, he is not sold at all. Rabbi Eliezer says:
If his theft corresponds to his worth, he is sold, otherwise he is not
sold at all. The Rabbis said: In the following arguments Rabbi Eliezer
prevails over the Rabbis: If he stole five hundred but he is still worth
a thousand, he is not sold; because the All Merciful said: (*Exodus*
xxii, 3) *Then he shall be sold*. All of him, and not half of him and
the All Merciful also said: (*Exodus* xxii, 3) *Sold for his theft;* not
for half of his theft.

A slave is freed against her own will. Raba wanted to interpret this:
against the master's will, but Abaya said to him: How is that? Does it
mean that one gives the master a bond for the value?—Would that be
right? A man has a pearl in his hand, and we will give him a potsherd
for it? But Abaya explained: It is meant against the will of her father,
because of the disgrace to the family. Then should the family of a
Hebrew male slave be compelled to redeem him because of the disgrace to
the family?—Then he may go and sell himself again. In the case of the
female slave too, cannot the father go and sell her again? Were not we
taught, however, she cannot be sold, and sold over again, and this is
according to Rabbi Simon who taught: A man may sell his daughter for
marriage, and sell her a second time. He may sell her over again. He may
sell her in marriage after servitude, but not for servitude after
marriage says Rabbi Simon. Just as you cannot sell a daughter for
servitude after the marriage, one cannot sell her for servitude after
servitude.

(*Gemara*)

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

A CANAANITE slave is acquired through money, through a bond or through
the law of possession. He can redeem himself through money paid by
others or through a bond of his own. This is according to Rabbi Meir.
The sages, however, said: Through money of his own or by a bond of other
people, providing the money belongs to other people.

Large cattle are acquired through delivery. Small cattle are acquired
through lifting. This according to Rabbis Meir and Eliezer. The sages,
however, said: Small cattle are acquired through pulling.

Secured property can be acquired by money, by a deed, or by the law of
possession.

(*Mishna*)

 

THE Rabbis taught: Through possession in the following manner: If the
slave loosened his shoe, if he carried his baggage for him to the
bathing place, if he undressed him, bathed him, rubbed him, dressed him,
put his shoes on, or if he lifted him, thus he acquired him. Rabbi Simon
said: Possession is not greater than lifting; for by lifting,
acquisition is valid everywhere. What does he mean? Rabbi Ashi explains:
If the slave lifted the master he is thereby acquired by the master, but
if the master lifted the slave, he did not acquire the slave. Rabbi
Simon' said: Possession should not be greater than lifting, since
lifting is recognized everywhere as acquisition.

We are taught: A slave goes free because of the loss of an eye, a tooth,
or a limb that grows not again. It is quite obvious that the slave goes
free because of the loss of an eye or a tooth. This is stated in the
Torah. But how do we apply this to other parts of the body? It

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

is self-evident. An eye or a tooth are blemishes which grow not again,
so the loss of other limbs that grow not again make the slave free.

 

THE Rabbis taught: The father has the following obligations towards his
son: He must circumcise him, redeem him, teach him the *Torah*, take a
wife unto him, and teach him a trade. Some say he must teach him to swim
also. Rabbi Yehuda said: He that does not teach his son a trade, teaches
him to rob. Teaches him to rob? How is that?—we may say: as though he
taught him to rob.

The Rabbis taught: If one must study and is about to marry, he studies
first and marries later. But if he cannot do without a wife, he marries
first, and then he studies. Rab Yehuda said in the name of Samuel: The
law is that he marries first and studies later. Said Rabbi Yohanan:
What? with a stone around his neck he can study the law?

Rab Hisda praised Rab Hamnuna before Rab Huna. He called him a great
man. Said Rab Huna to him: If he comes to you, bring him to me. When Rab
Hamnuna came before Rab Huna, he saw that he had no shawl on him. He
asked him: Why have you no shawl on you? Rab Hamnuna replied: Because I
am unmarried. The Rabbi turned his face away from him and said: Take
notice that you do not see me again until you are married. He was
consistent with his principles. For he said: He who is twenty and is not
married lives in sin. Does he really mean, lives in sin? You may say, in
sinful thoughts.

Rabbi said, and the school of Rabbi Ishmael agreed

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

with him: Till the age of twenty, the Lord sits and waits. When will the
man take a wife unto himself? But when he reaches twenty and had not
taken a wife unto himself, the Lord says: Let his bones be swollen.

Rab Hisda said: The reason I am more alert than my colleagues is because
I was married at sixteen. And had I married at fourteen, I would have
said to Satan, an arrow in thine eye.

Rab said to Rabbi Nehemia ben Ammi: Marry him off while you have your
hand around your son's neck; that is between sixteen and twenty. Others
say: between eighteen and twenty-four. The Rabbis taught: The evil
desire is very hard. Even his Creator called him evil. It was said:
(*Genesis* viii, 21) *For the imagination of man's heart is evil from
his youth*.

Rabbi Isaac said: The desire of man renews itself every day and has
designs on him. As it was written: (*Genesis* vi, 5) *was only evil
continually*. And Rabbi Simon ben Levi said: The evil desire of man gets
the upper hand of him every day and wishes to destroy him. As was said:
(*Psalms* xxxvii, 32) *The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to
slay him*. And if the Lord, blessed be He, would not prevail against
him, as was said: (*ibid*. 33) *The Lord will not leave him in his
hand*.

The school of Rabbi Ishmael taught: If this reprehensible thing shall
come upon thee, drag it into the house of learning. If it be stone, it
will melt. If it be iron, it will fall to fragments. As it was said:
(*Jeremiah* xxiii, 29) *Is not my word like as fire? saith the Lord; and
like a hammer that breaketh the rock into pieces*. And if it is stone it
will melt, as was said: (*Isaiah* lv, 1) *Ho, everyone that thirsteth,
come ye to* 

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

*the waters*. And moreover it was said: (*Job* xiv, 19) *The waters wear
the stones*.

To take a wife to him. How do we know this? For it was written:
(*Jeremiah* xxix, 6) *Take ye wives and beget sons and daughters; and
take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands*. All this
is said of his sons, for they are in his hands. But what about the
daughters, are they in his hand too?—This is the meaning. One gives her
a dowry, clothing and adornments, so that man will desire her.

 

THE Rabbis taught: It was said: (*Exodus* xx, 12) *Honor thy father and
thy mother*. It is also said: (*Proverbs* iii, 9) *Honor the Lord with
thy substance*. The Scriptures had compared, here, the honor of father
and mother with that of the Lord. It was said: (*Leviticus* xix, 3) *Ye
shall fear every man his mother and his father* and it was said:
(*Deuteronomy* vi, 13) *Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and serve him*.
The Scriptures thus compare the fear of the Lord to that of the father
and mother. It was said: (*Leviticus* xxiv, 15) *Whosoever curseth his
God shall bear his sin*. Thus the Scriptures compare the blessings of
father and mother to the blessing of the Lord.

Said Rab Yehuda in the name of Samuel: Rabbi Eliezer was once asked: How
far should the honor of father and mother extend? He answered: Go and
see how a non-Jew, Dama ben Nethinah of Ashkelon, behaved towards his
father:

Once the sages wanted to buy from him precious stones for the priest's
breastplate. It would have brought him a profit of 60,000 *denars*, and
Rabbi Kahana thinks

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

it was 80,000. But the key to the jewel case was under the pillow of
Dama's father and Dama would not wake him. The Lord rewarded him for it,
for next year a red calf was born in his herd. When the sages of Israel
came to him again, he said to them I know that if I demand it, you would
give me all the money in the world for the red calf, which you need for
your rites. But all I will ask of you is the amount I lost, because of
the honor I paid to my father. Rabbi Hanina commented: If he who is not
commanded, gets such a reward, how much more will be rewarded the man
who was given a commandment and fulfills his commandment.

When Rabbi Dimi came he related: Once Dama sat, among Romans, wearing a
gold-embroidered silken gown. His mother came in and tore the garment
off, struck him on the head, and spat in his face. He, however, did not
shame her.

Abimi, the son of Rabbi Abahu taught: One gives his father pheasants to
tat, yet this drives him out of this world, because of the manner in
which he gives it to him, while another makes his father work at the
grindstone in the mill, and yet this will give him life in the world to
come, for he does so with due honor to his parent.

Rabbi Abahu said: Here is an illustration, how my son Abimi fulfilled
the commandment of honor to his father. Abimi had five ordained sons
during the life of his father, but when Rabbi Abahu came knocking at the
door, he himself would run to open it for him, shouting all the while: I
am coming, I am coming, until he reached it.

One day his father said: Get me a drink of water.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> While he was
getting the water the father fell asleep. Abimi bent over him and stood
there till he awoke. He was rewarded for it, for he succeeded in
interpreting the Song of Asaph, in the *Psalms*.

The Rabbis taught: What is fear and what is honor? Fear means that the
son does not stand in his father's place, does not sit in his father's
place, he does not contradict him and does not overrule him. Honor means
that he feeds him, clothes him, covers him, and leads him in and out.

 

HE THAT is versed in the Scripture, the Mishna and the way of the world
will not sin easily, for it was said: (*Ecclesiastes* iv, 12) *And a
three-fold cord is not quickly broken*. But he who is not versed in the
*Scripture*, nor in the *Mishna*, nor in the ways of life, has no place
in the world.

(*Mishna*)

 

SAID Rabbi Eleazar in the name of Rabbi Zadok: The righteous in this
world are compared to a tree that stands in a clean place, but whose
branches spread over an unclean place. If the branches are pruned off,
the tree is now entirely in a clean place. The Holy One blessed be His
name, brings suffering upon the righteous in this world, so that they
may inherit the world to come, as was said: (*Job* viii, 7) *Though thy
beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly increase*. To
what are the evil compared? To a tree that stands in an unclean place,
but its branches spread to a clean place. If the branches are pruned
off, the tree remains entirely in an unclean place. So does the Holy
One, blessed be His name, bestow goodness upon the sinners in this
world, but He shall destroy them and shall make them inherit

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

the lowest depths of perdition, as was said: (*Prov*. xiv, 12) *There is
a way that seemeth right unto a man; but the ends thereof are the ways
of death*.

Once Rabbi Tarpon and the elders were in an upper story in the house of
Nitzza in Lydia. The question was propounded: What is greater, study or
action? Rabbi Tarpon said: Action. Rabbi Akiba said: Study is greater.
Then all the rabbis agreed and said study is greater, for study leads to
action.

The Rabbis taught: He who eats in the street is like a dog, and some say
he is disqualified from being a witness.

Bar Kappara preached. The hot tempered gains nothing but the effects of
his hot temper. But the good man partakes of the fruit of his good
deeds. From a man that knows no Scripture, no Mishna, and no ways of
life, one may have no benefit. For it was said: (*Psalms* i, 1) His seat
is the seat of the scornful.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER I</span>

 

A MAN may betroth himself personally or through an agent. A woman may
betroth herself personally or through an agent. A man may betroth his
grown daughter personally or through an agent.

If a man said to a woman: Be betrothed to me with this date, or be
betrothed to me with this, and one of them is worth a *perutha*, the
betrothal is valid; if not, it is not valid. If he said: Be betrothed to
me with this, this and this, and they were together worth a *perutha*,
the betrothal is valid; if they are not worth a *perutha*, it is not
valid. If he said: Be betrothed to me with

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

this cup of wine, and it was found to contain honey, or if he said: With
this cup of honey and it was found to contain wine, or with this silver
*denar*, and it was found to be of gold; or with this gold *denar* and
it was found to be of silver; if he said: Be betrothed to me with the
understanding that I am rich, and it was found that he was poor, or if
he said poor and he was found to be rich; the betrothal is not valid.

Rabbi Simon says: If the advantage is on her side, she is betrothed.

If he said to the woman be betrothed to me, because I am a priest and he
was found to be a levite. . . . If he said because I have a grown
daughter or a bondwoman and he does not have them, or he said I have
them not, and he has them, or if he said that he had children and he did
not have them, or if he said he did not have children and had them. In
all of these cases, though she may say: It was in my heart to be
betrothed to him, the betrothal is not valid, and this also holds good
if she deceived the man.

(*Mishna*)

 

IF HE can betroth himself through an agent is it not self-evident that
he can do it personally? Rabbi Joseph said: Personally is preferable to
doing it through an agent. It is even said that herewith is injected a
prohibition. This is in accordance with Rab Yehuda, who quoted Rab: One
is prohibited to be betrothed to a woman before he has seen her, for
upon seeing her he may find something repugnant in her and she may be
detestable to him, and the All Merciful taught: (*Leviticus* xix, 18)
*But thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself*. And this according to Rab
Joseph applies to the woman,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

too. But Resh Lakish disagrees. He says: There is no prohibition as
regards the woman, for it is better to suffer in marriage than to live
in widowhood.

"A man may betroth his grown daughter." He may betroth her when she is
grown, but not when she is a minor. This agrees with Rab. For Rab Yehuda
said in the name of Rab, some may say it was Rabbi Eleazar: It is
prohibited to betroth a daughter while she is a minor, only when she is
grown and declares: "I want so-and-so."

 

RAB Nahman said in the name of Samuel: When orphans come to divide the
estate of their father, the court appoints a guardian for them, and he
selects a proper portion for each of them. But when they become of age
they can protest it. Rab Nahman, however, decided that they cannot
protest, because what would become of the authority of the court? If
then Rab Nah-man decides thus against the court, what becomes of the
authority of the court in this instance? But it is taught: If the
valuation of the judges was one-sixth too high or one-sixth too low the
sale is void. Rabbi Simon ben Gamaliel said: It is not void, otherwise
where does the authority of the court come in? Said Rab Huna in the name
of Rabbi Hinena: Rab Nahman ruled that the law is in agreement with the
sages. There is no contradiction here. It is one thing when the judges
made a mistake, and another thing when there was no mistake.

 

TEN measures of wisdom descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the
Land of Israel and one was taken by the rest of the world. Ten measures
of beauty descended

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

upon the world. Nine were taken by Jerusalem and one by the rest of the
world. Ten measures of wealth descended upon the world, nine were taken
by Rome and one by the rest of the world. Ten measures of poverty
descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Babylon and one by the rest
of the world. Ten measures of rudeness descended upon the world. Nine
were taken by Elam and one by the rest of the world. Was not rudeness
supposed to descend to Babylon? For it was written: (*Zech*. v, 9) *Then
lifted I up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came out two women,
and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a
stork; and they lifted up the ephah between the earth and the heaven.
Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the
ephah? And he said unto me, to build it a house in the land of Shinar*
(Babylon) . Rabbi Yohanan says: This refers to hypocrisy and
haughtiness, which descended upon Babylon. It came first to Babylon, but
went then to Elam. But this is, indeed, not so, said the Master. What is
the sign of rudeness but poverty, and poverty is to be found in Babylon.
What is meant by poverty is poverty of learning, as it is written:
(*Song of Solomon* viii, 8) *We have a little sister and she hath no
breasts*. Rabbi Yohanan said: This refers to Elam, which had the
advantages of learning, but not that of teaching. Ten measures of
strength descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the Persians, and
one by the rest of the world. Ten measures of vermin descended upon the
world. Nine were taken by Medea, and one. . . . Ten measures of
witchcraft descended upon the world. Nine were taken by Egypt, and one.
. . . Ten measures of

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

plagues descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the pigs, and one.
. . . Ten measures of whoring descended upon the world. Nine were taken
by Arabia, and one. . . . Ten measures of impudence descended upon the
world. Nine were taken by Meshan, and one. . . . Ten measures of gossip
descended upon the world. Nine were taken by woman, and one. . . . Ten
measures of blackness descended upon the world. Nine were taken by the
Ethiopians, and one. . . . Ten measures of sleep descended upon the
world. Nine were taken by slaves and one by the rest of the world.

(*Gemara*)

 

IF A man betrothed a woman with the stipulation that she has no vows and
it was found that she had vows, she is not betrothed. If she was
betrothed without any stipulations, and it was found that she had vows,
she may be sent away without her marriage allotment. If she was
betrothed with the stipulation that there are no defects in her, and it
was found that she possesses defects, she is not betrothed. If she was
betrothed without any stipulations, and if she was found to possess
defects, she may be sent away without her marriage allotment. All
defects which disqualify priests disqualify women.

If a man betrothed two women with what was worth a *perutha* or one
woman with what was worth less than a *perutha*, even if he sends gifts
to her later, the betrothal is not valid, for the reason he sends his
gifts is that they have already been betrothed. This applies, also, to a
minor.

If a man betroths a woman and her daughter, or a woman and her sister
both at the same time, they are not betrothed.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

There was once the case of five women, among whom were two sisters. A
man lifted a basket of figs that belonged to them—it contained the
produce of the 7th year—and said: With this basket you all are betrothed
to me, and one of the women accepted the basket on behalf of them all.
The sages ruled that the sisters were not betrothed.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER II</span>

 

IF A man betrothed a woman, and later says: I believed that she was the
daughter of a priest, and she proves to be the daughter of a levite. Or
the daughter of a levite, and she is the daughter of a priest. Or rich,
and she is poor, or poor, and she is rich. She is betrothed to him, for
she did not deceive him. If a man says to a woman: Be thou betrothed to
me after I become a proselyte, or after thou becomest a proselyte, or
after I become free, or thou becomest free, or after thine husband shall
die, or after thine sister shall die, or after thou shalt have performed
the *Halizah* to thine brother-in-law: she is not betrothed. This
applies also to one who said: If thine wife shall bear thee a female
child, it is betrothed to me. The child is not betrothed.

If a man said: Be betrothed to me on the condition that I intercede for
thee with the government or on condition that I work for thee as a
laborer; if he interceded on her behalf with the government or worked
for her as a laborer, she is betrothed. But if he did not, she is not
betrothed. If he said: Be thou betrothed to me on condition that my
father consents. If the father consent, she is betrothed, if not, she is
not betrothed. If the father die in the meantime, she is betrothed. But
if the

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

son died, the father is instructed to say that he does not consent.

If a man says: I betrothed my daughter to someone, but I do not know
whom, and someone appears and says: I betrothed her, he is believed. If
two appear and each says that he betrothed her, both are compelled to
give her a writ of divorce, but if they are willing, one gives her a
writ of divorce and the other marries her.

(*Mishna*)

 

RAB says: He is believed when it's a question of a divorce as no one
will sin without any gain; but not believed as to marriage.

His passion may have persuaded him to say it. Rab Ashi says: He is
believed to marry her. But Rab Ashi stipulates, however, if the woman
says: I have been betrothed, and know not to whom I have been betrothed,
and one appears and says: I betrothed her, he is not believed to marry
her.

We were taught according to Rabbi Ashi: I betrothed my daughter and know
not to whom. If one comes and says: I betrothed her, he is believed to
marry her. If he married her and another came and says: I betrothed her,
he is not believed and she is not forbidden to the husband. But if a
woman says: I was betrothed and know not to whom, and one appears and
says: I betrothed her, he is not believed, because the woman will shield
the man.

 

RAB Yehuda said: If one had betrothed this woman before one witness, the
betrothal is disregarded. Rab Yehuda was asked: Suppose both admit it?
He was uncertain, yes or no.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

A question was asked: If one witness charges that one's wife committed
adultery? Abaya says: The witness is believed. Rabbi says: This is a
case of incest, and in a case of incest two witnesses are needed. Abaya
said the following case proves it to me: Mar-Samuel had a blind man who
used to recite the law for him every day. One day the man did not
appear, so the Rabbi sent a messenger for him. While the messenger took
one road, the blind man entered, coming through a different road. When
the messenger returned, he announced that the blind man's wife committed
adultery. Mar-Samuel said to the blind man, if you believe him send your
wife away; but if you don't believe him, don't send her away. If you
believe him means that the witness is not a robber. And Rab said: If you
believe him as if it were two witnesses, send her away, otherwise don't
send her away.

Abaya said: I also learn this from the following story:

Once King Yanai went to Kohalith in the wilderness and conquered sixty
cities. When he returned he was very happy. He invited all the sages of
Israel and said to them. Our forefathers ate mallow when they were
building the Temple. Let us, too, eat mallow, in remembrance of our
forefathers. So mallow was served on golden tables and they ate. Among
them there was one Eleazar ben Poyra, a scoffer and an evil-minded man,
and he said to King Yanai: "O King Yanai! The heart of the Pharisees is
against thee." What shall I do? asked the King. Test them by the gold
plate between thine eyes. So he tested them with the gold plate between
his eyes. There was an old man there by the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

name of Yehuda ben Gedidiah. And Yehuda ben Gedidiah said to the King,
"Oh King Yanai, the crown of royalty is enough for thee. Leave the crown
of priesthood to the descendants of Aaron." Now there was talk that
Yanai's mother was once a captive in Modin (This would make Yanai
ineligible for priesthood), but this charge was investigated, and was
never substantiated. The Sages of Israel departed in anger. Whereupon
Eleazar ben Poyra said to King Yanai: "This is the law, even for the
meanest in Israel, and thou art a King and High Priest. Art thou bound
by the same law? Then what shall I do?" "If thou wilt listen to my
advice, trample them down." "Then what shall become of the *Torah?*"
"The *Torah* is rolled up, lying in the corner, whoever wants let him
come and study." Said Rabbi Nahmai ben Israel: Immediately heresy
entered into his soul, for he should have answered this applies to the
written law, but how about the oral law? And this evil was spread
through Eleazar ben Poyra. All the Sages of Israel were slain. And the
world became desolate till Simon ben Shetah appeared and restored the
*Torah* to its former position.

Now how does the case stand? Shall we say that there were two witnesses
who said that she was a captive, and two that said she was not? Shall we
believe one or the other? Therefore it must have been one witness who
testified that she was a captive, and two who testified that she was
not. Otherwise we would say that one would be believed.

(*Gemara*)

 

RABBI Tarfon says: Bastards can be made pure. In what manner? A bastard
marries a slave, the offspring

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

is born a slave, but if he is later emancipated he becomes a free man.
Rabbi Eliezer says: That is but a bastard slave.

(*Mishna*)

 

A QUESTION. Does Rabbi Tarfon mean that this is at the very outset, or
that it is already done? Come and hear. Rabbi Tarfon was asked: You have
purified the male, but you have not purified the female. Now if you mean
at the very outset, then let a female bastard go and marry a slave? A
slave has no paternity. Come and hear: Once Rabbi Simlai said to his
host, who was a bastard: Had I known you before, I could have made your
sons to be pure. Surely! if you say that it is at the very outset; but
if you say only if it has already been done, then what could he advise
him? He would have told him to steal something and be sold as a Hebrew
slave. From this you conclude that Rabbi. Tarfon means at the very
outset. Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Samuel: The law is in
accordance with Rabbi Tarfon.

(*Gemara*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER III</span>

 

IF A man says: This son of mine is a bastard, he is not believed. Even
when both parents say that the child in the mother's womb is a bastard,
they are not believed. Rabbi Yehuda says: They are believed.

(*Mishna*)

 

WHY say both parents? It is quite obvious that the father, who cannot be
certain of the parentage, is not believed, but the mother who is sure of
the parentage, why, too, is she not believed? It is self-evident that
they

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

should not be believed when the child enjoys the presumption of being
spotless, but in the case of a child who is still in the womb and does
not enjoy the presumption of spotlessness, they are still not believed.

Rabbi Yehuda says: They are believed. We are taught: (*Deuteronomy* xxi,
17) *He shall acknowledge him before the others*. It follows: A man is
believed when he says: This son of mine is my first born. He is also
believed when he says: This one is the son of a divorcee, this one is
the son of a *Haluzah*. But the Sages ruled that he is not believed.

(*Gemara*)

 

A MAN must not stay alone with two women. But one woman may stay alone
with two men. Rabbi Simon says: One man may stay with two women if his
wife is with him, and he may sleep with them in an inn, because his wife
keeps watch over him. A man may stay alone with his mother and with his
daughter, and he may sleep with them in the same bed. But if they become
of age she must sleep in her clothes, and he in his clothes.

(*Mishna*)

 

"BUT one woman." Rabbi Yehuda said in the name of Rab: This is spoken
only of respectable men and women. Even ten men must not stay alone with
a loose woman. There was a case once when ten men carried a woman out on
a bier. Rabbi Joseph said: We have proven that ten men will get together
to steal a beam, and will not be ashamed of each other.

Here is another proof: Two scholars are sent with the man so that he
won't have intercourse with the woman on the way. Scholars, but not
ordinary people. Only scholars, because they know and can warn him.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

Rab and Rab Yehuda were once walking on the road. There was a woman
walking in front of them. Said Rab to Rab Yehuda: "Run faster away with
perdition." "But you yourself said that it was all right with
respectable people." "Who says that respectable people means men like
you and me?" "Who then?" "Such as Rabbi Hanina and Rabbi Papi and their
colleagues."

Rabbi Meir would scoff at transgression. One day Satan appeared to him
on the other side of the river, disguised as a woman. As there was no
bridge across, he grabbed a rope and began to tow himself across. When
he reached the middle of the river, Satan let go, and said: Had they not
proclaimed in Heaven: Take heed of Rabbi Meir and his learning, I would
have valued your blood at two *mahs*.

Rabbi Akiba used to scoff at transgression. One day Satan appeared to
him, disguised as a woman, on the top of a palm. Akiba grasped the palm
and began to ascend. When he reached the middle, Satan let him go and
said: Had they not proclaimed in Heaven: Take heed of Rabbi Akiba and
his learning, I would have valued your blood at two *mahs*.

Pelimo used to say each day: A bolt in thine eye, Satan. One Eve of
Atonement Satan appeared before him disguised as a beggar and knocked on
his door. Bread was brought out to him. Whereupon Satan said: On a day
like this everyone is within, shall I be outside? So he was asked to
come in and they gave him bread. Whereupon he said: On a day like this
everyone sits at the table, shall I sit alone? So he was asked to sit at
the table. His body was all covered with sores and he conducted himself
repulsively. Pelimo said to him: Sit

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

properly. Then Satan asked for a goblet. He was given the goblet and he
began to cough in it and spat his phlegm into it. He was scolded.
Whereupon he fell and died. Whereupon a voice cried: "Pelimo killed a
man, Pelimo killed a man." So he ran and hid in a privy. Satan followed
him. When he saw how Pelimo was suffering he let himself be recognized
and said: "Why do you talk that way every day?" "What should I say?"
inquired Pelimo. "You should say: The All-Merciful upbraid Satan."

Rab Hiya ben Ashi used to fall upon his face and pray: All-Merciful,
protect us from evil desire. When one day his wife heard him, she
reflected: It is so many years that he kept away from me, why does he
pray in this manner? One day when he was studying in his garden, she
dressed herself up and paced before him, back and forth several times.
Whereupon he asked her: "Who are you?" "I am Hirtha, the courtesan", she
answered, "and have returned only today." And when he desired her, she
said to him: "Get me that pomegranate from the top of the tree." He went
up and got it for her. When he returned home, his wife was just making
the fire in the oven. So he went up and sat in it. She said to him:
"What does this mean?" He answered her: "So and so happened to me."
Whereupon she replied: "It was I", but he would not believe her until
she gave him proof thereof. "Nonetheless", he said, "my intentions were
sinful."

(*Gemara*)

 

A BACHELOR must not teach children, and a woman must not teach children.
Rabbi Eleazar says: Also one who has no wife must not teach children.
Rabbi

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yehuda says: A
bachelor must not tend cattle, nor may two bachelors sleep under one
cover. But the Sages permit it. One whose business is with women must
not stay alone with women. And a man should not teach his son a woman's
craft. Rabbi Meir says a man should teach his son a clean and easy
trade, and let him look up to those that possess riches and wealth, for
there is no trade that there are riches and poverty in it, and riches do
not come from trade, nor does poverty, for all depends on merit.

Rabbi Simon ben Eleazer says: Have you ever seen a wild beast or bird
that has a trade? And yet they sustain themselves without much trouble,
and they were created to serve me, while I was created to serve my
Maker. Is it not right that I shall sustain myself without trouble? But
I have turned to evil and so despoiled my livelihood.

Abba Gurian of Zaidan says in the name of Abba Guria: A man should not
teach his sort to be: an ass-driver, or a camel-driver, or a barber, or
a sailor, or a shepherd, or a shopkeeper, for all these trades are
trades of thieves. Rabbi Yehuda said on his own account: The ass-drivers
are mostly evil, but the camel-drivers are mostly honest. The sailors,
most of them, are pious. The best of the medicine men may go to Hell,
and the most honest of the butchers is a partner of Amalek. Rabbi
Nehorai says: I keep away from all the trades in the world, and teach to
my son the *Torah* only. Because a man gets his rewards in this world
and the principal is secured for him for the world to come. But all
other professions are not like that. For when a man gets sick or becomes
old or is suffering and cannot engage

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

in his work, he dies from starvation. But the Torah is not like that.
For it guards him from all evil, and gives him a future and hope in his
old age.

The Rabbis taught: He whose business is with women has a sullen
disposition, as for instance: The goldsmiths, carders, a mill cleaner, a
hawker, a peddler, weavers, barbers, launderers, blood-letters, bath
attendants and tanners. They may not be crowned King or High Priest.
Why? Not because they are unfitted, but because of their mean
occupation.

Bar Kappra discoursed: Always teach your son an easy and clean trade.
What is it? Rabbi Yehuda replied: "Needlepoint embroidery!"

It was taught: There is no trade that will disappear from the world.
Happy is he who sees his parents in a superior trade, and woe to him who
sees his parents in a mean trade. The world cannot do without a perfume
maker and without a tanner. Happy is he whose trade is perfume making,
and woe to him who is a tanner. The world cannot exist without male and
female. Happy is he whose children are male and woe to him whose
children are female.

(*Mishna*)  
<span class="small">FROM CHAPTER IV</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Civil Law (Tractate Baba Kamma)](bata14)

</div>
