<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sikhism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rosi04) 
[Next](rosi06) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Religion of the Sikhs*, by Dorothy Field, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

### CHAPTER II

### THE RELIGIOUS ORIGINS OF SIKHISM——HINDU MONOTHEISM AND CONNECTION WITH ISLĀM

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have seen that on the one hand Sikhism
has its source in a movement *within* Hinduism, and that on the other it
owes something to the foreign element of Muhammadanism. It will now be
possible to look into this a little more closely. How far the doctrine
of the one Supreme God, as proclaimed by Nānak, was the *direct* result
of Muhammadan influence, it is difficult to say. We have seen that in
Nānak's youth he was greatly interested in Persian writings and in the
doctrines of Moslem saints with whom he came in contact. Probably much
of his protesting zeal, of his fury against idolatry, of his bitterness
and violence against those with whom he did not agree, was the result of
these excursions into Islām. But while fully acknowledging this we must
be careful not to attribute the Sikh doctrine of Divine Unity solely to
the influence of Muhammadanism, for such doctrine had always been
present within Hinduism. The saints and.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

reformers who preceded the Sikh Gurus, and to whom the latter were so
much indebted for the very phrases used in their hymns, were mostly
Hindu, or, if Muhammadan, had been largely influenced by Hinduism. Their
declaration of the Unity of God was part of a natural Hindu development.

*Monotheistic Thought grows from Polytheism*.—From the very earliest
times in the Rig Veda <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) a tendency to
monotheism may be noticed. One god is frequently chosen from the rest of
the pantheon and exalted in some particular hymn till he becomes supreme
and infinite, all lesser deities being but his servants and emanations
from him. The acknowledgement of some such secondary beings in no way
conflicts with monotheistic doctrine, for in Catholic Christendom or in
Muhammadanism the existence of angels and archangels is admitted. This
tendency to raise first one god and then another to the position of
Supreme Deity gradually gained ground, but with the ascendancy of the
Brahman priesthood it was counterbalanced by another development. Out of
the more general polytheism of the Vedas a mystical and subtle
philosophy arose, by which God became the neuter World-Soul, immanent in

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

matter. He thus lost the attributes of personality and could only be
expressed by negation and realised by meditation. This pantheism finds
full expression in such texts as the following, which represents the
spirit of the Vedānta: <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Verily this all is Brahman;  
 As such, one should worship It in stillness."</span>

</div>

But such doctrine left little room for the personal devotion of man to
God; moreover, it was esoteric, demanding mystical understanding and
philosophic insight. It was jealously guarded by the priesthood in
mid-India.

*Persists during Pantheism*.—In the out-lands, however, reactions
against this pantheism were continually taking place; returns to
monotheism, or the belief in the personality of God and in the
possibility of approaching Him with prayer and devotion. These movements
frequently arose in the warrior caste and they asserted the rights of
the laity as against those of the priesthood.

*Forms the Vishnuite Churches*.—The greatest of them all was the
development of Vishnuite theology, which originated in the soot of the
Bhāgavātas, who first evolved the theory of Bhakti, or passionate
devotion of man to God.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Another reaction
of a different kind against the Brahman priesthood was that of Buddhism,
which, instead of returning to belief in a more personal God, introduced
a greater agnosticism, emphasising the necessity of right action as
against dogmatic belief, subtle philosophy, or elaborate ritual. Ritual
had gradually been evolved by the Brahman priests, who felt that their
teaching could only be upheld in this way, since for the multitude their
philosophy could have but little meaning.

*Partial Victory of the Priests and Pantheism*.—All these reactions,
whether monotheistic, or agnostic, made for simplification, and
endeavoured to lesson mysteries and banish ritual. One by one, however,
they were mastered by the priestly influence, which, while yielding
something, always contrived to win a three-part victory. Thus the
Vishnuite Churches, which originated in a monotheistic reaction against
pantheism, a rebellion of the laity against the priesthood, became
gradually an orthodox part of Hinduism, with all its ritual and much of
its mystical philosophy super-added. In the same way Buddhism was partly
absorbed and partly expelled.

*Monotheism borrows Fervour from Islām*—It will thus be seen that
monotheistic doctrine had never been absent from Hinduism, though it
belonged less to orthodoxy than to particular movements of reform. Where
the later religion

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

of the Prophet came into contact with Hinduism it helped to fan the
flame of monotheistic devotion, and to give it exclusiveness and
proselytising zeal. The Hindu Bhāgats <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) or saints, who preceded Nānak, show to a
considerable extent this influence of Islām, especially perhaps, the
greatest of all, Kabīr, <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) who when a
child had been adopted by Muhammadans.

*The Older Reformers quietistic*.—Speaking generally, however, there was
not sufficient combativeness among these earlier reformers to lead to
the formation of a powerful new religion. They were too deeply imbued
with poetic mysticism—with the spirit of quietism and toleration—to have
much sympathy with aggressive ideals. No doubt they protested vigorously
against idolatry, formality, and caste tyranny, but in practice they did
not break away too violently from the religion of their country. Kabīr,
for instance, far from defying Brahmanic traditions as to the eating of
meat, would not permit so much as the plucking of a flower, whereas
Nānak deemed all such scruples to be superstitious, and openly allowed
the eating of all kinds of flesh food except that of the cow.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

*The Sikhs energetic*.—Again, regarding caste, the vigour of Sikh
teaching did actually succeed in breaking down age-long barriers, and in
reclaiming a vast out-caste population. In Nānak, then, all the
reformative tendencies within Hinduism were combined, and he associated
with them a greater amount of intolerance than had any of the previous
reformers. In other words, he borrowed more from Islām than his
predecessors had done.

*Enmity of Islām*.—It was natural, however, that this zeal of the Sikh
Gurus should come into contact with the same element in the religion
from which they had borrowed, and that antagonism between the two should
arise, even had not political enmity provided an immediate cause. The
fact that Nānak was originally very friendly to the Muhammadans was soon
forgotten; bitterness arose between the followers of the two religions,
persecution by the one being largely accountable for the magnificent
martial development of the other.

*Consequent Reaction towards Orthodox Hinduism*.—This state of affairs
naturally induced something of a reaction on. the part of the Sikhs
towards orthodox Hinduism—a reaction which has gone on until this day.

*Inconsistency with Hinduism*.—We have seen, however, that Nānak
rejected certain conspicuous features of the religion of his country,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

and that, therefore, however much he may have borrowed in the matter of
doctrine, his religion remains distinct and complete in itself, and is
not in any way dependent on association with Hinduism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[37:1](rosi05.htm#fr_22) The *Rig Veda* is one
of the oldest literary productions in the world, some parts of it dating
from as far back as two thousand years before Christ. It is called by
Sikhs the "white" Veda.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[38:1](rosi05.htm#fr_23) Vedanta (lit. *Veda's
end*) is a term applied to various Hindu works, commentaries on the
Vedas, which set forth this Hindu pantheistic philosophy.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[40:1](rosi05.htm#fr_24) The word Bhāgat is
derived from a Sanscrit word Bhakti = love or devotion.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[40:2](rosi05.htm#fr_25) It has been suggested
that Kabīr was influenced by Christianity. It is curious that a
sacramental meal has boon found among the observances of his followers,
but this may by the remains of Muhammadan Sufism.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Doctrines of the Sikhs](rosi06)

</div>
