<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tolkien](../index.md) 
[Morris](../../neu/morris/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wbw00.md) 
[Next](wbw02.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Wood Beyond the World*, by William Morris, \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER I: OF GOLDEN WALTER AND HIS FATHER

Awhile ago there was a young man dwelling in a great and goodly city by
the sea which had to name Langton on Holm. He was but of five and twenty
winters, a fair-faced man, yellow-haired, tall and strong; rather wiser
than foolisher than young men are mostly wont; a valiant youth, and a
kind; not of many words but courteous of speech; no roisterer, nought
masterful, but peaceable and knowing how to forbear: in a fray a
perilous foe, and a trusty war-fellow. His father, with whom he was
dwelling when this tale begins, was a great merchant, richer than a
baron of the land, a head-man of the greatest of the Lineages of
Langton, and a captain of the Porte; he was of the Lineage of the
Goldings, therefore was he called Bartholomew Golden, and his son Golden
Walter.

Now ye may well deem that such a youngling as this was looked upon by
all as a lucky man without a lack; but there was this flaw in his lot,
whereas he had fallen into the toils of love of a woman exceeding fair,
and had taken her to wife, she nought unwilling as it seemed. But when
they had been wedded some six months he found by manifest tokens, that
his fairness was not so much to her but that she must seek to the
foulness of one worser than he in all ways; wherefore his rest departed
from him, whereas he hated her for her untruth and her hatred of him;
yet would the sound of her voice, as she came and went in the house,
make his heart beat; and the sight of her stirred desire within him, so
that he longed for her to be sweet and kind with him, and deemed that,
might it be so, he should forget all the evil gone by. But it was not
so; for ever when she saw him, her face changed, and her hatred of him
became manifest, and howsoever she were sweet with others, with him she
was hard and sour.

So this went on a while till the chambers of his father's house, yea the
very streets of the city, became loathsome to him; and yet he called to
mind that the world was wide and he but a young man. So on a day as he
sat with his father alone, he spake to him and said: "Father, I was on
the quays even now, and I looked on the ships that were nigh boun, and
thy sign I saw on a tall ship that seemed to me nighest boun. Will it be
long ere she sail?"

"Nay," said his father, "that ship, which hight the Katherine, will they
warp out of the haven in two days' time. But why askest thou of her?"

"The shortest word is best, father," said Walter, "and this it is, that
I would depart in the said ship and see other lands."

"Yea and whither, son?" said the merchant.

"Whither she goeth," said Walter, "for I am ill at ease at home, as thou
wottest, father."

The merchant held his peace awhile, and looked hard on his son, for
there was strong love between them; but at last he said: "Well, son,
maybe it were best for thee; but maybe also we shall not meet again."

"Yet if we do meet, father, then shalt thou see a new man in me."

"Well," said Bartholomew, "at least I know on whom to lay the loss of
thee, and when thou art gone, for thou shalt have thine own way herein,
she shall no longer abide in my house. Nay, but it were for the strife
that should arise thenceforth betwixt her kindred and ours, it should go
somewhat worse with her than that."

Said Walter: "I pray thee shame her not more than needs must be, lest,
so doing, thou shame both me and thyself also."

Bartholomew held his peace again for a while; then he said: "Goeth she
with child, my son?"

Walter reddened, and said: "I wot not; nor of whom the child may be."
Then they both sat silent, till Bartholomew spake, saying: "The end of
it is, son, that this is Monday, and that thou shalt go aboard in the
small hours of Wednesday; and meanwhile I shall look to it that thou go
not away empty-handed; the skipper of the Katherine is a good man and
true, and knows the seas well; and my servant Robert the Low, who is
clerk of the lading, is trustworthy and wise, and as myself in all
matters that look towards chaffer. The Katherine is new and
stout-builded, and should be lucky, whereas she is under the ward of her
who is the saint called upon in the church where thou wert christened,
and myself before thee; and thy mother, and my father and mother all lie
under the chancel thereof, as thou wottest."

Therewith the elder rose up and went his ways about his business, and
there was no more said betwixt him and his son on this matter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Golden Walter Takes Ship To Sail The Seas](wbw02.md)

</div>
