<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tolkien](../index) 
[Morris](../../neu/morris/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wbw31) 
[Next](wbw33) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wood Beyond the World*, by William Morris, \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXII: OF THE NEW KING OF THE CITY AND LAND OF STARK-WALL

When he awoke again the sun was shining brightly into that chamber, and
he looked, and beheld that it was peerless of beauty and riches, amongst
all that he had ever seen: the ceiling done with gold and over-sea blue;
the walls hung with arras of the fairest, though he might not tell what
was the history done therein. The chairs and stools were of carven work
well be-painted, and amidmost was a great ivory chair under a cloth of
estate, of bawdekin of gold and green, much be-pearled; and all the
floor was of fine work alexandrine.

He looked on all this, wondering what had befallen him, when lo! there
came folk into the chamber, to wit, two serving-men well- bedight, and
three old men clad in rich gowns of silk. These came to him and (still
by signs, without speech) bade him arise and come with them; and when he
bade them look to it that he was naked, and laughed doubtfully, they
neither laughed in answer, nor offered him any raiment, but still would
have him arise, and he did so perforce. They brought him with them out
of the chamber, and through certain passages pillared and goodly, till
they came to a bath as fair as any might be; and there the serving-men
washed him carefully and tenderly, the old men looking on the while.
When it was done, still they offered not to clothe him, but led him out,
and through the passages again, back to the chamber. Only this time he
must pass between a double hedge of men, some weaponed, some in peaceful
array, but all clad gloriously, and full chieftain-like of aspect,
either for valiancy or wisdom.

In the chamber itself was now a concourse of men, of great estate by
deeming of their array; but all these were standing orderly in a ring
about the ivory chair aforesaid. Now said Walter to himself: Surely all
this looks toward the knife and the altar for me; but he kept a stout
countenance despite of all.

So they led him up to the ivory chair, and he beheld on either side
thereof a bench, and on each was laid a set of raiment from the shirt
upwards; but there was much diversity betwixt these arrays. For one was
all of robes of peace, glorious and be-gemmed, unmeet for any save a
great king; while the other was war-weed, seemly, well-fashioned, but
little adorned; nay rather, worn and bestained with weather, and the
pelting of the spear-storm.

Now those old men signed to Walter to take which of those raiments he
would, and do it on. He looked to the right and the left, and when he
had looked on the war-gear, the heart arose in him, and he called to
mind the array of the Goldings in the forefront of battle, and he made
one step toward the weapons, and laid his hand thereon. Then ran a glad
murmur through that concourse, and the old men drew up to him smiling
and joyous, and helped him to do them on; and as he took up the helm, he
noted that over its broad brown iron sat a golden crown.

So when he was clad and weaponed, girt with a sword, and a steel axe in
his hand, the elders showed him to the ivory throne, and he laid the axe
on the arm of the chair, and drew forth the sword from the scabbard, and
sat him down, and laid the ancient blade across his knees; then he
looked about on those great men, and spake: "How long shall we speak no
word to each other, or is it so that God hath stricken you dumb?"

Then all they cried out with one voice: "All hail to the King, the King
of Battle!"

Spake Walter: "If I be king, will ye do my will as I bid you?"

Answered the elder: "Nought have we will to do, lord, save as thou
biddest."

Said Walter: "Thou then, wilt thou answer a question in all truth?"

"Yea, lord," said the elder, "if I may live afterward."

Then said Walter: "The woman that came with me into your Camp of the
Mountain, what hath befallen her?"

The elder answered: "Nought hath befallen her, either of good or evil,
save that she hath slept and eaten and bathed her. What, then, is the
King's pleasure concerning her?"

"That ye bring her hither to me straightway," said Walter.

"Yea," said the elder; "and in what guise shall we bring her hither?
shall she be arrayed as a servant, or a great lady?"

Then Walter pondered a while, and spake at last: "Ask her what is her
will herein, and as she will have it, so let it be. But set ye another
chair beside mine, and lead her thereto. Thou wise old man, send one or
two to bring her in hither, but abide thou, for I have a question or two
to ask of thee yet. And ye, lords, abide here the coming of my
she-fellow, if it weary you not."

So the elder spake to three of the most honourable of the lords, and
they went their ways to bring in the Maid.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII: Concerning The Fashion Of King-making In
Stark-wall](wbw33)

</div>
