<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tolkien](../index.md) 
[Morris](../../neu/morris/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wbw30.md) 
[Next](wbw32.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Wood Beyond the World*, by William Morris, \[1894\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXXI: THEY COME UPON NEW FOLK

With that they went down from the bent again, and came to where the pass
narrowed so much, that they went betwixt a steep wall of rock on either
side; but after an hour's going, the said wall gave back suddenly, and,
or they were ware almost, they came on another dale like to that which
they had left, but not so fair, though it was grassy and well watered,
and not so big either. But here indeed befell a change to them; for lo!
tents and pavilions pitched in the said valley, and amidst of it a
throng of men, mostly weaponed, and with horses ready saddled at hand.
So they stayed their feet, and Walter's heart failed him, for he said to
himself: Who wotteth what these men may be, save that they be aliens? It
is most like that we shall be taken as thralls; and then, at the best,
we shall be sundered; and that is all one with the worst.

But the Maid, when she saw the horses, and the gay tents, and the
pennons fluttering, and the glitter of spears, and gleaming of white
armour, smote her palms together for joy, and cried out: "Here now are
come the folk of the city for our welcoming, and fair and lovely are
they, and of many things shall they be thinking, and a many things shall
they do, and we shall be partakers thereof. Come then, and let us meet
them, fair friend!"

But Walter said: "Alas! thou knowest not: would that we might flee! But
now is it over late; so put we a good face on it, and go to them
quietly, as erewhile we did in the Bear-country."

So did they; and there sundered six from the men-at-arms and came to
those twain, and made humble obeisance to Walter, but spake no word.
Then they made as they would lead them to the others, and the twain went
with them wondering, and came into the ring of men-at-arms, and stood
before an old hoar knight, armed all, save his head, with most goodly
armour, and he also bowed before Walter, but spake no word. Then they
took them to the master pavilion, and made signs to them to sit, and
they brought them dainty meat and good wine. And the while of their
eating arose up a stir about them; and when they were done with their
meat, the ancient knight came to them, still bowing in courteous wise,
and did them to wit by signs that they should depart: and when they were
without, they saw all the other tents struck, and men beginning to busy
them with striking the pavilion, and the others mounted and ranked in
good order for the road; and there were two horse-litters before them,
wherein they were bidden to mount, Walter in one, and the Maid in the
other, and no otherwise might they do. Then presently was a horn blown,
and all took to the road together; and Walter saw betwixt the curtains
of the litter that men-at-arms rode on either side of him, albeit they
had left him his sword by his side.

So they went down the mountain-passes, and before sunset were gotten
into the plain; but they made no stay for nightfall, save to eat a
morsel and drink a draught, going through the night as men who knew
their way well. As they went, Walter wondered what would betide, and if
peradventure they also would be for offering them up to their Gods;
whereas they were aliens for certain, and belike also Saracens. Moreover
there was a cold fear at his heart that he should be sundered from the
Maid, whereas their masters now were mighty men of war, holding in their
hands that which all men desire, to wit, the manifest beauty of a woman.
Yet he strove to think the best of it that he might. And so at last,
when the night was far spent, and dawn was at hand, they stayed at a
great and mighty gate in a huge wall. There they blew loudly on the horn
thrice, and thereafter the gates were opened, and they all passed
through into a street, which seemed to Walter in the glimmer to be both
great and goodly amongst the abodes of men. Then it was but a little ere
they came into a square, wide-spreading, one side whereof Walter took to
be the front of a most goodly house. There the doors of the court opened
to them or ever the horn might blow, though, forsooth, blow it did
loudly three times; all they entered therein, and men came to Walter and
signed to him to alight. So did he, and would have tarried to look about
for the Maid, but they suffered it not, but led him up a huge stair into
a chamber, very great, and but dimly lighted because of its greatness.
Then they brought him to a bed dight as fair as might be, and made signs
to him to strip and lie therein. Perforce he did so, and then they bore
away his raiment, and left him lying there. So he lay there quietly,
deeming it no avail for him, a mother-naked man, to seek escape thence;
but it was long ere he might sleep, because of his trouble of mind. At
last, pure weariness got the better of his hopes and fears, and he fell
into slumber just as the dawn was passing into day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII: Of The New King Of The City And Land Of
Stark-wall](wbw32.md)

</div>
