[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mcft20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Notes and References

I HAVE scarcely anything to add to the general account of the collection
of Celtic Fairy Tales which I gave in the predecessor to this volume.
Since the appearance of that volume in 1891, the publication of such
tales has gone on apace. Mr. Curtin has published in the New York *Sun*
no less than fifty more Irish fairy tales, one of which he has been good
enough to place at my disposal for the present volume. Mr. Larminie has
published with Mr. E. Stock a volume of *West Irish Fairy Tales,* of
which I have also the privilege of presenting a specimen. A slight
volume of Welsh Fairy Tales, published by Mr. Nutt, and a few fairy
anecdotes contained in the Prize Essay on Welsh Folk-lore by the Rev.
Mr. Evans, sum up Cambria's contribution to our subject during the past
three years. The fifth volume of the *Waifs and Strays of Celtic
Tradition,* just about to appear at the moment of writing, is the sole
addition to Celtic Fairy Tales from the country of J. F. Campbell. Taken
altogether, something like a hundred previously unpublished tales from
Celtdom have been rendered accessible to the world since I last wrote, a
by no means insignificant outcome in three years. It is at any rate
clear, that the only considerable addition to our folk-lore knowledge in
these isles must come from the Gaelic area. The time of harvest can be
but short ; may the workers be many, willing, and capable.

 

XXVII\. THE FATE OF THE CHILDREN OF LIR.

*Sources*.- Abridged from the text and translation published by the
Society for the Preservation of the Irish Language in 1883. This merely
follows the text and version given by Professor O'Curry in *Atlantis,*
iv. He used three Dublin MSS., none of them, however, of earlier date
than the eighteenth century. Dr. Joyce gives a free paraphrase in his

Old Celtic Romances.

Parallels. - For "Jealous Stepmother," see the bibliographical
references in the list of incidents at the end of my paper on the
Science of Folk.tales" in the *Transactions of the Folk-lore Congress,
sub voce.* Add Miss Roalfe Cox in *Folk-lore Journal* vii. app. 37 also
the same list *sub voce* "Swan Maiden Transformation." In modern Irish
literature Griffin has included the tale in his *Tales of the
Jury-room',* and Tom Moore's "Song of Fiounala" beginning "Silent, O
Moyle"is founded upon it.

Remarks.-The " Fate of the Children of Lir" is always referred to along
with "The Story of Deirdre *" (cf* the *Celtic Fairy Tales,* ix.), and
the "Children of Tuireann" as one of the Three Sorrowful Tales of Erin.
But there is no evidence of equal antiquity to the other two stories, of
which one is as old as the eleventh century. From the interspersed verse
O'Curry concluded, however, that the story was at least of considerable
antiquity, and the references to the unknown Saint Mochaomhog confirm
his impression. The Hill of the White Field is near Newton Hannton, in
the county of Armagh. The Lake of the Red Eye is Lough Derg, in the
Shannon above Killaloe.

Fingula is Fair Shoulder. The tradition that swans are inviolable is
still extant in Ireland. A man named Connor Griffin killed eleven swans:
he had previously been a prosperous man, and shortly after. wards his
son was drowned in the Shannon, his goods were lost, and his wife died
*(Children of Lir,* Dublin edit., note, p. 87). In County Mayo it is
believed that the souls of pure virgins are after death enshrined in the
forms of swans ; if anybody injures them, it is thought he will die
within a year (Walter's *Natural History of the Birds of Ireland,*
pp.94-5). Mr. Gomme concludes from this that the swan was at one time a
British totem *(Arch. Rev.,* iii. 226-7).

At first sight the tale seems little more than an argument against the
Bill for Marriage with a Deceased Wife's Sister, but the plaintive lays
of Fingula, the touching detail of the swans flying over the desolate
hill and White Field, give a touch of Celtic glamour to the whole story.
There is probably also a deep religious significance implied in the fact
that the wicked Aunt Stepmother's spell is broken when the transformed
Children of Lir come across the first Christian they meet.

Mr. Nutt has kindly communicated the following remarks on this tale:-

The Fate of the Children of Lir belongs formally to the so-called
mythological cycle, the personages of which are the Tuatha de Danann.
The Irish annalists of the 10th-11th centuries described these as
members of one of the races which possessed Ireland in pre-Christian
times before the coming of the Milesians. But even in the most strongly
euhemerised accounts the mythic nature of these beings is apparent, and
most modern scholars are agreed that they are in fact the members of a
Pagan Irish Pantheon. They live on to this very day in Irish folk-belief
as chiefs and rulers of the fairies.

The MS. evidence for some of the stories concerning the Tuatha de Danann
is as old as that for the oldest heroic cycle (the Ultonian of Conchobar
and Cuchulainn). But the Tuatha de Danann legends have retained
throughout Irish literature greater plasticity and vitality than those
of the Ultonian cycle, and many stories are not older in their present
state than the 14th and 15th centuries. This is probably the case with
the present story. The oldest known MS. only goes back to 1718, but this
and the MS. of 1721, used by O'Curry for hs edition, are certainly
copied from much older MSS.

The interesting question for storiologists is whether the themes of the
story - the swan-metamorphosis consequent upon the step-mother's
jealousy, and the protecting role assigned to the sister-are of old
native or of recent imported nature. In support of the first hypothesis,
it may be noted that the theme of stepmotherly jealousy was current in
Ireland in the 10th century at the latest, as it is woven into the saga
of the Destruction of Daderga's Fort (see my article *"Folk-lore,"*
ii.). The final episode of the sudden aging of the miraculously
long-lived swans is also genuinely Irish, but its true significance is
obscured in our story in a way that sufficiently demonstrates the late
and secondary character of the text. The idea is that the dwellers in
Faery, whether fairy-folk or mortals penetrating thither, enjoy
perpetual life, forfeited by the latter the moment they return to this
earth. As children of the Tuatha de Danann, Fionngula and her brothers
are deathless, and the episode as it stands in our text results from a
contamination of the original form of the story in which the
swan-metamorphosis was annulled under certain conditions (the removal of
the chains), when the original shape was resumed, and the familiar story
of the mortal returning from Faery after hundreds of years, which he
deems to be but a short space of time, shrinking into dust the moment he
touches earth.

There is a well-known Continental folk-taIe - the "Seven Swans" (or
Ravens) of which we possess several medieval (12th to 13th century)
versions, all connected with the romance of the "Swan Knight." M. Gaston
Paris has studied the whole story group *(Romania,* xix. 314, &c.) with
the following results The folk-tale of the seven swans had originally
nothing to do with the saga of the swan-knight. The connection apparent
in the 12th century texts is artificial ; the swans owe their
shape-shifting capacity to the superhuman nature of their mother ; this
trait has been almost effaced even in the oldest versions. The
distinguishing mark of the swans in all the versions is the possession
of silver or gold chains, which are what may be called metamorphosis
tokens ; it follows from this that the contamination of the two
story-types ("Seven Swans" and "Swan Knight") must be older than the
oldest version of the first story, as these chains can only be derived
from the one with which in the Swan Knight saga the swan draws the
knight back.

In *Romania* (xxi. 62, *seq.*) M. Ferd. Lot examines the question in the
light of our tale. He points out that it indicates clearly the super
human nature of the mother, and that as the silver chains figure in the
story, they cannot be due in the Continental versions to contamination
with the Swan Knight saga, as M. Gaston Paris imagines. M. Lot evidently
inclines to look upon them as talismans, the abandonment of which was
the original cause of the metamorphosis, and the handling of which at
the end brings about the change back to human shape. He points out that
these chains form an essential part of the gear of beings appearing in
bird guise (especially if they belong to Faery); thus in the
10th-century 'Sickbed of Cuchulaion' the goddesses Fand and Liban appear
as two swans united by a golden chain; in the 8th to 9th century
Conception of Cuchulainn, Dechtire, the mother of the hero by the god
Lug, appears with her companions in the guise of many-hued birds linked
together by chains of silver (or red gold in one version). The MS.
evidence for these tales reaches back to the early 11th century.

Curiously enough, M. Lot has not cited the closest parallel to our tale
from old Irish literature, and one which is certainly connected with it
in some measure, the fine story called the "Dream of Angus." A story of
this title is cited in the epic catalogue of the Book of Leinster (which
dates back to the early I ith century) as one of the introductory
stories to the Tam bo Cuailgne. This assumed its present shape
substantially between 650 and 750. The introductory stories had
originally no connection with it, and were invented or re-shaped in the
8th to 10th centuries, after the Tam had taken undisputed place as the
leading Irish epic. The tale may therefore be ascribed provisionally to
the 9th century, if we can only be sure that the existing version,
preserved in a single MS. of the 15th century, is a faithful copy of the
original. There need be no doubt as to this. The text is due to a
Christian scribe, and, like nearly alt portions of the mythological
cycle, betrays signs of Christian influence, though not of Christian
remodelling. Such influence is, however, far more likely to have exerted
itself in the first stage of the written existence of these tales, when
the memory of organised paganism was still tenacious, than later, when
the tales had become subject-matter for the play of free poetic fancy.
The story, printed and translated by Dr. E. Muller, *Rev*. *Celt.* iv.
342, &c., is as follows: Angus (the chief wizard of the Tuatha de
Danann) is visited in sleep by a maiden whose beauty throws him into
love sick-ness. The whole of Ireland is scoured to find her the Dagda is
appealed to in vain. At length, Bodb, fairy king of Munster, finds her
at Loch bel Dracon (this is not the only trace of the impression which
the story of Bel and the Dragon made upon the Irish mind). She lives
there with 150 swans ; one year they are in swan shape the next in human
shape. They appear as white birds with silvery chains and golden caps
around their heads. Angus changes himself into a swan to he with her,
and it is recorded of the music they made that "people fell asleep for
three days and three nights." The soporific power of music is that which
is chiefly commended in old Irish literature.

I think it is obvious that the writer of our story was familiar with
this and other legends in which swan-maids encircled with gold and
silver chains appear, and that we may fairly draw the following
conclusions from the preceding facts : There existed an Irish folk-tale
of a king with two wives, one a water or sea fairy, whose children
derive from her the capacity of shape-shifting dependent upon certain
talismans ; jealousy impels the human wife to tamper with these
talismans, and the children are condemned to remain in their animal
form. This folk-tale was, probably at some time in the 14th or 15th
century, arbitrarily fitted into the *cadre* of the Tuatha de Danann
cycle, and entirely re-fashioned in a spirit of pious edification by a
man who was in his way a great and admirable artist. The origin and
nature of the story, all the elements of which are genuinely national,
assured for it wide and lasting popularity. The evolution of the Irish
folk-tale is in no way dependent upon that of the Continental folk-tale
of the Seven Swans, but it is possible that the Celtic presentiment of
the chain-girdled swans may have influenced it as well as the Swan
Knight Romance.

 

XXVIII\. JACK THE CUNNING THIEF.

Sources.- Kennedy, *Stories of Ireland,* pp- 38-46 ; Campbell, *West
Highland Tales, i.* 320 *seq. ;* "The Shifty Lad," Dasent, *Popular
Tales from the Norse,* pp.232-51, *"* Master Thief." Köhler has a number
of variants in his notes on Campbell *Orient und Occident* Band ii. Mr.
Clouston has a monograph on the subject in his *Popular Tales,* ii.
115-65. A separate treatise on the subject has been given by S. Prato,
1882, La *Leggenda di Rhampsinite.* Both these writers connect the
modern folk-tales with Herodotus' story of King Rampsinites. Mr. Knowles
in his *Folk-tales of Kashmir,* has a number of adventures of "Sharaf
the Thief." The story of " Master Thief" has been heard among the tramps
in London workhouses (Mayhew, *London Labour and London Poor,* iii.
119).

Remarks.-Thievery is universally human, and at first sight it might seem
that there was no connection between these various versions of the "
Master Thief." But the identity of the tricks by which the popular
hero-thief gains his ends renders it impossible that they should have
been independently invented wherever they are found,

 

XXIX\. POWEL, PRINCE OF DYFED.

Source.-Lady Guest's *Mabinogion,* with the names slightly anglicised,
and omitting the opening incident.

Parallels.-For the incident of tearing off the hands, *cf* Morraha; the
enchanted hill and maiden occur at the beginning of "Tuairisgeul Môr" in
*Scottish Celtic Review,* i. 61, and are fully commented upon by Mr.
Nutt, *I.c.* 137.

 

XXX\. PADDY O'KELLY AND THE WEASEL.

Sources.- Hyde, Beside the Fire, pp. 73-91

Parallels.-On green hills as the homes of the fairies: see note on
"Childe Roland," *English Fairy Tales,* p.241. The transformation of
witches into hares is a frequent *motif* in folk-lore.

  
  
XXXI. THE BLACK HORSE.

Sources.- From J. F. Campbell's manuscript collection now deposited at
the Advocates' Library in Edinburgh (MS. 53, vol. xi.). Collected in
Gaelic, February 14, 1862, by Hector MacLean, from Roderick MacNeill, in
the island of Menglay : MacNeill learnt the story about 1840 from a
Barra man. I have omitted one visit of the Black Horse to Greece, but
otherwise left the tale untouched. Mr. Nutt gave a short abstract of the
story in his report on the Campbell MSS. in *Folk-lore,* i. 370.

Parallels.- Campbell gives the following parallels in his notes on the
tale, which I quote verbatim. On the throwing into the well he remarks:
"So this incident of' Lady Audley's Secret' was in the mind of a Barra
peasant about 1840. Part of a modern novel may be as old as Aryan
mythology, which was one point to be proved." \[The incident of throwing
into the well almost invariably forms a part of the tales of the White
Cat type.\]

With regard to the Black Horse, Campbell notes that a Gaelic riddle
makes a Black Horse identical with the West Wind, and adds "It is for
consideration whether this Horse throws light on the sacred Wheel in
Indian Sculptures it is to be noted that a Black Horse is the
sacrificial colour."

"The Cup is a well-known myth about winning a Fairy Cup which pervades
Scandinavian England in many forms." "A silver ring, two quaint serpents
heads pointing opposite ways, is a common Scandinavian wedding-ring many
were to be got in Barra and elsewhere in 1869, sold by emigrants bound
for America."

"Those who can account for myths must settle the geography of the Snow
Mountain. Avalanches and glaciers are In Iceland, in the Caucasus, and
in Central Asia. There are none within sight of Menglay. Hindoo
cosmogony, which makes the world consist of seven rings, separated by
seas and by a wall of mountains, may account for this in some sort."

On the spikes driven into the Horse, Campbell compares the Norse story
of " Dapple-grim" and the Horse sacrifice of the Mahabharata. On the
building of the Magic Castle, Campbell remarks : "Twashtri was the
Carpenter of the Vedic gods : can this be his work?"

On the Horse's head being struck off Campbell comments: "This was the
last act in the Aryan Horse's sacrifice, and the first step in the Horse
apotheosis."

Remarks.- Campbell has the following note at the end of the tale, from
which it would seem that in 1870 at least he was very nearly being an

Indiamaniac.

"So ends this horse-riding story. Taking it as it is, with the test of
language added, nothing short of an Asian origin will account for it. A
Gaelic riddle makes 'a black horse' mean the invisible wind, and a
theorist might suppose this horse to be the air personified. As Greece
is mentioned, he might be Pegasus, who had to do with wells. But he had
wings, and he was white, and there is nothing in classical fable like
this Atlantic myth. 'The enchanted horse' of Arabian Nights was a flying
machine, and his adventures are quite different. This is not the horse
of Chaucer's Squire's Tale. He is more like 'Hrimfaxi,' the horse of the
Edda, who drew the car of Nött in heaven, and was ridden round the earth
in twelve hours, followed by Dagr and his glittering horse Skinfaxi. The
black horse who always arrives at sunrise is like the horse of night,
but there is no equivalent story in the Edda. 'Dapple-grim' in Norse
tales is clad in a spiked bull's hide, and is mixed up with a blazing
tar-barrel, but his adventures won't fit, and he was grey.

"The story is but an imperfect skeleton. The cup was to give strength;
he had to open seven gates after he got the cup, but it does nothing.
The hood is to hide with; he went in and out of the palace unseen after
he had got the hood, but it plays no part. The light shoes were the
shoes of swiftness of course, but they never showed their paces. Baldr's
horse was led to the funeral pile with all his gear; and Odin laid the
gold ring Draupnir on the pile. Such rites might account for the ring in
the blazing lake. Hermothr's ride northwards and downwards to the abode
of Hel to seek Baldr, his leap over the grate, and his return with the
ring (Edda 25), might account for one adventure.

"The many-coloured horses of the sun in the Indian mythology and solar
myths may account for all these horses, astronomically or
meteorologically. The old Aryan Aswa Medha or sacrifice of a black
horse, and the twelve adventures of Arjuna as told in the Mahabbarata,
are something like this story in some general vague way. But the
simplest explanation of this Menglay myth, fished out of the Atlantic,
is to admit that 'the black horse' and all this mythical breed came west
with men who rode from the land where horses were tamed, which is
unknown."

 

XXXII\. THE VISION OF MACCONGLINNEY.

Source.- Kindly condensed by Mr. Alfred Nutt from Prof. Meyer's edition
of *The Vision* published in book form in 1892. This contains two
versions, a longer one from a fourteenth century M S\~, *Leabhar Breac
or Speckled Book,* and a shorter one from a sixteenth century MS. in the
Library of Trinity College, Dublin. A translation of the former version
was given by the late W. M. Hennessy in *Fraser's Magazine,* September,
1873. Prof. Wollner, who contributed to Prof. Meyer's edition an
introduction dealing with the story from the standpoint of comparative
literature, considers that the later version reproduces the original
common source more nearly.

Parallels.- At first sight *The Vision* seems to picture the Land of
Cockayne (on which see Poeschel, *Das Mährchen vom Schlaraffenlade,,*
HaIle, 1878*),* but as Prof. Wollner remarks, the Irish form is much
more simple and primitive, and represents rather an agricultural
conception of a past *aurea aetas.* The conception of enormous appetite
being due to the presence of a voracious animal or demon within the body
is widespread among the folk. Prof. Wollner gives numerous parallels,
*l.c.* XLVII.-LIII. The common expression 'to wolf ones food" is said to
be derived from this conception. On the personification of disease, see
Tylor, *Primitive Culture,* ii. 148.

I can myself remember a tale somewhat similar to *The Vision* which I
heard from my nurse in Australia, I fancy as a warning against gluttony.
She told me of a man, who in swallowing large pieces of food had
swallowed a little hairy monster, which grew and grew and grew and
caused the man to be eating ah day to satisfy his visitors He was cured
by being made to fast, and then a bowl of brandy was brought in front of
his mouth into which the hairy thing, attracted by the fumes, jumped and
'vas drowned.

Remarks.- W*e* have here an interesting example of the personification
of disease in the form of a demon, of which some examples occur in the
Gospels. The rollicking Rabelaisian tone in which the story is told
prevents us, however, from attributing any serious belief in the
conception by the Irish Monk the author of the tale, who was parodying,
according to Prof. Wollner, the Visions of the Saints. Still he would be
scarcely likely to use the conception, even for purposes of parody,
unless it were current among the folk, and it occurs among them even at
the present day. (See Hyde, *Beside the Fire,* p. 183.)

 

XXXIII\. DREAM OF OWEN O'MULREADY.

Sources. - Kindly translated by Mr. Leland L. Duncan from *Gaelic
Journal,* vol. iv. p.57 *seq*.

Parallel.- Croker's *Daniel O'Rourke* may be compared in part.

Remarks. - At first sight a mere droll, the story has its roots In the
most primitive philosophy. Owen's problem is to get in the Land of
Dreams. Now Dreamland, so all our students of Mythology are agreed, is
the source and origin of our belief in souls and spirits. Owen's problem
therefore resolves itself into this: where was he to go in order to come
into closest contact with the world of spirits. Mark what he does - he
clears the hearth and has his bed made in it. Now it is round the hearth
that the fullest associations with the spirit life are clustered. The
late M. Fustel de Coulanges in his *Cité Antique* traces back most of
the Greek and Roman religions and a large number of their institutions
to the worship of the ancestors localised on the hearth. The late
Professor Hearn extended his line of research to the whole of the Aryans
in his *Aryan Household.* It will thus be seen from this course of
reasoning, that Owen was acting on the most approved primitive
principles in adopting this curious method of obtaining dreams. The
story is not known elsewhere than in Ireland, and we are therefore at
liberty to apply the method of Survivals to this case.

 

XXXIV\. MORRAHA.

Sources.- The second story in Mr. W. Larminie's *West Irish Folk-tales,
pp.* 10 - 30. The framework was collected from P. McGrale of Achill
Island, Co. Mayo. The story itself was from Terence Davis of Rendyle,
Co. Galway. There is evidently confusion in the introductory portion
between Niall's mother and wife.

Parallels.- Carnpbell's No. I has a very close parallel to the opening.
Mr. Larminie refers to a similar tale collected by Kennedy. Another
version from West Munster has been recently published in the *Gaelic
Iournal* iv. 7, 26, 35. The evasion of the promise to give up the sword
at the end seems a favourite incident in Achill folk-tales ; it occurs
in two others of Mr. Larminie's stories. On the framework, see note on
"Conal Yellow claw" *(Celtic Folktales,* v.). I have there suggested
that the plan comes from the East, ultimately from Buddha.

 

XXXV\. THE STORY OF THE MCANDREW FAMILY.

Sources.- Supplied by Mrs. Gale, now in the United States, from the
recitation of her mother who left Ireland over fifty years ago.

Parallels.- " Noodle Tales" like this are found everywhere in Europe,
and have been discussed by Mr. Clouston in a special monograph in *The
Book of Noodles,* 1889. The "sell" at the end is similar to that in the
"Wise Men of Gotham." Kennedy *(Fireside Stories of Ireland)* gives a
similar set of adventures, p. 119

seq.

Rernarks.- Mrs*.* Gale remarks that it was a common superstition in
Ireland, that if a raven hovered over the head of cattle, a withering
blight had been set upon the animals. As birds of carrion they were
supposed to be waiting for the carcases.

 

XXXVI\. THE FARMER OF LIDDESDALE

Sources. - MacDougal, *Waifs and Strays,* III. ix. pp. 216 - 21

Parallels.- Campbell, *West Highland Tales,* " The Master and the Man,"
iii. 288-92.

Remarks.- I need scarcely suggest the identification of the Ploughman
with the … . As usual in folk-tales, that personage does not get the
best of the bargain. The rustic Faust evades his contract by a direct
appeal to the higher powers. This is probably characteristic of Scotch
piety.

 

XXXVII\. THE GREEK PRINCESS AND THE YOUNG GARDENER.

Sources.-Kennedy, *Fireside Stories,* pp.47-56.

Parallels- Campbell*, West Highland Tales,* lvi.; *Mac Iain Direach,*
ii. 344-76. He gives other variants at the end. The story is clearly
that of the Grimms' "GoIden Bird, No. 57. They give various parallels in
their notes. Mrs. Hunt refers to an Eskimo version in Raes *White Sea
Peninsula,* called " Kuobba the Giant and the Devil.' But the most
curious and instructive parallel is that afforded by the Arthurian
Romance of Walewein *(i.e.,* Gawain) now only extant in Dutch, which, as
Professer W. P. Ker has pointed out in *Folk-lore,* v. 121, exactly
corresponds to the popular tale, and thus carries it back in Celtdom to
the early twelfth century at the latest.

 

XXXVIII\. THE RUSSET DOG.

Source.- I have made up this Celtic Reynard out of several fables given
by Campbell, *West Highland Tales,* under the title "Fables," vol. i.
pp.275 *seq.;* and "The Keg of Butter" and the "The Fox and the little
Bonnach," vol. iii. Nos. lxv. lxvi.

Parallels.- The Fox's ruse about a truce among the animals is a
well-known Aesop's Fable see my edition of *Carton's Aesop,* vol. ii.
p.307, and *Parallels,* vol. i. p.267. The trick by which the cock gets
out of the fox's mouth is a part of the Reynard Cycle, and is given by
Chaucer as his "Nonne Preste's Tale." How the wolf lost his tail is also
part of the same cycle, the parallels of which are given by K. Krohn,
*Bär (Wolf) und Fuchs* (Helsingfors, 1889), pp.26-8. The same writer has
studied the geographical distribution of the story in Finland,
accompanied by a map, in *Fennia,* iv. No.4. I have given a mediaeval
Hebrew version in my *Jews* *of Angevin England,* pp. 170-2. See also
Gerber, *Great Russian Animal Tales,* pp. 48-50. The wolf was originally
the bear, as we see from the conclusion of the incident, which professes
to explain why the wolf is stumpy-tailed. "The Keg of Butter " combines
two of the Grimm stories, 2, 189. "The Little Bonnach" occurs also in
English and has been given in two variants in *English Fairy Tales,* No.
xxviii. and *More English Fairy Tales,* No. lvii.

Remarks.- It would lead me too far afield to discuss here the sources of
Reynard the Fox, with which I hope shortly to deal at length elsewhere.
But I would remark that in this case, as in several others we have
observed, the stories, which are certainly reproductions, have received
the characteristic Celtic dress. It follows that we cannot conclude
anything as to the origin of a tale from the fact that it is told
idiomatically. On the other hand, the stories of" The Fox and Wrens "and
" The Fox and the Todhunter,' and ' How the Fox gets rid of his Fleas,"
have no parallels elsewhere, and show the possibility of a native beast
tale or cycle of tales.

 

XXXIX\. SMALLHEAD AND THE KING'S SON.

Source.- Mr*.* Curtin's "Hero Tales of Ireland," contributed to the

New York Sun.

Parallels- Campbell's No. xvii., ' Maol a Chliobain," is the same story,
which is also found among the Lowlanders, and is given in my *English
Fairy Tales,* No. xxii., "Molly Whuppie," where see notes for other
parallels of the Hop o' My Thumb type of story. King Under the Waves
occurs in Campbell, No. lxxxvi.

 

XL\. THE LEGEND OF KNOCKGRAFTON.

Source.- Croker

, Fairy Legend's of South of Ireland.

Parallels. - Parnell's poem, *Edwin and Sir Topaz,* contains the same
story. As he was born in Dublin, 1679, this traces the tale back at
least 200 years in Ireland. Practically the same story, however, has
been found in Japan, and translated into English under the title,
"Kobutori ; or, The Old Man and the Devils." In the story published by
Kobunsha, Tokio, the Old Man has a lump on the side of his face. He sees
the demons dancing, and getting exhilarated, joins in. Thereupon the
devils are so delighted that they wish to see him again, and as a pledge
of his return take away from him his lump. Another old man, who has a
similar lump on the other side of his face, hearing of this, tries the
same plan, but dances so badly that the devils, not wishing to see him
again, and mistaking him for the other old man, give him back the lump,
so that he has one on each side of his face.

I may add here that Mr. York Powell informs me that No. xvii. of the
same series, entitled, " Shippietaro," contains a parallel to the
"Hobyahs" of

More English Tales.

Remarks.- Here we have a problem of diffusion presented in its widest
form. There can be little doubt that "The Legend of Knockgrafton " and "
Kobutori," one collected in Ireland and to be traced there for the last
200 years, and the other collected at the present day in Japan, are one
and the same story, and it is impossible to imagine they were
independently produced. Considering that Parnell could not have come
across the Japanese version, we must conclude that "Kobutori "is a
recent importation into Japan. On the other hand, as "the Hobyahs"
cannot be traced in England, and was collected from a Scottish family
settled in the United States, where Japanese influence has been
considerable, it is possible that this tale was derived from Japan
within the memory of men still living. It would be highly desirable to
test these two cases, in which we seem to be able to observe the process
of the diffusion of Folk Tales going on before our eyes.

 

XLI\. ELIDORE.

Source. - Giraldus Cambrensis, *Itinerariurn Cambriae,* I. viii. I have
followed the Latin text tolerably closely.

Parallels.- Mr*.* Hartland has a paper on " Robberies in Fairyland," in
*Arch. Rev.,* iii. 39 *seq.* Davies, *Mythology of the British Druids,*
p.155, tells a story of a door in a rock near a cave in the mountains of
Brecknock, which was left open for Mayday, and men used to enter, and so
reach that fairy island in the middle of the lake. The visitors were
treated very hospitably by their fairy hosts, but on the condition that
they might eat all, but pocket none; for once, a visitor took away with
him a fairy flower, and as soon as he got outside the door the flower
vanished, and the door was never more opened. "The Luck of Edenhall,"
still in existence, is supposed to be a trophy brought back from a
similar visit.

Remarks.- Mr*.* Hartland suggests that these legends, and the relics
connected with them, are in some way connected with the heathen rites
prevalent in these islands before the introduction of Christianity,
which may have lingered on into historic times. The absence of sunlight
in this account of the House of the Fairies, as in "Childe Rowland " (on
which see note in *English Fairy Tales),* may be regarded as a point in
favour of Mr. MacRitchie's theories as to the identification of the
fairies with the mound-dwellers. The object of the expectoration was to
prevent Elidore's seeing his way back. Thus the fairies prevent the
indiscretions of the human midwives they employ.

 

XLII\. THE LEECHING OF KAYN'S LEG.

Source- Maclnnes*, Folk-Tales from Argyleshire,* vii., combined with
Campbell of *Tiree's* version.

Parallels.- The earliest version, from an Egerton MS. of the fifteenth
century, has been printed by Mr. S. H. O'Grady in his *Silva Gadelica,*
No.20, with an English version, pp.332-42. Mr. Campbell of Tiree has
given a short Gaelic version in the *Transactions of the Gaelic Society
of Inverness,* 78-100. Campbell of Islay collected the fullest version
of this celebrated story, which is to be found among his manuscript
remains now in Edinburgh. Mr. Nutt has given his English abstract in
*Folk-lore,* i. 373-7, in its original form. The story must have
contained twenty-four tales or episodes of stories, nineteen of which
are preserved in J. F. Campbell's version. For parallels to the various
incidents, see Mr. Nutt's notes on Maclnnes, pp. 47\~3. The tale is
referred to in MacNicol, *Remarks on Dr. Johnson's Journey to the
Hebrides,* 1779.

Remarks.- Nothing could give a more vivid idea of what might be called
the organisation of the art of story-telling among the Celts than this
elaborate tale. Mr. Nutt is inclined to trace it, even in its present
form, back to the twelfth or, thirteenth century. It occurs in an MS. of
the fifteenth century in an obviously unoriginal form which shows that
the story-teller did not appreciate the significance of many features in
the folk-tale he was retelling, and yet it was orally collected by the
great Campbell in 1871, in a version which runs to 142 folio pages.

Formally, its interest consists in large measure in the curious
frame-work in which the subsidiary stories are imbedded. This is not of
the elaborate kind introduced into Europe from the East by the Crusades,
but more *naive,* resembling rather, as Mr. Nutt points out to me, the
loosely-knit narratives of Charles Lever in his earlier manner.

 

XLIlI. HOW FIN WENT TO THE KINGDOM OF THE BIG MEN.

Source.-J. G. Campbell, *The Fians (Waifs and Strays,* No. iv.), pp. I75
- 92.

Parallels.- The Voyage to Brobdingnag will occur to many readers, and it
is by no means impossible that, as Swift was once an Irish lad, *The
Voyage* may have been suggested by some such tale told him in his
infancy. It is not, however, a part of the earlier recorded Ossianic
cycle, though over-sea giants occur as opponents of the heroes in that
as well as in the earlier Ultonian cycle.

 

XLIV\. HOW CORMAC MAC ART WENT TO FAERY.

Source.- Kindly condensed by Mr. Alfred Nutt from an English version by
Mr. S. H. O'Grady in *Ossianic Society's Publicahons,* vol. iii. The
oldest known version has been printed from fourteenth century MSS., by
Mr. Whitley Stokes, *Irische Texte,* iii. i. The story existed in some
form in the early eleventh cent u y, as it is cited in the epic
catalogue contained in the Book of Leinster.

Parallels.- Mr*.* Nutt in his *Studies on the Legend of the Holy Grail,*
p. 193, connects this visit of Cormac to the Otherworld with the
bespelled Castle incident in the Grail Legend. and gives other instances
of visits to the Brug of Manannan. Manannan Mac Lir is the Celtic
sea-god.

 

XLV\. RIDERE OF RIDDLES.

Source- Campbell, *West Highland Tales,* No. xxii. vol. ii. p. 36,
*seq.* I have modified the end, which has a polygamous complexion.

Parallels.- Campbell points out that the story is in the main identical
with the Grimms' "Räthsel," No. xxii. There the riddle is : " One slew
none, and yet slew twelve. " MacDougall has the same story in *Waifs and
Strays,* iii. pp. 76

seq.

Remarks.- There can be no doubt that the Celtic and German Riddle
Stories are related genealogically. Which is of the earlier generation
is, however, more difficult to determine. In favour of the Celtic is the
polygamous framework; while on the other hand, it is difficult to guess
how the story could have got from the Highlands to Germany. The simpler
form of the riddle in the German version might seem to argue greater
antiquity.

 

XLVI\. THE TAIL.

Source.- Campbell, No. lvii.

Parallels.- Most story-tellers have some formula of this kind to
conclude their narrations. Prof. Crane gives some examples in his
*Italian Popular Tales, pp.* 155-7. The English have "I'll tell you a
story of Jack a Nory," and "The Three Wise Men of Gotham" who went to
Sea in a Bowl:

 

"If the bowl had been stronger,  
My song would have been longer."
