[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mcft16)  [Next](mcft18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# How Fin went to the Kingdom of the Big Men

FIN and his men were in the Harbour of the Hill of Howth on a hillock,
behind the wind and in front of the sun, where they could see every
person, and nobody could see them, when they saw a speck coming from the
west. They thought at first it was the blackness of a shower; but when
it came nearer, they saw it was a boat. It did not lower sail till it
entered the harbour. There were three men in it; one for guide in the
bow, one for steering in the stern, and one for the tackle in the
centre. They came ashore, and drew it up seven times its own length in
dry grey grass, where the scholars of the city could not make it stock
for derision or ridicule.

They then went up to a lovely green spot, and the first lifted a handful
of round pebbles or shingle, and commanded them to become a beautiful
house, that no better could be found in Ireland; and this was done. The
second one lifted a slab of slate, and commanded it to be slate on the
top of the house, that there was not better in Ireland ; and this was
done. The third one caught a bunch of shavings and commanded them to be
pine-wood and timber in the house, that there was not in Ireland better
; and this was done.

This caused much wonder to Fin, who went down where the men were, and
made inquiries of them, and they answered him. He asked whence they
were, or whither they were going. They said, "We are three Heroes whom
the King of the Big Men has sent to ask combat of the Fians." He then
asked, " What was the reason for doing this ?" They said they did not
know, but they heard that they were strong men, and they came to ask
combat of Heroes from them. "Is Fin at Home ?" "He is not." (Great is a
man's leaning towards his own life). Fin then put them under crosses and
under enchantments, that they were not to move from the place where they
were till they saw him again.

He went away and made ready his coracle, gave its stern to land and prow
to sea, hoisted the spotted towering sails against the long, tough,
lance-shaped mast, cleaving the billows in the embrace of the wind in
whirls, with a soft gentle breeze from the height of the sea-coast, and
from the rapid tide of the red rocks, that would take willom from the
hill, foliage from the tree, and heather from its stock and roots. Fin
was guide in her prow, helm in her Stern, and tackle in her middle ; and
stopping of head or foot he did not make till he reached the Kingdom of
the Big Men. He went ashore and drew up his coracle in grey grass. He
went up, and a Big Wayfarer met him. Fin asked who he was. "I am," he
said, "the Red-haired Coward of the King of the Big Men; and," said he
to Fin, you are the one I am in quest of. Great is my esteem and respect
towards you ; you are the best maiden I have ever seen ; you will
yourself make a dwarf for the King, and your dog (this was Bran) a
lapdog. It is long since the King has been in want of a dwarf and a
lapdog." He took with him Fin; but another Big Man came, and was going
to take Fin from him. The two fought ; but when they had torn each
other's clothes, they left it to Fin to judge. He chose the first one.
He took Fin with him to the palace of the King\~ whose worthies and high
nobles assembled to see the little man. The king lifted him upon the
palm of his hand, and went three times round the town with Fin upon one
palm and Bran upon the other. He made a sleeping-place for him at the
end of his own bed. Fin was waiting, watching, and observing everything
that was going on about the house. He observed that the King, as soon as
night came, rose and went out, and returned no more till morning. This
caused him much wonder, and at last he asked the King why he went away
every night and left the Queen by herself. " Why," said the King, "do
you ask ? " "For satisfaction to myself," said Fin ; "for it is causing
me much wonder." Now the King had a great liking for Fin; he never saw
anything that gave him more pleasure than he did ; and at last he told
him. " There is," he said, "a great Monster who wants my daughter \~n
marriage, and to have half my kingdom to himself; and there is not
another man in the kingdom who can meet him but myself; and I must go
every night to hold combat with him." "Is there," said Fin, "no man to
combat with him but yourself?" "There is not," said the King, "one who
will war with him for a single night." "It is a pity," said Fjn, "that
this should be called the Kingdom of the Big Men. Is he bigger than
yourself? " "Never you mind," said the King. "I will mind," said Fin ;
"take your rest and sleep to-night, and I shall go to meet him." "Is it
you ?" said the King; "you would not keep half a stroke against him."

When night came, and all men went to rest, the King was for going away
as usual ; but Fin at last prevailed upon him to allow himself to go. "
I shall combat him," said he, "or else he knows a trick." "I think
much," said the King, "of allowing you to go, seeing he gives myself
enough to do." "Sleep you soundly to-night," said Fin, "and let me go ;
if he comes too violently upon me, I shall hasten home."

Fin went and reached the place where the combat was to be. He saw no one
before him, and he began to pace backwards and forwards. At last he saw
the sea coming in kilns of fire and as a darting serpent, till it came
down below where he was. A Huge Monster came up and looked towards him,
and from him. "What little speck do I see there ? " he said. " It is I,"
said Fin. "What are you doing here?" "I am a messenger from the King of
the Big Men ; he is under much sorrow and distress; the Queen has just
died, and I have come to ask if you will be so good as to go home
to-night without giving trouble to the kingdom." " I shall do that,"
said he ; and he went away with the rough humming of a song in his
mouth.

Fin went home when the time came, and lay down in his own bed, at the
foot of the King's bed. When the King awoke, he cried out in great
anxiety, " My kingdom is lost, and my dwarf and my lapdog are killed !"
"They are not," said Fin ; "I am here yet ; and you have got your sleep,
a thing you were saying it was rare for you to get."

How," said the King, "did you escape, when you are so little, while he
is enough for myself, though I am so big."

"Though you," said Fin, "are so big arid strong, I am quick and active."

Next right the King was for going ; but Fin told him to take his sleep
to-night again. "I shall stand myself in your place, or else a better
hero than yonder one must come.

"He will kill you," said the King, "I shall take my chance," said Fin.

He went, and as happened the night before, he saw no one; and he began
to pace backwards and forwards. He saw the sea coming in fiery kilns and
as a darting serpent; and that Huge Man came up. "Are you here to-night
again ?" said he. "I am, and this is my errand : when the Queen was
being put in the coffin, and the King heard the coffin being nailed, and
the joiner's stroke, he broke his hean with pain and grief; and the
*Parliament* has sent me to ask you to go home to-night till they get
the King buried." The Monster went this night also, roughly humming a
song ; and Fin went home when the time came.

In the morning the King awoke in great anxiety, and called out, "My
kingdom is lost, and my dwarf and my lapdog are killed !" and he greatly
rejoiced that Fin and Bran were alive, and that he himself got rest)
after being so long without sleep.

Fin went the third night, and things happened as before. There was no
one before him, and he took to pacing to and fro. He saw the sea coming
till it came down below him the Big Monster came up; he saw the little
black speck, and asked who was there, and what he wanted. " I have come
to combat you," said Fin.

Fin and Bran began the combat. Fin was going backwards, and the Huge Man
was following. Fin called to Bran, " Are you going to let him kill me ?
" Bran had a venomous shoe ; and he leaped and struck the Huge Man with
the venomous shoe on the breast-bone, and took the heart and lungs out
of him. Fin drew his sword, Mac-a-Luin, cut off his head, put it on a
hempen rope, and went with it to the Palace of the King. He took it into
the *Kitchen,* and put it behind the door. In the morning the servant
could not turn it, nor open the door. The King went down ; he saw the
Huge Mass, caught it by the top of the head, and lifted it, and knew it
was the head of the Man who was for so long a time asking combat from
him, and keeping him from sleep. " How at all," said he, "has this head
come here? Surely it is not my dwarf that has done it." "Why," said Fin,
"should he not ?"

Next night the King wanted to go himself to the place of combat ; "
because," said he, " a bigger one than the former will come to-night,
and the kingdom will be destroyed, and you yourself killed ; and I shall
lose the pleasure I take in having you with me." But Fin went, and that
Big Man came, asking vengeance for his son, and to have the kingdom for
himself, or equal combat. lie and Fin fought; and Fin was going
backwards. He spoke to Bran, "Are you going to allow him to kill me ?"
Bran whined, and went and sat down on the beach. Fin was ever being
driven back, and he called out again to Bran. Then Bran jumped and
struck the Big Man with the venomous shoe, and took the heart and the
lungs out of him. Fin cut the head oft; and took it with him, and left
it in front of the house. The King awoke in great terror, and cried out,
"My kingdom is lost, and my dwarf and my lapdog are killed !" Fin raised
himself up and said, "They are not;" and the King's joy was not small
when he went out and saw the head that was in front of the house.

The next night a Big Hag came ashore, and the tooth in the door of her
mouth would make a distaff. She sounded a challenge on her shield " You
killed," she said, "my husband and my son," "I did kill them," said Fin.
They fought ; and it was worse for Fin to guard himself from the tooth
than from the hand of the Big Hag. When she had nearly done for him Bran
struck her with the venomous shoe, and killed her as he had done to the
rest. Fin took with him the head, and left it in front of the house. The
King awoke in great anxiety, and called out, "My kingdom is lost, and my
dwarf and my lapdog are killed ! " " They are not," said Fin, answering
him and when they went out and saw the head, the King said, "I and my
kingdom will have peace ever after this. The mother herself of the brood
is killed; but tell me who you are. It was foretold for me that it would
be Fin-mac-Coul that would give me relief, and he is only now eighteen
years of age. Who are you, then, or what is your name?" " There never
stood," said Fin, " on hide of cow or horse, one to whom I would deny my
name. I am Fin, the Son of Coul, son of Looach, son of Trein, son of
Fin, son of Art, son of the young High King of Erin; and it is time for
me now to go home. It has been with much wandering out of my way that I
have come to your kingdom; and this is the reason why I have come, that
I might find out what injury I have done to you, or the reason why you
sent the three heroes to ask combat from me, and bring destruction on my
Men." " You never did any injury to me," said the King; " and I ask a
thousand pardons. I did not send the heroes to you. It is not the truth
they told. They were three men who were courting three fairy women, and
these gave them their shirts; and when they have on their shirts, the
combat of a hundred men is upon the hand of every one of them. But they
must put off the shirts every night, and put them on the backs of
chairs; and if the shirts were taken from them they would be next day as
weak as other people."

Fin got every honour, and all that the King could give him, and when he
went away, the King and the Queen and the people went down to the shore
to give him their blessing.

Fin now went away in his coracle, and was sailing close by the side of
the shore, when he saw a young man running and calling out to him. Fin
came in close to land with his coracle, and asked what he wanted. "I
am,' said the young man, "a good servant wanting a master." "What work
can you do ?" said Fin. "I am," said he, "the best soothsayer that there
is." "Jump into the boat then." The soothsayer jumped in, and they went
forward.

They did not go far when another youth came running.

"I am," he said, "a good servant wanting a master."

"What work can you do ?" said Fin. " I am as good a thief as there is."
"Jump into the boat, then;" and Fin took with him this one also. They
saw then a third young man running and calling out. They came close to
land. "What man are you?" said Fin. "I am," said he, "the best climber
that there is. I will take up a hundred pounds on my back in a place
where a fly could not stand on a calm summer day." "Jump in ;" and this
one came in also.

"I have my pick of servants now," said Fin; "it cannot be but these will
suffice."

They went; and stop of head or foot they did not make till they reached
the Harbour of the Hill of Howth. He asked the soothsayer what the three
Big Men were doing. "They are," he said, "after their supper, and making
ready for going to bed."

He asked a second time. "They are," he said, "after going to bed ; and
their shirts are spread on the back of chairs."

After a while, Fin asked him again, "What are the Big Men doing now? " "
They are," said the soothsayer, sound asleep." "It would be a good thing
if there was now a thief to go and steal the shirts." "I would do that,"
said the thief; " but the doors are locked, and I cannot get in. Come,"
said the climber, " on my back, and I shall put you in." He took him up
upon his back to the top of the chimney, and let him down, and he stole
the shirts.

Fin went where the Fian band was ; and in the morning they came to the
house where the three Big Men were. They sounded a challenge upon their
shields, and asked them to come out to combat.

They came out. " Many a day," said they, " have we been better for
combat than we are to-day," and they confessed to Fin everything as it
was. " You were," said Fin, "impertinent, but I will forgive you " ; and
he made them swear that they would be faithful to himself ever after,
and ready in every enterprise he would place before them.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Cormac Mac Art went to Faery](mcft18.md)
