[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp090)  [Next](arp092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE DAWN OF LOVE.

Antar had frequent opportunities of seeing Abla, one of his duties being
to serve the women of his father's and uncles’ families with the camel's
milk which, previously cooled in the wind, it was the custom of Arab
women to drink every morning and evening. Coming into his uncle Malik's
tent one day while Abla's long flowing hair was being dressed by her
mother, Antar's soul was filled with the image of her beauty, and when
he retired he thus expressed his feelings:

<span class="smallcaps">That</span> fair maid lets down her ringlets,
and she is completely hid in her hair, which appears like the dark
shades of night.

It is as if she were the brilliant day, and as if the night had
enveloped her in obscurity.

It is as if the full moon was shining in its splendour, and all the
stars were concealed by its lustre.

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

Her charms bewitch all around her, and all are anxious to offer their
services:

They live in her beauties and loveliness; and they are imbued with
sweetness from her perfections, and receive new spirit from her graces.

Revile me not for my love of her, for I am distracted for her, and live
but as the victim of my love.

I will conceal my affection in my soul, till I can see that I am
sufficiently fortunate one day to serve her.

And on another occasion, seeing Abla playing and singing among other
maidens at a feast, Antar addressed her in eloquent verses:

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> lovely virgin has struck my heart
with the arrow of a glance, for which there is no cure.

Sometimes she wishes for a feast in the sand-hills, like a fawn whose
eyes are full of magic.

My disease preys on me; it is in my entrails: I conceal it; but its very
concealment discloses it.

She moves: I should say it was the branch of the tamarisk, that waves
its branches to the southern breeze.

She approaches: I should say it was the frightened fawn, when a calamity
alarms it in the waste.

She walks away: I should say her face was truly the sun when its lustre
dazzles the beholders.

She gazes: I should say it was the full moon of the night when Orion
girds it with its stars.

She smiles: and the pearls of her teeth sparkle, in which there is the
cure for the sickness of lovers.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

She prostrates herself in reverence towards her God; and the greatest of
men bow down to her beauties.

O Abla! when I most despair, love for thee and all its weaknesses are my
only hope!

Should fortune or my father assist me, I will requite myself for its
vicissitudes by my fearless spirit.

Love had now become the master-passion of the hero's soul; for all his
subsequent exploits as a warrior were undertaken and performed mainly
with the view of raising himself above the circumstance of his birth,
and of becoming worthy of his cousin. But already Antar had many bitter
enemies among his own people, who sought every means of depriving him of
the favour and protection of King Zoheir, and of his son Prince Malik.
Wandering one day far from the tents of his tribe, and brooding over his
forlorn condition and his love for Abla, he composed the following
verses:

<span class="smallcaps">Abla’s</span> spirit appeared to me in my sleep,
and thrice I kissed her within her veil.

It bade me adieu, but it deposited in me a flame that I feel burning
through my bones.

Were I not left in solitude, and could I not quench the fire of my
passion with tears, my heart would melt.

But I do not complain; though all my fears are on thy account, O thou
perfect full moon!

O daughter of Malik! how can I be consoled, since my love for thee
originated from the time I was weaned?

But how can I ever hope to approach thee, whilst the lions of the forest
guard thy tent?

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

By the truth of my love for thee, my heart can never be cured but by
patience.

O thou noble maid! till I exalt myself to the heights of glory with the
thrusts of my spear, and the blows of my sword, I will expose myself to
every peril wherever the spears clash in the battle-dust—then shall I be
either tossed upon the spear-heads, or be numbered among the noble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Early Warlike Exploits](arp092)
