[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp015)  [Next](arp017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="img_03900"></span> ![Decorative Page Header](img/03900.jpg.md)

###### THE

#### POEM

###### OF

# LEBEID.

### THE ARGUMENT.

ALTHOUGH the opening of this Poem be that of a love-elegy, and the
greater part of it be purely pastoral, yet it seems to have been
composed on an occasion more exalted than the departure of a mistress,
or the complaints of a lover. For the poet, who was also a genuine
patriot, had been entertained at the court of Nomaan, King of Hira in
Mesopotamia, and had been there engaged in a warm controversy with
Rabeiah, son of Zeiad, chief of the Absites, concerning the comparative
excellence of their tribes. Lebeid himself relates, what might be very
naturally expected from a man of his eloquence and warmth, that he
maintained the glory of his countrymen and his own dignity against all
opponents; but, in order to perpetuate his victory, and to render his
triumph more brilliant, he produced the following poem at the annual
assembly, and having obtained the suffrages of the critics, was
permitted, we are told, to hang it up on the gate of the Temple.

The fifteen first couplets are extremely picturesque, and highly
characteristic of Arabian manners. They are followed by an expostulatory
address of the poet himself, or of some friend who attended him on his
rambles, on the folly of his fruitless passion

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

for Nawara, who had slighted him, and whose tent was removed to a
considerable distance. Occasion is hence taken to interweave a long
description of the camel on which he intended to travel far from the
object of his love, and which he compares for swiftness to a cloud
driven by the wind, or a wild-ass running to a pool, after having
subsisted many months on herbage only; or rather to a wild-cow hastening
in search of her calf, whom the wolves had left mangled in the
forest;—the last comparison consists of *seventeen* couplets, and may be
compared with the long-tailed similes of the Greek and Roman poets.

He then returns to Nawara, and requites her coyness with expressions of
equal indifference; he describes the gaiety of his life, and the
pleasures which he can enjoy even in her absence; he celebrates his own
intrepidity in danger and firmness on his military station; whence he
takes occasion to introduce a short but lively description of his horse;
and, in the seventieth couplet, alludes to the before-mentioned contest,
which gave rise to the poem: thence he passes to the praises of his own
hospitality; and concludes with a panegyric on the virtues of his tribe.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The measure is of the fifth class, called *perfect verse*, which
regularly consists of the compound foot *benedicerent*, six times
repeated, in this form:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Tria grata sunt \| animo meo, ut \| melius nihil,  
 Oculi nigri, \| cyathus nitens, \| roseus calyx."

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But when the
couplet admits the third epitrite, *pastoribus*, and the double iambus,
*amantium*, it may be considered as belonging to the seventh, or
*tremulous*, class; between which and the *perfect* the only distinction
seems to be that the *tremulous* never admits the *anapestic* foot. They
are both, in the language of European prosody, *iambics*, in which the
even places are invariably pure, and the odd places always exclude the
dactyl: when the uneven feet are *trochees* or *pyrrhics*, the verses
become *choriambic* or *peonic;* but of this change we have no instance
in the poem before us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Poem of Lebeid](arp017.md)
