[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp042)  [Next](arp044.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

### SONGS

#### BY MASHDUD, RAKEEK, AND RAIS,

##### THE THREE MOST CELEBRATED IMPROVISATORI POETS IN BAGDAD, AT AN ENTERTAINMENT GIVEN BY ABU ISY, SON OF THE KHALIF MOTAWAKKEL.

THE preface with which these Poems are accompanied in the *Mostatraf*,
at the same time that it explains the cause of their composition, gives
no bad picture of Arabian manners during the flourishing period of the
Khalifate:—

I was one day going to the mosque \[says Abu Akramah, an author who
supported himself at Bagdad by the profits of his pen\], in order to see
if I could pick up any little anecdote which might serve for the
groundwork of a tale. As I passed the gate of Abu Isy, son of the Khalif
Motawakkel, I saw Mashdud, the celebrated extempore poet, standing near
it.

Mashdud saluted me, and asked whither I was going. I answered, to the
mosque, and confessed without reserve the business which drew me
thither. The poet, upon hearing this, pressed me to accompany him to the
palace of Abu Isy. I declined, however, complying with his
solicitations, conscious of the impropriety of intruding myself
uninvited into the presence of a person of such rank and consequence.
But Abu Isy's porter, overhearing our conversation, declared that he
would put an end to my difficulties in a moment, by acquainting his
master with my arrival. He did so; and in a short time two servants
appeared, who took me up in their arms, and carried the into a most
magnificent apartment, where their master was sitting.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Upon my introduction, I could not help feeling a little confused, but
the Prince soon made me easy, by calling out in a good-natured manner,
"Why do you stand blushing there, you simpleton? Take a seat." I obeyed:
and in a few minutes a sumptuous collation was brought in, of which I
partook. Nor was the juice of the grape forgotten: a cupbearer,
brilliant as the morning star, poured out wine for us, more sparkling
than the beams of the sun reflected by a mirror.

After the entertainment I arose, and having invoked every blessing to be
showered down upon the head of my bounteous host, I was preparing to
withdraw. But Abu Isy prevented me, and immediately ordered Mashdud,
together with Rakeek and Rais, two musicians, whose fame was almost
equal to Mashdud's, to be called in. They appeared accordingly and
having taken their places, Mashdud gave us the following satiric song:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mashdud on the Monks of Khabbet](arp044.md)
