[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp095)  [Next](arp097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### A BRIDAL PARTY ATTACKED.

Next day Antar and his companions meet with a numerous bridal party; the
bride's howdah—richly ornamented with velvet, and on its top a crescent
of gold—was preceded by damsels and slaves wearing bright-coloured
robes, and behind came a troop of seventy horsemen. The Absians attack
the escort, and take the bride prisoner. But while Ghegadh and the
others are disputing with Antar about his share of the plunder, the
father of the damsel, Yezid the son of Handhala, surnamed the
Blood-drinker, arrives, with 300 warriors. "In a moment swords clashed;
every heart was roused: heads flew off like balls, and hands like leaves
of trees. The Teyans rushed upon the race of Abs; the Blood-drinker
assailed them in his courage, and released his daughter. The Absians
quitted their plunder, for their souls could not stand fire, and they
fled over the wilds." Antar, to punish his sordid companions, had thus
far remained an inactive spectator of the conflict, but seeing the
Absians give way, he rushed down on the Teyans, and slew with his own
hand eighty of their bravest warriors; and the rest, with the renowned
Blood-drinker and his daughter, spread themselves

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

over the plain and escaped. The Absians had hardly returned from
pursuing the Teyans, when Nakid, the husband of the bride, came up, with
a large body of horsemen, and a fierce battle immediately ensued. The
tribe of Abs were overpowered, and were about to retreat, when Antar
turned the fortune of the day, by encountering and slaying Nakid.

Meanwhile King Zoheir had sent a slave in search of Antar, who returned
with the news that he was engaged with the tribe of Maan in deadly
conflict. The King at once despatched his son Prince Malik with a party
of warriors to Antar's assistance, but when they reached him, the enemy
was already vanquished. Antar and Prince Malik then returned to their
own land, and as they drew near the tents of their tribe Antar
exclaimed:

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> the breezes blow from Mount Saadi,
their freshness calms the fire of my love and transports. Let my tribe
remember I have preserved their faith; but they feel not my worth, and
preserve not their engagements with me.

Were there not a maid settled in the tents, why should I prefer their
society to absence?

Slimly made is she, and the magic influence of her eye preserves the
bones of a corpse from entering the tomb.

The sun, as it sets, turns towards her, and says: Darkness obscures the
land—do thou rise in my absence; and the brilliant moon calls out to
her: Come forth!—for thy face is like me when I am at the full, and in
all my glory!

The tamarisk trees complain of her in the morn and the eve, and say:
Away, thou waning beauty, thou form of the laurel!

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

She turns away abashed, and throws aside her veil, and the roses are
scattered from her soft fresh cheeks.

She draws her sword from the glances of her eyelashes, sharp and
penetrating as the blade of her forefathers, and with it her eyes commit
murder, though it be sheathed:

Is it not surprising that a sheathed sword should be so sharp against
its victims?

Graceful is every limb; slender her waist; love-beaming are her glances;
waving is her form.

The damsel passes the night with musk under her veil, and its fragrance
is increased by the still fresher essence of her breath.

The lustre of Day sparkles from her forehead, and by the dark shades of
her curling ringlets Night itself is driven away.

When she smiles, between her teeth is a moisture, composed of wine, of
rain, and of honey.

Her throat complains of the darkness of her necklace;—alas! alas! the
effects of that throat and that necklace!

Will fortune ever, O daughter of Malik! ever bless me with thy embrace,
that would cure my heart of the sorrows of love?

If my eye could see her baggage-camels, and her family, I would rub my
cheeks on the hoofs of her camels. I will kiss the earth where thou art;
mayhap the fire of my love and ecstacy may be quenched.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

Shall thou and I ever meet as formerly on Mount Saadi? or will the
messenger come from thee to announce thy meeting? or will he relate that
thou art in the land of Nejd?

Shall we meet in the land of Shurebah and Hima, and shall we live in joy
and happiness?

I am the well-known Antar, the chief of his tribe, and I shall die; but
when I am gone, history shall tell of me.

King Zoheir and the chiefs of the tribe came out to meet Antar, and
congratulate him on his return. The hero, after the King had greeted him
kindly, ran to his father Shedad, and asked his forgiveness; and the
whole tribe were astonished at his prowess.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plots Against The Hero](arp097)
