[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp120)  [Next](arp122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANTAR IN THE LAND OF ZEBEED.

On reaching the country of the Zebeedians, Antar finds Khalid absent on
a plundering expedition, but he is met by Jaida on horseback, armed as a
knight. The warlike lady boldly encounters Antar: she is vanquished, and
taken prisoner. Zoheir having summoned his warriors and set out to join
Antar, the father of Abla avails himself of this opportunity of again
quitting the tribe, and accordingly Malik emigrates with his family, and
accompanied by Rebia, to the tribe of Aamir. But here his usual
ill-fortune follows him; for the Aamirites are presently attacked by
Khalid and his warriors, and Malik and Rebia are taken captive.
Returning home, Khalid meets the Absians, and a desperate battle ensues,
with great slaughter on both sides. During the following night Antar and
Khalid keep watch over their respective tribes: the two chiefs meet;
Khalid is slain by the all-conquering hero, and Shiboob cuts off his
head as a trophy to grace Abla's wedding. Meantime a general battle
takes place, in which the Absians are completely victorious. After the
horsemen of Abs had returned from pursuing the enemy and collected the
spoil, Antar inquired for Jaida, but she had escaped; Malik and his
daughter too were nowhere to be found; and the hero passed a sleepless
night, lamenting the loss, once more, of his darling Abla.

At daybreak the noble Absian warriors set out for home, and as they drew
near the tents of their tribe, "high and low came out to meet them, and
it was a grand day for them all." When friends had greeted friends, all
retired to their tents; but Antar remained gazing sorrowfully upon the
abandoned and ruined dwelling of Abla; and leaning on his spear, in a
voice expressive

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

of his poignant grief, he recited these verses, which form the opening
of his famous *Moällacah:*

<span class="smallcaps">Have</span> the poets left aught to be repaired
in song? Canst thou recollect the abode of thy love, after long
meditation?

O dwelling of my Abla! Speak to me from Jiwa! Hail to thee, dwelling of
my Abla! secure and safe be thou!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Address to the Turtle-Dove](arp122)
