[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp118)  [Next](arp120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

### ANTAR UNDERTAKES ANOTHER ENTERPRISE FOR ABLA'S SAKE.

Thus, once more, every obstacle to Antar's marriage appears to be
removed; but in reality his treacherous uncle is as much averse as ever
to his union with Abla, and he soon devises another stratagem to bring
about the hero's death. Artfully instructed by her father, Abla demands
of Antar that at her marriage she should be as exalted as was Jaida, the
daughter of Zahir: when she was married to her cousin Khalid, the son of
Moharib, the bridle of her camel was held by the daughter of Moawiyah,
son of Nizal. The hero boldly promises that at Abla's marriage Jaida
herself shall hold her bridle, with Khalid's head slung round her neck.
To this wild proposal the father of Abla pretends opposition; but, as he
had anticipated, Antar is resolute; and that same night the hero, eager
to gratify the wishes of his darling Abla, set out on his perilous
enterprise, exclaiming:

<span class="smallcaps">I traverse</span> the wastes, and the night is
gloomy: I stray over the wilds, and the sands are parching; I desire no
other companion but the sword, whether, on the day of horrors, the foe
be few or numerous.

Ye beasts of the desert! beware of the warrior; for when he brandishes
his scimitar, caution avails not.

Accompany me: ye will behold prostrate carcasses, and the birds darting
at them as they hover and look on.

Now that I am going in quest of him, no eternity is there for Khalid.

No, no; let Jaida no longer boast;—short will be the happiness of their
country—soon will the tiger come!

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

O Abla! may the riches that come for thee rejoice thee, when Fortune
casts me among thy enemies!

O thou, who, with one glance of the eye, hast exposed my life to deadly
arrows, whose wounds are frightful—it is well; for thy embrace is an
unadulterated paradise, and the flames of separation from thee cannot be
endured.

O Mount Saadi! may showers from the rain-cloud ever moisten thee, and
may the dew ever refresh thy lands!

How many nights have I travelled in thy society, and lived in happiness,
unalloyed by pain, with the damsel who circles the goblets, and whose
form shines among them like the flame of wine!

The maiden who passes them round is of the daughters of Arabia,
elegantly formed, and Paradise is in her eye.

If I live, it is she whom I will ever remember: if I die, a night in
death with her will be existence!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Story of Jaida and Khalid](arp120)
