[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp150)  [Next](arp152.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

### NOTES ON THE MOALLAKÁT.

BESIDES Professor E. H. Palmer's elegant translation of Antara's
Mo‘allaqah, included in a small volume entitled "The Song of the Reed,
and Other Pieces," published by Messrs. Trübner and Co., of London, the
only attempts that have been made to render passages of the "Seven
Arabian Poems" into English verse are—the first sixteen verses of Lebīd
by Carlyle, and a few of the more striking passages of the other Poems
by the anonymous writer of an article on the Mo‘allaqāt in vol. v. of
the Retrospective Review, 1822. Carlyle's "learned translation" of
Lebīd's opening couplets, as Burton terms it half-scornfully in his
"Pilgrimage to El-Medina and Meccah," forms the first of his "Specimens
of Arabian Poetry," but was omitted in the reprint of his translations
in the present volume, in order that it might be more appropriately
placed, with the other versified passages of the Mo‘allaqāt, among the
following Notes.

A new translation of the Mo‘allaqāt, done with the light of the
Commentaries, will probably appear shortly, by Mr. C. J. Lyall, of the
Indian Civil Service, who has already published, by way of specimens, in
the *Journal* of the Bengal Asiatic Society, the Poems of Lebīd and
Zuhayr, with Introductions and copious Notes. In these translations Mr
Lyall has preserved the external form of the original verses, though he
has not attempted to reproduce the Qasīda rhyme. When Mr Lyall's
complete translation is published, it will doubtless supersede that of
Sir William Jones; which, however, with all its imperfections, must
continue to be respectfully regarded as being the first attempt to
translate these remarkable compositions into any of the modern European
languages.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The following Notes are designed simply for the general reader, to whom
they may perhaps serve to render certain obscure passages and
expressions in the English text somewhat more intelligible. It is
perhaps hardly necessary to state that the words printed in italic
letters in the text are explanatory

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

interpolations of the translator, and are not in the original. Those
verses which are distinguished by asterisks are not given in the
original texts which, printed in Roman characters, are appended to the
translation as given in Sir W. Jones’ collected Works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Poem of Amriolkais](arp152.md)
