[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp153)  [Next](arp155.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE POEM OF ZOHAIR.

\*<sub>\*</sub>\* The following Notes are adapted from those appended to
Mr. Lyall's translation of this Mo‘allaqah.

v\. 2. "Blue stains renewed," &c. The second hemistich of this verse
gives concisely a simile for the water-worn traces of the tents which is
found in a more expanded form in Lebîd's Mo‘allaqah, vv. 8, 9, *q.v.*
The tattooing over the veins of the inner wrist is said to be renewed,
because the torrents have scored deeply certain of the trenches dug
round the tents, while others that did not lie in the path of the flood
have become only faintly marked, like the veins beneath the tracery.

v\. 5. "Canal": round the tent a trench is dug to receive the rain from
the roof and prevent the water from flooding the interior.

v\. 6. "May thy morning be fair and auspicious!" The morning was the
time when raids were made. To wish peace in the morning to a place was
therefore an appropriate greeting. \[See Antara's Mo‘all., v. 2.\]

v\. 52. Tassels of scarlet wool decorated the *haudaj* in which ladies
rode.

v\. 17. The "Sacred Edifice" is the Ka‘beh. The mention of its building
by the Qureysh and the men of Jurhum must not be understood of the same
time. Jurhum was the name of two Arab stocks: the first, the ancient
race who peopled the lower Hijâz and the Tihâmeh at the time of the
legendary settlement of Ishmael among them, with whom he is said to have
intermarried; the second (whom M. de Perceval regards as alone having
had a historical existence), a tribe who ruled in Mekkeh from about 70
B. C. to 200 <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> They were expelled from
Mekkeh and dispersed so that no memorial of them remained by an

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Azdite stock from
el-Yemen, called the Khuzâ‘ah. (C. de Perceval, *Essai*, i., 218.
Aghânî, xiii, 108-111.) The second Jurhum are said (Agh. *id*. p. 109)
to have rebuilt the Ka‘beh on the foundations laid by Abraham after it
had been overthrown by a flood: the architect was one ‘Omar el-Jârûd,
whose descendants were known as the *Jedarah*, or masons. The Qureysh
settled in Mekkeh during its occupation by the Khuzâ‘ah, and gained
possession of the Ka‘beh in the time of Qusayy, whose mother was of the
race of the Jedarah, about 440, <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> (C.
de Perceval.) Qusayy, in the year 450 <span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> or thereabout, caused the building erected
by the Jurhum to be demolished, and rebuilt the Ka‘beh on a grander
scale. It was rebuilt a third time in the year 605 <span
class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>, very shortly before the Mo‘allaqah was
composed. Mohammed, then thirty-five years old, assisted in the work.
These three occasions are probably those to which Zuhayr refers.

"Make devout processions": the *tawâf*, or going round seven times, was
one of the most ancient rites of the religion of the Arabs; it was the
mode of worship used not only for the Ka‘beh, but also for the other
objects of reverence among the pagan Arabs: see Lane, *s.v.* *Duwâr*.

v\. 19. The literal translation of this verse is

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Ye two repaired the condition of ‘Abs and Dubyān (by peace), after
that  
they had shared one with another in destruction, and had brayed between
them the perfume of Menshim.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The second
hemistich is said to refer to a custom which existed among the Arabs of
plunging their hands into a bowl of perfume as they took an oath
together to fight for a cause until the last of them was slain. Menshim,
the commentators say, was a woman in Mekkeh who sold perfume. Such an
oath was followed by war to the bitter end; and so "he brayed the
perfume of Menshim" became a proverb for entering on deadly strife.

v\. 22. Ma‘add was the forefather of all those Arabs (generally called
*musta‘ribeh*, or insititious) who traced their descent from ‘Adnan,
whose son he was. \[See Genealogical Table prefixed

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

to the Mo‘allaqāt in this volume.\] The name is thus used to denote the
Central stocks settled for the most part in Nejd and El-Hijāz, as
opposed to the Arabs of El-Yemen or of Yemenic origin by whom they were
bordered on the north and south.

v\. 29. War, *el-Harb*, is feminine in Arabic.

v\. 31. The comparison of War to a mill and the slain to ground grain is
common in the old poetry. \[See vv. 31, 32, Poem of Amru, and *Note*.\]

v\. 32. \["Deformed as the dun camel of Aad: "see notes on vv. 11 and 22
of the "Lay of the Himyarites," pp.
[351](arp147.htm#page_351)-[354](arp148.htm#page_354.md) of the present
volume. Some of the genealogists say that Thailand was a cousin of ‘Ad,
and after the destruction of the ancient race of ‘Ad, the people of
Thamûd inherited their possessions and were called "the latter ‘Ad,"
which would account for Zuhayr's saying "camel of ‘Ad" instead of "camel
of Thamûd."\]

v\. 36. This verse appears to refer to the breaking out again of strife
which followed the deed of Hoseyn. The camels are the warriors, and the
pools the pools of death. The image seems intended to figure the
senselessness of the strife and its want of object and aim.

v\. 37. The grazing on pernicious and noxious weeds is the brooding over
wrong in the intervals of combat. Thus Qeys son of Zuhayr \[the Prince
Cais of the Romance of Antar\] says, of the bitter results of wrong in
this same War of Dāhis (*Hamâseh* p. 210, *Aghânî*, xvi, 32)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

But the stout warrior Hamal son of Bedr  
  wrought wrong; and wrong is a surfeiting pasturage.

</div>

\[El-Būsīrī, in v. 27 of his Mantle Poem, employs the same phrase, with
reference to impure thoughts: "If Desire find the pasturage sweet to its
taste, leave it not to pasture."\]

v\. 47. Among the Arabs, when two parties of men met, if they meant
peace, they turned towards each other the feet of their spears; if they
meant war, they turned towards each other the points.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

v\. 53. The "cistern" (*haud*) is a man's home and family.

v\. 56. Zuhayr was eighty years old when he composed his Mo‘allaqah—608
or 610 <span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span>, according to M. de Perceval.

v\. 57. Mr. Lyall's note on this verse will be better understood if read
with his own rendering of the passage—v. 49 of his text:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I have seen the Dooms trample men as a blind beast at random treads  
  —whom they smote, he died; whom they missed, he lived on to
strengthless eld.

</div>

"Blind beast" (*‘ashwâ*): literally "a weak-eyed she-camel"—one that
sees not well where she is going, and therefore strikes everything with
her forefeet, not paying attention to the places where she sets down her
feet.—*Lane*. The word is used proverbially: you say, *Rekiba
fulânuni-l-‘ashwâ*, "such a one rides the weak-eyed she-camel," that is,
he prosecutes his affair without due deliberation; and *Khabata
Khabta-l-‘ashwâ*, "he trod with the careless tread of a weak-eyed
she-camel"—he acted at random.

vv. 47-64. The different order in which these maxims occur in different
recensions of the poem, and the fact that some recensions omit several
of them which others supply, make it doubtful, Mr. Lyall thinks, whether
they properly belong to the Mo‘allaqah. "No other poem of those by
Zuhayr that remain has the same metre and rhyme as his Mo‘allaqah, and
it is most likely that fragments of other poems, now lost, in this
measure and rhyme, that have survived have been included in it, because
there was no other piece into which they could be put."—In Mr. Lyall's
text these maxims are placed in a very different order from that in
which they stand in Sir William Jones’ translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes on the Poem of Lebeid](arp155.md)
