[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp134)  [Next](arp136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AMARAH LAMPOONED BY THE GIRLS.

Antar returned to his tribe, and lived secluded in his tent, sorrowing
for the loss of his first and ever steadfast friend. One day Khemisa,
Abla's handmaiden, came to him with a message from his darling, who
desired him to watch over the safety of herself and her female
companions while they passed some time at the lake during the evening.
The hero was delighted with the duty, and readily promised Abla his
protection against the wanderers of the night.

The girls set out for the lake at the hour appointed, and Amarah,
disguised in women's clothes, followed them. When they reached the lake
he pounced upon Abla like a voracious. vulture. But help was at hand.
Antar, concealed behind the sand-hills, heard Abla's screams. He rushed
forth like a furious lion, grasped Amarah, and almost heat the life out
of him; then he let him go, followed by the taunts and jeers of the
girls.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

"This circumstance with Abla soon spread abroad, and all the women, and
men, and girls, and boys, and slaves, and slave-girls joined in the
laugh against Amarah, singing these verses, whilst Amarah heard
them:—the women and shepherdesses sang them at their spindles; for there
was a girl among the Absians who could compose verses; she was very
eloquent, so she repeated these verses on Amarah the cuckold, and they
were recollected by all the women and girls:"

<span class="smallcaps">Amarah</span>, leave alone the beautiful,
full-hipped damsels;—let alone all disputes about the lovely girls!

For thou canst not plunge into the sea of deaths, and thou art no
horseman in the day of battle.

Aspire no more to Abla: if thou dost but look at her, thou wilt see
horrors from the lion of the forests!

As to the thin quivering spear, touch not its strength, nor the cleaving
scimitar.

Abla is a fawn chased by a lion, with eyes that afflict with disorder
the stoutest in health.

Let alone all contest about her, or the unflinching Antar will make thee
drink of death.

Thou didst not cease thy obstinacy, till thy foul condition gave
evidence against thee!

All the girls laughed at thee: thou vast the carrion of the plains and
deserts; thou wast the common talk of the merry, and the laughing-stock
for every passenger!

Thou camest to us in the robes of dyed silk, thou black greasy kettle!

As thou didst meet us, a lion met thee, whom all the lion-heroes
acknowledge in the carnage:

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

Then fear trembled in thy heart—intoxication quitted thee, and thou wast
restored to thy senses. Nothing but contempt remained for thee, when
thou didst retire like a dunghill.

Abla beheld thee laid low, stretched out; and all the beautiful
high-hipped damsels with her.

We held our noses at thee, as we laughed at thee and quizzed thee.

The Antar of Knights, the lion of the cave, came—he, who in generosity
is a sea of liberality:

And thou art the vilest of all those that ever crossed a horse—the
noblest of those who are tenacious of their lives!

We are like the sweetest flowerets, scented like the violets and the
camomile; and Abla amongst us is like the branch of the tamarisk: her
beauty is the full moon, and the sun of the desert.

Thou wouldst possess her by violence and outrage—thou!—the vilest of all
the dogs that bark!

Die in grief, otherwise live in contempt; for never, never will there be
an end of our lampoons upon thee!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marriage of Antar and Abla](arp136)
