[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp144)  [Next](arp146.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FROM THE TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">Beyond</span> his pedigree, we know but little
of Neshwân ibn Sa'īd. He tells us himself in his great work, the *Shems
el-’Ulûm*, that his mother, like his father, was of noble Himyaritic

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

descent, and that his residence was at Hûth, a little village in the
district of Hamdân. Here we may imagine him to have lived and worked
until his death, which took place in <span class="smallcaps">a.h.</span>
573 \[<span class="smallcaps">a.d.</span> 1177\]. The knowledge which is
so copiously displayed in his works was probably derived, not only from
the writings of more ancient authors, such as Wahb ibn Munebbih and
’Ubaid ibn Shariyah, but from the oral traditions of the peasantry. His
principal work, the *Shems el-’Ulûm*, is in lexicographical form, and,
according to Dr. D. H. Müller, is of the highest value from a historical
and geographical point of view. A manuscript of this book is in the
Royal Library at Berlin, and it is much to be wished that Dr. Muller,
who has already turned its contents to considerable use, should complete
his task by giving to the world the work in its entirety. Neshwân ibn
Sa’îd was also the author of several other works, chiefly, it would
appear from their titles, of an exegetical nature, and of a few
scattered poetical pieces, which the searcher amongst Arabic manuscripts
may here and there light upon.

The work, however, which has been chiefly associated with his name is
the *Lay of the Himyarites*. The *motif* of this Poem is clearly
ethical: it deals with the most commonplace and yet the newest of
themes, the decay of glory, the vanity of human power. Not less vain
perhaps are the efforts of poet or moralist to persuade man that he is
but a sharer in the common lot, and that he, even he, like every one
else, "cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his name
shall be covered with darkness;" for that which strikes him as only
natural in the case of the rest of the world, appears something strange
and novel when his own turn comes to endure it. The Poet of Himyar takes
as his text the fallen fortunes of his own illustrious race. "Where,"
asks he, "are the kings and nobles of Himyar? They have been ground down
as the kernel of the date beneath the millstone: they have become as
dust in the earth!"

But reflections which are merely the echo of the voice of the Preacher
may be thought too trite to merit much attention. This is true; the
writer's claims to a hearing rest on other

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

grounds. The Poem is a terse epitome of the ancient history of El-Yemen:
if it does little more than record the names of kings and princes, still
these names are rarely to be found else where, and, when read with the
Commentary and with the *Shems el-’Ulûm* of the same author, the work
affords valuable testimony in support of the theory that the
interminable genealogies which we find scattered throughout the works of
the early Arab writers are not the mere figments of their imagination,
but are actually founded upon evidence which is more or less of a
historical character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Opening Verses of the Poem](arp146.md)
