[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp114)  [Next](arp116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANTAR GOES TO MECCA.

At night, when all was still, Antar, mounted on Abjer, and accompanied
by his brother Shiboob, departs for the Holy Shrine. As they travelled
through the deserts, the hero's reflections found expression in these
verses:

<span class="smallcaps">If</span>, O tear! thou canst not relieve me in
my sorrow, perhaps thou mayst quench the flame that consumes me.

O heart! if thou wilt not wait patiently for a meeting—die, then, the
death of a woe-begone, wandering stranger!

How long must I defy the evils of Fortune, and encounter the
vicissitudes of night with the Indian blade?

I serve a tribe, whose hearts are the reverse of what they exhibit in
their fondness for me.

I am, in the field, the prince of their tribe; but, the battle over, I
am more despised than a slave.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

O that I could annihilate this affection of a lover! how it humiliates
me!—it agonizes my heart—it enfeebles my courage.

But soon will I seek the Sacred Shrine, and complain of my ill-usage to
the Judge against whose decrees there lies no appeal.

I will renounce the days when my tears deceived me; and I will aid the
widowed and plaintive dove.

On thee, O daughter of Malik! be the peace of God!—the blessing of a
sorrowing, heart-grieved lover!

I will depart; but my soul is firm in its love for thee;—have pity,
then, on the cauterised heart of one far away!

Soon will my tribe remember me when the horse advance—every noble
warrior trampling and stamping over them:

Then, O daughter of Malik! will agony be plainly evident, when the
coward gnaws his hands in death!

Their journey was marked with no particular incident until they drew
near Mecca, when Shiboob observed to his brother that it was strange
they had met with no adventure on the way. Antar replied that he was
harassed with encountering dangers, and his heart was disgusted at
fighting; and he quoted these verses:

<span class="smallcaps">Retire</span> within yourself, and be familiar
with solitude:

When you are alone, you are in the right road.

Wild beasts are tamed by gentle treatment;

But men are never to be induced to abandon their iniquity.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But presently they
hear, in the calmness of the night, a female voice crying out, evidently
in sore distress; upon which Antar slackens his bridle, and gallops in
the direction whence proceeded the cries. He discovers a lady, who
informs him that she is of the noble tribe of Kendeh; her husband,
As-hath, the son of Obad; that a famine having visited their land, they
were proceeding, with their family, to the country of Harith, where they
intended to settle, having a daughter married there, when they were
attacked by a horseman of the desert, called Sudam, the son of Salheb,
with forty plundering Arabs, who had slain her three sons, wounded her
husband, and taken herself and her three daughters captive; and that the
brigands were about to convey them to the mountains of Toweila, there to
sell them as slaves. Consigning the ladies to the care of his brother,
Antar grasped his spear, and turned to meet Sudam and his followers,
whom he now saw hastily advancing towards him. The hero is assailed by
several of the brigands at once, but he cuts them down on either side,
and at length encounters Sudam, and, striking him on the breast with his
cleaving Dhami, the chief falls to the ground dead, weltering in his
blood.

The three damsels and their mother crowd round their deliverer, kissing
his hands and thanking him for having saved them from dishonour; and
Antar, desiring the damsels to veil themselves, and having bound up the
old sheikh's wounds, sat down to rest himself after the fatigues of his
conflict. The old sheikh, grateful for the good service rendered his
family by Antar, offers him his choice of his three daughters, but Antar
courteously declines the compliment, saying to the damsels:

<span class="smallcaps">Were</span> my heart my own, I should desire
nothing beyond you—it would covet nothing but you.

But it loves what tortures it; where no word, no deed encourages it.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

Having escorted the old sheikh and his family to the land of Harith,
Antar took leave of them, and, in company with Shiboob, proceeded to
Mecca. "He alighted in the Sacred Valley, and there he resided; passing
his days in hunting, to relieve his sorrows and afflictions, and his
nights with Shiboob, in talking over old stories and past events."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prince Shas in Captivity](arp116)
