[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp113)  [Next](arp115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANTAR RESCUES HIS BELOVED.

When Shiboob had concluded his story, Antar appeared to be stupefied
with rage and grief; but recovering himself, he cried, "I must be
revenged on that family of Zeead!—I will deprive them of their sweet
slumbers!" He hastened to his friend Prince Malik, who conducted him to
the King, to whom he related Amarah's ungrateful return for his services
in liberating him from the Nocturnal Evil. Zoheir was greatly
exasperated at the infamous conduct of Amarah, and vowed vengeance upon
the whole family of Zeead. But Antar tells Prince Malik that he will not
put the king to any trouble on his account, for he will alone undertake
the rescue of Abla. His friend, however, insists upon going with him;
and, taking advantage of the king's absence at the chase, he musters his
father's horsemen, while Antar summons Shedad and his brother Malik,
with his son Amru; and the sun was not yet high when the warriors, to
the number of two hundred, set out to revenge the insult that had been
offered to the family of Carad, and to the whole tribe of Abs. On the
way, Antar, turning to Prince Malik, thus addressed him:

"Truly, my lord, it is very absurd in me to set out to the assistance of
my foes. This is the most grievous circumstance of all; for I am aware
that, though they become victorious by my

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

means, they will not let me be quiet. But it is on Abla's account that I
act thus. Some poet has observed:

<span class="smallcaps">Had</span> I a heart of pity and compassion for
myself, I would not pass the night grieving in the agony of love.

It is extraordinary, that from thine eyes I feel no arrow, but still my
heart is pierced with shafts.

I am kind to thy friends in my love, though they are my foes; and on
account of two eyes a thousand eyes are respected."

And again addressing the Prince, he said, "On Abla's account I will
submit to these pains;" adding—

<span class="smallcaps">I endure</span> torments from my relations that
fatigue me; and I conceal from them my passion and my transports.

When they question me, I say: Kill me; for I am an oppressive tyrant.

They insult me, and seek to separate me from my beloved; and she is my
hope and my object.

They long for my death:—it is their sole wish to see me felled to the
ground in the day of battle.

But when the foe comes upon them, they entreat my aid, and are inclined
to love me.

I will have patience till I obtain my desire; and I will punish the
enemy by my resignation to insults.

Meanwhile Rebia, with two hundred horsemen of his family, is advancing
to the rescue of his brother Amarah. But Moofrij has timely warning,
and, assailing them, routs the party and takes thirty prisoners; and
Rebia, with the remnant of his followers,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

retreats into the sand-hills. There they are in distress from want of
water, and Rebia sends a messenger to Moofrij, asking his protection in
order that they might surrender themselves and procure their ransom; or,
if he will not consent to forego the further shedding of blood, at least
supply them with water. To this message Moofrij returns the grim answer,
that he would furnish them with water only on the condition that they
throw away their arms, and come dismounted before him; when he would
shave off their beards, and cut off their noses and their ears; after
which—by Lat and Uzza!—he would hang them all. In desperation Rebia and
his followers descend and commence another attack; but, being weakened
by thirst, the Teyans easily make prisoners of them all.

"The night was not far spent when Moofrij became intoxicated. The people
had departed to their respective tents, and every one was asleep, when
Moofrij happened to think of Abla; and as he was considering how he
should complete his gratification, he repaired to his mother, and said:
'I wish you would bring me that Absian damsel. If she will not consent,
I will use her most cruelly; I will multiply her distresses, and slay
her countrymen.' Away hastened his mother to Abla.—'Go to your master
instantly,' said she, that he may show some kindness to you and your
countrymen; but if you still obstinately refuse to yield to him, dread
his violence.'—'Vile hag!' exclaimed Abla, 'were your son even to hack
my limbs with the sword, or to massacre the whole tribe of Abs, and all
that the sun rises upon, never would he see me his property—never see me
yield or submit to him. Wishes he my death? I will kill myself with my
own hand.'—'Accursed wretch!' cried the old woman. She struck her with
her fist, and ordered the slave-girls to drag her forth, as she screamed
out, 'O by Abs! O by Adnan! who can now save me? who can assist me? who
can redeem me from this captivity? Alas! is there any one to deliver me
from this distress?'"

That same night the Teyans were surprised in their tents by the renowned
Antar and his warriors, crying, 'O by Abs! O by Adnan!' and sparing
neither old nor young. While the horsemen

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

were engaged in slaying or capturing the Teyans, Shiboob released Rebia
and his companions; then roamed among the tents in search of Abla, whom
he at length found covered with the bodies of the slain, and groaning
like a woman bereft of her children; and while she listened for the
voice of Antar, thus she exclaimed:

<span class="smallcaps">O my cousin</span>! ease my heart, and lead me
home by the hand, for my body is worn out and my strength fails!

For the black hero I have encountered disgrace.

My frame—the zephyr would overwhelm it, so greatly have they exhausted
me with eternal pains: my resignation, it is at an end.

My foes exult over me, and I have endured endless horrors.

Convey me to the protection of Antar: no one but the lion can defend the
fawn.

Tell him I am in dismay, and my heart wanders gild in its fears.

My eyelids—no sleep have they; but they mourn for eternal sleep.

Shiboob took Abla in his arms, and brought her to Antar, who pressed her
to his breast, and kissed her between the eyes, saying, "Grievous indeed
it is to me that you should suffer such calamities, and I be alive in
the world! But it is the misfortune of the times, against which no human
being can find refuge." He then desired his brother to convey her to the
tent of Moofrij (who had escaped to the sand-hills); and here Shiboob
has the satisfaction of discovering all Abla's property—her rich robes
and strings of jewels—which he restores to her. "Thus all her distresses

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

and afflictions vanished, and her hopes and wishes were realised."

As the Absians are about to set out for their own country, Rebia and
Amarah come up to Antar, and in the most abject manner implore his
forgiveness for their infamous deeds "Antar pitied them; and, feeling
favourably inclined towards them on account of his relationship, he
embraced them, saying: 'Although I am abused for being black, my acts
are the acts of the noble born.'"

Returning from the land of Cahtan, they encounter the tribes of Jadeelah
and Nibhan, and, after a dreadful battle, are victorious. When they had
collected all the spoil, they returned to their tents, preceded by
Antar.

"Abla rejoiced at his prowess and intrepidity, and smiled; and as Antar
saw her smile,—'Daughter of my uncle,' said he, 'are you smiling at what
you saw me perform this day in the carnage and combat?'—'By the faith of
an Arab,' she replied, 'my sight was bewildered at your slaughter among
these wretches!'—Her words descended into his heart sweeter than the
purest water to the thirsty spirit."

At midnight, the Absians, having first divided the spoil, mounted their
horses and resumed their march home. When the sun's rays began to dispel
the darkness they discovered the Teyans, headed by King Maljem, son of
Handhala, and his brother, the Blood-drinker, in pursuit of them. On
seeing the number of the enemy, they were disposed for flight, but Antar
inspired them with courage, by rushing impetuously among the Teyans,
dealing death and destruction with his irresistible sword Dhami. At this
juncture the Absians are reinforced by troops which King Zoheir had
despatched to Antar's assistance, and the Teyans are defeated with great
slaughter.

The next day, Abla's father, acting upon Rebia's suggestion, begs Prince
Shas to take Abla under his protection, to prevent Antar from marrying
her, to which he consents; and sending for Antar, he intimates to him
that henceforth Abla shall be under the protection of his wife; at the
same time reproaching

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

him for lusting after a woman to whom he has no claim. Tears filled the
eyes of the hero as he replied, saying that it was his uncle Malik who
had excited his passion;—for whenever Abla is a prisoner, he entreats
him to liberate her; but when she is in safety, he calls him a slave,
and the son of a slave-woman.

Antar then goes to his friend Prince Malik, and acquaints him of his
uncle's new device to thwart his union with Abla. The Prince promises to
carry her off for him—only let him wait until they return to King
Zoheir, and he should obtain justice. But the hero, unwilling to burden
his friend with his distresses, or to be the cause of dissensions in his
tribe, resolves to set out secretly for Mecca, and there make his
complaints to the Lord of mankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Antar Goes to Mecca](arp115.md)
