[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp132)  [Next](arp134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A HORSE RACE, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.

King Cais having despatched some of his slaves to obtain tidings of
Antar, one of them returned with a glowing account of a wonderful colt,
called Dahis, which he had seen in the course of his journey. In beauty
and in speed this colt had no equal in all Arabia. The King bargained
for Dahis with the owner, and was delighted when he came to terms for
his purchase. Soon after this Carwash, a cousin of King Cais, was
present at a grand feast given by Hadifah; and the conversation turning
upon horses, Carwash boasted of the racing qualities of Dahis. Hadifah

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

offers to back his mare Ghabra for twenty camels, to run against Dahis,
and a match is made accordingly. But the King takes the matter in his
own hands, and visits Hadifah, to arrange the conditions of the race.

"'As to the first bet, Hadifah,' said Cais, 'I dissolve it, and I will
lay you another, and let the wager be thirty.' 'Forty,' said Hadifah.
'Fifty,' said Cais. 'Sixty,' said Hadifah; and they continued rising
till they made the bet a hundred she-camels, and consigned the contract
into the hands of a man called Sabik, son of Wahab, whilst a crowd of
old and young collected about them.—'What distance shall we run?' said
Hadifah to Cais.—'Forty arrow-shots,' said Cais; 'and we have an archer
called Ayas, son of Mansoor'—for there was no Arab at that day could
shoot like him, and the Arabs had made him quite a proverb. King Cais
was anxious indeed for a longer race on account of the strength of his
horse's muscles; for the greater distance he went, the more his spirit
and animation increased in his movements. 'Determine, then,' said Cais
to Hadifah, when the match shall take place.'—'Forty days, I think,'
said Hadifah, will be required to train the horses.'—'Very well,' said
Cais; and the affair was mutually settled, that the horses should be
trained forty days, and the race-ground should be near the lake of
Zat-ul-irsad; and the horse that should arrive first should be the
winner. Cais having given his consent, he returned to the tents."

The race between Dahis and Ghabra came off at the place appointed, and
Dahis would have won, but for foul play on the part of Hadifah, who
caused the colt to be injured before reaching the goal; the consequence
of which was the famous Forty Years’ War between the tribes of Abs and
Dhobyan, known as the War of Dahis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prince Malik's Marriage and Death](arp134)
