[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arp119)  [Next](arp121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRJ8/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Arabian Poetry*, by W. A. Clouston, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### STORY OF JAIDA AND KHALID.

Moharib and Zahir, the fathers respectively of Khalid and Jaida, were
brothers. Moharib was chief of the tribe of Zebeed, and Zahir was his
counsellor. The brothers quarrelled, and Zahir struck his tents, and
cast his lot with the kindred tribe of Saad. Zahir's wife becoming
pregnant, he said to her that if a son were born, he would be most
welcome; but if a girl, then she was to conceal the fact, and let it
appear to the world that they had a male child, in order that his
brother should not exult over him. In due course a daughter was born,
and was called, in

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

private, Jaida, but Jooder in public, that it might appear she was a
boy. About the same time Moharib had a son born to him, whom he called
Khalid. The daughter of Zahir was brought up as a boy, and taught to
ride on horseback; and soon she became famous in all the exercises
befitting a noble warrior—accompanying her father to battle, in which
she ever took a prominent part. Khalid was also one of the most
illustrious horsemen of the age, universally acknowledged as an intrepid
warrior and a valiant hero.

The fame of his cousin Jooder (Jaida) having reached him, Khalid, after
his father's death, visited his uncle, and spent ten days in jousting
with the horsemen of the family. Jaida became deeply enamoured of him,
and her mother, on learning this, revealed the secret of her sex to
Khalid's mother, and suggested that their children should be united in
marriage. But when Khalid was told by his mother that his cousin was a
woman, he was greatly chagrined, slighted her love for him, and hastened
back to his own tribe.

Jaida, enraged at finding herself thus scorned, resolved to be revenged
on her cousin, and disguising herself, she set out for the land of
Zebeed. Arrived there, she entered a tent of public entertainment,
close-vizored, like a horseman of Hejaz. After proving her superiority
over the best horsemen in the course, she encountered Khalid for three
days in succession, without either of them obtaining any advantage; when
she discovered herself to her cousin, whose hatred was now suddenly
converted into love. But Jaida rejected him, and returned home.

Khalid hastened to his uncle and demanded Jaida in marriage. His cousin
at length consents, on condition that he provide for slaughter at her
wedding-feast a thousand camels belonging to Gheshm, son of Malik,
surnamed the Brandisher of Spears. These Khalid procured by plundering
the tribe of Aamir; but on his return, Jaida imposed a further
condition—that her camel should be led by the captive daughter of a
prince. Khalid again set out with his horsemen, and, assailing the
family tribe of Moawiyah, son of Nizal, took captive his daughter
Amimah;

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

and his marriage with Jaida took place immediately after his return;
when the daughter of Moawiyah held the bridle of her camel, "and the
glory of Jaida was exalted among women and among men."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Antar in the Land of Zebeed](arp121.md)
