[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](mmi00)  [Next](mmi02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

# INTRODUCTORY. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

#### JAFL No. 73. pp. 145-64. \[1906\].

SINCE the scientific value of the myths and accounts of ceremonials
which I have collected will depend wholly upon their exactness and
accuracy, it is important that I should give enough of personal detail
to account satisfactorily for this.

The first requisite in securing the Indian narrations and songs is to
gain the good-will and complete coöperation of the old Indians who
recite them. This my many years of philanthropic work for the betterment
of their tribes has won in a general way; while individually, being
liberally paid for their trouble, they freely give a full return.

A second point, and one much more difficult, is the securing of a
perfect interpreter.

Finding that translations made by white people from the Spanish, with
which I first began my work, could not be entirely relied upon, I
determined to depend wholly upon interpretation direct from the Indian
into English.

The Mesa Grande version of the Story of Chaup (Cuy-a-ho-marr) was well
rendered in this way by an educated Indian girl; while at Campo (the
Manzanita region) and at La-Jolla-in-the-mountains, I found in each case
the sort of interpreter for whom I was seeking.

Sant, interpreter of the Manzanita version of the Cuy-a-ho-marr story,
herewith given, and of all the Diegueño songs, accounts of ceremonials,
etc., which I have lately secured, lived as a little naked boy among the
desert Indians; listened as a child to the old myths; has seen
twenty-one celebrations of the Image fiesta, extending as far as the
coast Indians and ranging to Yuma in the other direction; and is
saturated with the atmosphere and terminology of the past, which are
completely unknown to nine tenths of the younger generation to-day.

On the other hand, having lived for years in a white man's family. he
has a full and sufficient English vocabulary.

I was equally fortunate in my Luiseño interpreter at
La-Jolla-in-the-mountains. José is an educated Indian, fluent in his
English, and able to read and write it. At the same time, he is the son
of a renowned *hechicero*, and lives in a region where every rock has
its name and legend, and the past and present have suffered no divorce.

The Luiseño creation myth, the Ouiot songs and stories, were well
rendered by him.

As to method,--the old men are extremely intelligent in catching

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

and carrying out the idea which I enforce, that a pause must be made
after each sentence or two for translation and transcription. Nothing is
left to memory, but all is written down as nearly as possible word for
word.

It only remains, in recopying, to put into slightly better form the
English of my interpreter, being extremely careful never to introduce
the slightest change in idea. For instance, where Sant says, "It looked
ugly," I write, "It was an ugly sight." Whenever it seems expedient,
however, I use the exact words of my interpreter, my constant endeavor
being towards simplicity, and always towards the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[145:1](mmi01.htm#fr_0.md) This paper has been
communicated as part of the Proceedings of the California Branch of the
American Folk-Lore Society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story Of Cuy-a-ho-marr (The Chaup); The Manzanita Version
(Diegueño)](mmi02.md)
