[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0420)  [Next](sbe0422) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I (1-8). On five sins the commission of which makes the sinner a
Peshôtanu.

II (9-19). On unlawful unions and attempts to procure miscarriage.

III (20-45). On the treatment of a bitch big with young.

IV (46-51). On the breeding of dogs.

### I.

1\. How many are the sins that men commit and that, being committed and
not confessed, nor atoned for, make their committer a Peshôtanu <span
id="fr_928"></span>[2](#fn_916)?

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘There are five such sins, O holy
Zarathu*s*tra! It is the first of these sins that men commit when a man
teaches one of the faithful a foreign, wrong creed <span
id="fr_929"></span>[3](#fn_917), a foreign wrong law, and he does so
with a full knowledge and conscience of the sin: this is a sin that
makes him a Peshôtanu.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

3 (9). ‘It is the second of these sins that men commit when a man gives
too hard bones or too hot food to a shepherd's dog or to a house dog;

4 (11). ‘If the bones stick in the dog's teeth or stop in his throat, or
if the hot food burn his mouth or his tongue, so that mischief follows
therefrom, and the dog dies, this is a sin that makes the man a
Peshôtanu <span id="fr_930"></span>[1](#fn_918).

5 (16). ‘It is the third of these sins that men commit when a man smites
a bitch big with young or affrights her by running after her, with
shouting or with clapping of hands <span
id="fr_931"></span>[2](#fn_919);

6 (18). ‘If the bitch fall into a hole, or a well, or a precipice, or a
river, or a canal, so that mischief follows therefrom, and she dies,
this is a sin that makes the man a Peshôtanu <span
id="fr_932"></span>[3](#fn_920).

7 (22). ‘It is the fourth of these sins that men commit when a man has
intercourse with a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the
ordinary course or at the usual period: this is a sin that makes him a
Peshôtanu <span id="fr_933"></span>[4](#fn_921).

8 (25). ‘It is the fifth of these sins that men commit when a man has
intercourse with a woman quick with child <span
id="fr_934"></span>[5](#fn_922), whether the milk has already

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

come to her breasts or has not yet come: if mischief follow therefrom,
and she die, this is a sin that makes the man a Peshôtanu <span
id="fr_935"></span>[1](#fn_923).

### II.

9 (30). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the chief
of the family or not dependent, either delivered unto a husband or not
delivered <span id="fr_936"></span>[2](#fn_924), and she conceives by
him, let her not, from dread of the people, produce in herself the
menses, against the course of nature, by means of water and plants <span
id="fr_937"></span>[3](#fn_925).

10 (34). ‘And if the damsel, from dread of the people, shall produce in
herself the menses against the course of nature, by means of water and
plants, there is a sin upon her head <span
id="fr_938"></span>[4](#fn_926).

11 (36). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered unto a husband or
not delivered, and she conceives by him, let her not,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

from dread of the people, destroy the fruit in her womb.

12 (38). ‘And if the damsel, from dread of the people, shall destroy the
fruit in her womb, the sin is on both the father and herself, the murder
is on both the father and herself; both the father and herself shall pay
the penalty for wilful murder <span id="fr_939"></span>[1](#fn_927).

13 (40). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered unto a husband or
not delivered, and she conceives by him, and she says, "I have conceived
by thee;" and he replies, "Go then to the old woman <span
id="fr_940"></span>[2](#fn_928) and apply to her that she may procure
thee miscarriage;"

14 (43). ‘And the damsel goes to the old woman and applies to her that
she may procure her miscarriage; and the old woman brings her some
Banga, or Shaêta, or Ghnâna, or Fraspâta <span
id="fr_941"></span>[3](#fn_929), or some other of the drugs that produce
miscarriage and the man says, "Cause thy fruit to perish!" and she
causes her fruit to perish; the sin is on the head of all three, the
man, the damsel, and the old woman.

### III.

15 (49). ‘If a man come near unto a damsel, either dependent on the
chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered unto a husband or
not

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

delivered, and she conceives by him, so long shall he support her, until
the child is born.

16 (54). 'If he shall not support her, so that the child comes to
mischief <span id="fr_942"></span>[1](#fn_930), for want of proper
support, he shall pay the penalty for wilful murder.'

17 (54). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If she be near
her time and be lying on the high road, which is the worshipper of Mazda
that shall support her?

18 (56). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It a man come near unto a damsel, either
dependent on the chief of the family or not dependent, either delivered
unto a husband or not delivered, and she conceives by him, so long shall
he support her, until the child is born <span
id="fr_943"></span>[2](#fn_931).

19 (58). ‘If he shall not support her <span
id="fr_944"></span>[3](#fn_932) . . . .

'It lies with the faithful to look in the same way after every pregnant
female, either two-footed or four-footed, either woman or bitch.'

20 (61). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If (a bitch <span
id="fr_945"></span>[4](#fn_933)) be near her time and be lying on the
high road, which is the worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

21 (63). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He whose house stands-nearest, the care
of supporting her is

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

his <span id="fr_946"></span>[1](#fn_934); so long shall he support her
until the whelps are born.

22 (65). 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

23 (68). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a camel-stall, which is the worshipper of
Mazda. that shall support her?

24 (70) Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who built the camel-stall or who holds
it <span id="fr_947"></span>[2](#fn_935), the care of supporting her is
his; so long shall he support her, until the whelps are born.

25 (76). 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

26 (77). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a horse-stall, which is the worshipper of
Mazda that shall support her?

27 (78). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who built the horse-stall or who
holds it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support
her, until the whelps are born.

28 (81). 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

29 (84). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! If a
bitch be near her time and be lying in an ox-stall, which is the
worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

30 (86). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who built the ox-stall or who holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support her,
until the whelps are born.

31 (89). 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

32 (92). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in a sheep-fold, which is the worshipper of
Mazda that shall support her?

33 (94). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who built the sheep-fold or who holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support her,
until the whelps are born.

34 (97). 'If he shall not support her so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

35 (100). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying on the earth-wall <span
id="fr_948"></span>[1](#fn_936), which is the worshipper of Mazda that
shall support her?

36 (102). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who erected the wall or who holds
it, the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support her,
until the whelps are born.

37 (105). 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

38 (108). O Maker of the Material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in the moat <span
id="fr_949"></span>[1](#fn_937), which is the worshipper of Mazda that
shall support her?

39 (110). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who dug the moat or who holds it,
the care of supporting her is his; so long shall he support her, until
the whelps are born.

40 (112). 'If he shall not support her, so that the whelps come to
mischief, for want of proper support, he shall pay the penalty for
wilful murder.'

41 (113). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a bitch be
near her time and be lying in the middle of a pasture-field, which is
the worshipper of Mazda that shall support her?

42 (115). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He who sowed the pasture-field or who
holds it, the care of supporting her is his.

413 (117). 'He shall with kind charity <span
id="fr_950"></span>[2](#fn_938) take her to rest upon a litter of any
foliage fit for a litter; so long shall he support her, until the young
dogs are capable of self-defence and self-subsistence.'

44 (122). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When are the
dogs capable of self-defence and self-subsistence?

45 (123). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘When they are able to run about in a
circuit of twice seven houses around <span
id="fr_951"></span>[3](#fn_939). Then they may be let loose, whether it
be winter or summer.

‘Young dogs ought to be supported for six months, children for seven
years.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

'Âtar <span id="fr_952"></span>[1](#fn_940), the son of Ahura Mazda,
watches as well (over a pregnant bitch) as he does over a woman.'

### IV.

46 (127). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If worshippers
of Mazda want to have a bitch so covered that the offspring shall be one
of a strong nature, what shall they do?

47 (129). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall dig a hole in the earth, in
the middle of the fold, half a foot deep if the earth be hard, half the
height of a man if the earth be soft.

48 (131). ‘They shall first tie up the bitch there, far from children
and from the Fire, the son of Ahura Mazda <span
id="fr_953"></span>[2](#fn_941), and they shall watch by her until a dog
comes there from anywhere. They shall afterwards let another dog come
near her, and then a third besides <span
id="fr_954"></span>[3](#fn_942), each being kept apart from the former,
lest they should assail one another.

49 (134) <span id="fr_955"></span>[4](#fn_943). 'The bitch being thus
covered by three dogs, grows big with young, and the milk comes to her
teats and she brings forth a young one that is born from (three) dogs.'

50 (135). He who smites a bitch who has been covered by three dogs, and
who has already milk, and who shall bring forth a young one born from
(three) dogs, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

51 (137). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Seven hundred stripes with the
Aspahê-a*s*tra, seven hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_916"></span>[172:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_928) See Introd. V, 19.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[172:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_929) Literally, 'another
wrong creed;' the Commentary has, 'that is, a creed that is not ours.'
See Introd. III, 10.'

<span id="fn_918"></span>[173:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_930) He who gives too
hot food to a dog, so as to burn his throat is margarzân (guilty of
death); he who gives bones to a dog so as to tear his throat is
margarzân (Gr. Rav. 639).

<span id="fn_919"></span>[173:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_931) Or, 'with stamping
on the ground' (? Saddar 31).

<span id="fn_920"></span>[173:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_932) If a bitch is big
with young and a man shouts or throws stones at her, so that the whelps
come to mischief and die, he is margarzân (Gr. Rav. 639).

<span id="fn_921"></span>[173:4](sbe0421.htm#fr_933) See Farg. XVI, 14
seq.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[173:5](sbe0421.htm#fr_934) When she has been
pregnant for four months and ten days, as it is then that the child is
formed and a soul is added to its body (Anquetil II, 563).

<span id="fn_923"></span>[174:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_935) Or better, 'if the
child die.' 'If a man come to his wife during her pregnancy so that she
is injured and bring forth a still-born child, he is margarzân' (Old
Rav. 115 b).

<span id="fn_924"></span>[174:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_936) 'Whether she has a
husband in the house of her own parents or has none; whether she has
entered from the house of her own parents into the house of a husband
depending on another chief of family or has not' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_925"></span>[174:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_937) By means of drugs.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[174:4](sbe0421.htm#fr_938) 'It is a tanâfûhr
sin for her: it is sin on sin' (the first sin being to have allowed
herself to be seduced), Comm. 'If there has been no sin in her (if she
has been forced), and if a man, knowing her shame, wants to take it off
her; he shall call together her father, mother, sisters, brothers,
husband, the servants, the menials, and the master and the mistress of
the house, and he shall say, "This woman is with child by me, and I
rejoice in it;" and they shall answer, "We know it, and we are glad that
her shame is taken off her;" and he shall support her as a husband does'
(Comm.)

<span id="fn_927"></span>[175:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_939) For
baodhô-var*s*ta; see above, [p. 84](sbe0413.htm#page_84), § 38, and n.
[1](sbe0413.htm#fn_651).

<span id="fn_928"></span>[175:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_940) The nurse (Asp.)

<span id="fn_929"></span>[175:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_941) Banga is bang or
mang, a narcotic made from hempseed; shaêta means literally gold, and
must have been some yellow plant or liquor; ghnâna is 'that which kills
the fruit in the womb;' fraspâta is 'that which expels the fruit so that
it perishes' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_930"></span>[176:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_942) And dies.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[176:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_943) § 18 = § 15.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[176:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_944) The sentence is
left unfinished: Aspendiârji fills it with the words in § 16, 'so that
the child,' &c. It seems as if §§ 17, 18 were no part of the original
text, and as if § 17 were a mere repetition of § 20, which being wrongly
interpreted as referring to a woman would have brought about the
repetition of § 15 as an answer. See § 20.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[176:4](sbe0421.htm#fr_945) The subject is
wanting in the text: it is supplied from the Commentary as the sense
requires it.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[177:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_946) 'The bitch is lying
on the high road: the man whose house has its door nearest shall take
care of her. If she dies, be shall carry her off to dispose of the body
according to the law. One must support her for at least three nights: if
one cannot support her any longer, one intrusts her to a richer man'
(Comm. and Asp.)

<span id="fn_935"></span>[177:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_947) 'In pledge or for
rent' (Asp.; cf. Comm. ad § 42).

<span id="fn_936"></span>[178:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_948) The wall around the
house.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[179:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_949) The moat before the
earth-wall.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[179:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_950) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[179:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_951) Probably the
distance of one yugyê*s*ti; cf. Farg. XIII, 17.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[180:1](sbe0421.htm#fr_952) The fire: when a
woman is in labour, one lights up a great fire in order to protect her
and her child from the fiends (Introd.. V, 13).

<span id="fn_941"></span>[180:2](sbe0421.htm#fr_953) 'From children,
lest she shall bite them; from the fire, lest it shall hurt her' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_942"></span>[180:3](sbe0421.htm#fr_954) Cf. Justinus III,
4: maturiorem futuram conceptionem rati, si eam singulae per plures
viros experirentur.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[180:4](sbe0421.htm#fr_955) The text of this
and the following clause is corrupt, and the meaning doubtful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard XVI](sbe0422)
