[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0416)  [Next](sbe0418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD XI.

This chapter, like the preceding, is composed of spells intended to
drive away the Nasu. But they are of a more special character, as they
refer to the particular objects to be cleansed, such as the house, the
fire, the water, &c. Each incantation consists of two parts, a line from
the Gâthas which alludes, or rather is made to allude, to the particular
object, and a general exorcism, in the usual dialect, which is the same
for all the objects.

1\. Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Ahura Mazda! most beneficent
spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I cleanse
the house? how the fire? how the water? how the earth? how the cow? how
the tree? how the faithful man and the faithful woman? how the stars?
how the moon? how the sun? how the boundless light?

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

how all good things, made by Mazda, the offspring of the holy
principle?'

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thou shalt chant the cleansing words, and
the house shall be clean; clean shall be the fire, clean the water,
clean the earth, clean the cow, clean the tree, clean the faithful man.
and the faithful woman, clean the stars, clean the moon, clean the sun,
clean the boundless light, clean all good things, made by Mazda, the
offspring of the holy principle.

3 (7). ‘So thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and most-healing words;
thou shalt chant the Ahuna-Vairya five times: "The will of the Lord is
the law of holiness," &c.

‘The Ahuna-Vairya preserves the person of man: "The will of the Lord is
the law of holiness," &c.

‘"Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O Mazda! while the hate of the
fiend is grasping me?" &c.

‘"Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to maintain thy
ordinances?" &c.

‘"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Ârmaiti Spe*n*ta!" &c. <span
id="fr_803"></span>[1](#fn_791)

4 (9). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the house, say these words aloud: "He
is my greatest support as long as lasts this dreary world <span
id="fr_804"></span>[2](#fn_792)."

‘If thou wantest to cleanse the fire, say these words aloud: "Thy fire,
first of all, do we approach with worship, O Ahura Mazda <span
id="fr_805"></span>[3](#fn_793)!"

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

5 (13). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the water, say these words aloud:
"Waters we worship, the waters in the tree, the waters in the stream,
the waters in the rain <span id="fr_806"></span>[1](#fn_794)."

‘If thou wantest to cleanse the earth, say these words aloud: "This
earth we worship, this earth with the women, this earth which bears us
and those women who are thine, O Ahura <span
id="fr_807"></span>[2](#fn_795)!"

6 (17). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the cow, say these words aloud: "For
the cow we order thee to do these most excellent deeds, that she may
have a resting place and fodder <span id="fr_808"></span>[3](#fn_796)."

‘If thou wantest to cleanse the trees, say these words aloud: "Out of
him <span id="fr_809"></span>[4](#fn_797), through his holiness Mazda
made the plants grow up <span id="fr_810"></span>[5](#fn_798)."

7 (21). ‘If thou wantest to cleanse the faithful man or the faithful
woman, say these words aloud: "May the beloved Airyaman come hither, for
the men and women of Zarathu*s*tra to rejoice, for the faithful to
rejoice; with the desirable reward that is won by means of the law, and
with that boon for holiness that is vouchsafed by Ahura <span
id="fr_811"></span>[6](#fn_799)!"

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

8 (25). ‘Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and most-healing words.
Thou shalt chant the Ahuna-Vairya eight times:--

‘"The will of the Lord is the law of holiness," &c.

‘"Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O Mazda?" &c.

‘"Who is he who will smite the fiend?" &c.

"‘Keep us from our hater, O Mazda!" &c. <span
id="fr_812"></span>[1](#fn_800)

9 (26). ‘I drive away Aêshma <span id="fr_813"></span>[2](#fn_801), I
drive away the Nasu, I drive away direct defilement, I drive away
indirect defilement.

\[I drive away Khrû, I drive away Khrûighni <span
id="fr_814"></span>[3](#fn_802); I drive away Bûidhi, I drive away
Bûidhi*z*a <span id="fr_815"></span>[4](#fn_803); I drive away Ku*n*di,
I drive away Ku*n*di*z*a. <span id="fr_816"></span>[5](#fn_804)\]

'I drive away the yellow Bûshyãsta, I drive away the long-handed
Bûshyãsta <span id="fr_817"></span>[6](#fn_805); \[I drive away
Mûidhi <span id="fr_818"></span>[7](#fn_806), I drive away
Kapasti. <span id="fr_819"></span>[8](#fn_807)\]

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

‘I drive away the Pairika <span id="fr_820"></span>[1](#fn_808) that
comes upon the fire, upon the water, upon the earth, upon the cow, upon
the tree. I drive away the demon of uncleanness that comes upon the
fire, upon the water, upon the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree.

10 (32). ‘I drive thee away, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the fire,
from the water, from the earth, from the cow, from the tree, from the
faithful man and from the faithful woman, from the stars, from the moon,
from the sun, from the boundless light, from all good things, made by
Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle.

11 (33). ‘Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and most-healing
-words; thou shalt chant four Ahuna-Vairyas:--

‘"The will of the Lord is the law of holiness," &c.

‘"Whom hast thou placed to protect me?" &c.

‘"Who is he who will smite the fiend?" &c.

‘"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda!" &c. <span
id="fr_821"></span>[2](#fn_809)

12 (34). ‘Away is Aêshma driven; away is the Nasu driven; away is direct
defilement; away is indirect defilement driven.

‘Away is Khrû, away is Khrûighni driven; away is Bûidhi, away is
Bûidhi*z*a driven; away is Ku*n*di, away is Ku*n*di*z*a driven.

‘Away is Bûshyãsta driven, the yellow; away is Bûshyãsta driven, the
long-handed; away is Mûidhi, away is Kapasti driven.

‘Away is the Pairika driven that comes upon the fire, upon the water,
upon the earth, upon the cow, upon the tree. Away is the demon of
uncleanness driven that comes upon the fire, upon the water, upon the
earth, upon the cow, upon the tree.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

13 (40). ‘Away art thou driven, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the
fire, from the water, from the earth, from the cow, from the tree, from
the faithful man and from the faithful woman, from the stars, from the
moon, from the sun, from the boundless light, from all good things, made
by Mazda, the offspring of the holy principle.

14 (41). ‘Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and most-healing
words; thou shalt chant "Mazdâ a*d* môi" four times: "O Mazda! teach me
excellent words and excellent works, that through the good thought and
the holiness of him who offers thee due praise, thou mayest, O Lord!
make the world thrive for ever and ever, at thy will, under thy
sovereign rule <span id="fr_822"></span>[1](#fn_810)."

15\. 'I drive away Aêshma, I drive away the Nasu,' &c. <span
id="fr_823"></span>[2](#fn_811)

16\. 'I drive thee away, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the fire, from
the water,' &c. <span id="fr_824"></span>[3](#fn_812)

17\. 'Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and most-healing words;
thou shalt chant the Airyama-ishyô four times: "May the beloved Airyaman
come hither!" &c. <span id="fr_825"></span>[4](#fn_813)

18\. 'Away is Aêshma driven; away is the Nasu driven,' &c. <span
id="fr_826"></span>[5](#fn_814)

19\. 'Away art thou driven, O mischievous Angra Mainyu! from the fire,
from the water,' &c. <span id="fr_827"></span>[6](#fn_815)

20\. ‘Then thou shalt say these fiend-smiting and most-healing words;
thou shalt chant five Ahuna-Vairyas:--

‘"The will of the Lord is the law of holiness," &c.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

‘"Whom hast thou placed to protect me?" &c.

‘"Who is he who will smite the fiend?" &c. <span
id="fr_828"></span>[1](#fn_816)

‘"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Ârmaiti Spe*n*ta! Perish, O
fiendish Dru*g*! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world of the
fiend! Perish away, O Dru*g*! Rush away, O Dru*g*! Perish away, O
Dru*g*! Perish away to the regions of the north, never more to give unto
death the living world of the holy spirit!"'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_791"></span>[139:1](sbe0417.htm#fr_803) As in Farg. VIII,
19, 20.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[139:2](sbe0417.htm#fr_804) Yasna XLIX, 1. The
allusion is not quite clear, but there seems to be a comparison between
the small house of man and that great house the world.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[139:3](sbe0417.htm#fr_805) Yasna, XXXVI, 1.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[140:1](sbe0417.htm#fr_806) Yasna XXXVIII, 3.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[140:2](sbe0417.htm#fr_807) Yasna XXXVIII, 1.
'Who are thine,' that is, 'who are thy wives;' these women are, or
rather were, the rivers in heaven, which were considered as the wives of
the heaven-god; the rain waters are called 'Ahura's spouses,' Ahurânîs
(Yasna LXVIII); cf. Orm. Ahr. § 32 and Introd. IV. Tradition wrongly
recognises in these women the Faroers of godly men.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[140:3](sbe0417.htm#fr_808) Yasna XXXV, 4. 'Let
those excellent deeds be done for the behoof of cattle, that is to say,
let stables be made, and water and fodder be given' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_797"></span>[140:4](sbe0417.htm#fr_809) The first-born bull
from whose body, after his death, grew up all kinds of plants (Bund. IV;
cf. Orm. Ahr. § 129 seq.)

<span id="fn_798"></span>[140:5](sbe0417.htm#fr_810) Yasna XLVIII, 6.
Cf. Farg. XVII, 5.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[140:6](sbe0417.htm#fr_811) Yasna LIV, 1. Cf.
Farg. XX, 11. There is no special spell for the cleansing of the sun,
the moon, the stars, and the boundless <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>
light (see §§ 1, 2), because they are not defiled by the unclean one,
they are only pained by seeing him (Farg. IX, 41); as soon as he is
clean, they are freed from the pain.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[141:1](sbe0417.htm#fr_812) As in Farg. VIII,
19, 20.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[141:2](sbe0417.htm#fr_813) See Introd. IV, 22.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[141:3](sbe0417.htm#fr_814) 'Khrû and Khrûighni
are not met with elsewhere; their names mean, apparently, 'wound' and
'the wounding one;' whether they belonged to concrete mythology, or were
mere abstractions, is difficult to decide. They may have been mere names
or epithets of Aêshma khrûidru, 'Aêshma of the wounding spear.'

<span id="fn_803"></span>[141:4](sbe0417.htm#fr_815) Bûidhi*z*a is 'the
offspring of Bûidhi,' but the meaning of Bûidhi is unknown.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[141:5](sbe0417.htm#fr_816) Ku*n*di*z*a is 'the
offspring of Ku*n*di;' Ku*n*di is contracted from Kava*n*di or
Kava*n*da; the Indian homonym kavandha means literally 'a tub,' and by a
mythical metaphor 'a raining cloud' (Rig-veda V, 85, 3; IX, 74, 7); he
becomes then the demon in the cloud (Farg, XIX, 41). He is known in
Greek mythology under the name of Κάανθος; (Kuhn, Herabkunft des Feuers,
p. 134).

<span id="fn_805"></span>[141:6](sbe0417.htm#fr_817) See Introd. IV, 24;
cf. Farg. XVIII, 16.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[141:7](sbe0417.htm#fr_818) A demon unknown.
Aspendiârji translates it by 'Destruction.'

<span id="fn_807"></span>[141:8](sbe0417.htm#fr_819) Unknown.
Aspendiârji calls it 'Revenge.'

<span id="fn_808"></span>[142:1](sbe0417.htm#fr_820) See Introd, IV, 21.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[142:2](sbe0417.htm#fr_821) As in Farg. VIII,
19, 20.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[143:1](sbe0417.htm#fr_822) Yasna XXXIV, 15.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[143:2](sbe0417.htm#fr_823) The rest as in § 9.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[143:3](sbe0417.htm#fr_824) The rest as in §
10.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[143:4](sbe0417.htm#fr_825) As in § 7.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[143:5](sbe0417.htm#fr_826) As in § 12.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[143:6](sbe0417.htm#fr_827) As in § 13.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[144:1](sbe0417.htm#fr_828) See Farg. VIII, 19,
20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard XII](sbe0418)
