[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0408)  [Next](sbe0410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD III.

### The Earth.

I (1-6). The five places where the Earth feels most joy.

II (7-11). The five places where the Earth feels most sorrow.

III (12-35). The five things which most rejoice the Earth.

IV (36-42). Corpses ought not to be buried in the Earth.

There is a resemblance as to words between the first and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

second parts, but there is none as to matter; no clause in the former
has its counterpart in the latter. There is more resemblance between the
second part and the third; as the first three clauses of the third part
(§§ 12, 13, 22) relate to the same things as the second, third, and
fourth clauses of the second part (§§ 8, 9, 10).

Parts I and II are nothing more than dry enumerations. Part III is more
interesting, as it contains two long digressions, the one (§§ 14-21) on
funeral laws, the other (§§ 24-33) on the holiness of husbandry. The
fourth part of the chapter may he considered as a digression relating to
the first clause of the third part (§ 12).

The things which rejoice or grieve the Earth are those that produce
fertility and life or sterility and death, either in it or on it.

The subject of this chapter has become a commonplace topic with the
Parsis, who have treated it more or less antithetically in the
Mainyô-i-khard (chaps. V and VI) and in the Ravaets (Gr. Rav. pp.
434-437).

The second digression (§§ 24-33) is translated in Haug's Essays, p. 235
seq.

### I.

1\. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the first
place where the Earth feels most happy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place whereon one of the faithful steps
forward, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! with the holy wood in his hand <span
id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_430), the baresma <span
id="fr_434"></span>[2](#fn_431) in his hand, the holy meat in his hand,

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the holy mortar <span id="fr_435"></span>[1](#fn_432) in his hand,
fulfilling the law with love, and beseeching aloud Mithra, the lord of
wide pastures, and Râma *Hv*âstra <span
id="fr_436"></span>[2](#fn_433).'

2, 3 (6-10). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
second place where the Earth feels most happy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place whereon one of the faithful
erects a house with a priest within, with cattle, with a wife, with
children, and good herds within; and wherein afterwards the cattle go on
thriving, holiness is thriving <span id="fr_437"></span>[3](#fn_434),
fodder is thriving, the dog is thriving, the wife is thriving, the child
is thriving, the fire is thriving, and every blessing of life is
thriving.'

4 (11). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the third
place where the Earth feels most happy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place where one of the faithful
cultivates most corn, grass, and fruit, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! where
he waters ground that is dry, or dries ground that is too wet.'

5 (15). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
fourth place where the Earth feels most happy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place where there is most increase of
flocks and herds.'

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

6 (18). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the fifth
place where the Earth feels most happy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place where flocks and herds yield most
dung.'

### II.

7 (21). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the first
place where the Earth feels sorest grief?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the neck of Arezûra <span
id="fr_438"></span>[1](#fn_435), whereon the hosts of fiends rush forth
from the burrow of the Dru*g* <span id="fr_439"></span>[2](#fn_436).'

8 (25). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
second place where the Earth feels sorest grief?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place wherein most corpses of dogs and
of men lie buried <span id="fr_440"></span>[3](#fn_437).'

9 (28). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the third
place where the Earth feels sorest grief?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place whereon stand most of those
Dakhmas on which corpses of men are deposited <span
id="fr_441"></span>[4](#fn_438).'

10\. (31). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! Which is
the fourth place where the Earth feels sorest grief?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place wherein are most burrows of the
creatures of Angra Mainyu <span id="fr_442"></span>[1](#fn_439).'

11 (34). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Which is the
fifth place where the Earth feels sorest grief?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is the place whereon the wife and children of
one of the faithful <span id="fr_443"></span>[2](#fn_440), O Spitama
Zarathu*s*tra! are driven along the way of captivity, the dry, the dusty
way, and lift up a voice of wailing.'

### III.

12 (38). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is the first
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is he who digs out of it most corpses of dogs
and men <span id="fr_444"></span>[3](#fn_441).'

13 (41). O Maker of the material world, thou

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One! Who is
the second that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is he who pulls down most of those Dakhmas on
which corpses of men are deposited.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

14 (44). Let no man alone by himself carry a corpse <span
id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_442). If a man alone by himself carry a
corpse, the Nasu <span id="fr_446"></span>[2](#fn_443) rushes upon him,
to defile him, from the nose of the dead, from the eye, from the tongue,
from the jaws, from the sexual organ, from the hinder parts. This
Dru*g*, this Nasu, falls upon him, stains him even to the end of the
nails, and he is unclean, thenceforth, for ever and ever.

15 (49). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What shall be the
place of that man who has carried a corpse alone <span
id="fr_447"></span>[3](#fn_444)?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It shall be the place on this earth wherein is
least water and fewest plants, whereof the ground is the cleanest and
the driest and the least passed through by flocks and herds, by Fire,
the son of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of baresma, and by
the faithful.'

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

6 (55). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from the
fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated bundles of
baresma? How far from the faithful?

17 (5 7). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces from the fire, thirty
paces from the water, thirty paces from the consecrated bundles of
baresma, three paces from the faithful.

18, 19 (58-63). ‘There, on that place, shall the Worshippers of Mazda
erect an enclosure <span id="fr_448"></span>[1](#fn_445), and therein
shall they establish him with food, therein shall they establish him
with clothes, with the coarsest food and with the most worn-out clothes.
That food he shall live on, those clothes he shall wear, and thus shall
they let him live, until he has grown to the age of a Hana, or of a
Zaurura, or of a Pairi*s*ta-khshudra <span
id="fr_449"></span>[2](#fn_446).

20, 21 (64-71). 'And when he has grown to the age of a Hana, or of a
Zaurura, or of a Pairi*s*ta-khshudra, then the worshippers of Mazda
shall order a man strong, vigorous, and skilful <span
id="fr_450"></span>[3](#fn_447), to flay the skin off his body and cut
the head off his neck <span id="fr_451"></span>[4](#fn_448), on the top
of the mountain: and they shall deliver his corpse unto the greediest of
the corpse-eating creatures made by Ahura Mazda, to the greedy ravens,
with these words: "The man here has repented of all his evil thoughts,
words, and deeds.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If he has
committed any other evil deed, it is remitted by his repentance <span
id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_449): if he has committed no other evil deed,
he is absolved by his repentance, for ever and ever <span
id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_450)."'

22 (72). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is the third
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It is he who fills up most burrows of the
creatures of Angra Mainyu.'

23 (75). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is the fourth
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy?

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is he who cultivates most corn, grass, and
fruit, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! who waters ground that is dry, or dries
ground that is too wet <span id="fr_454"></span>[3](#fn_451).

24 (79). ‘Unhappy is the land that has long lain unsown with the seed of
the sower and wants a good husbandman, like a well-shapen maiden who has
long gone childless and wants a good husband.

25 (84). ‘He who would till the earth, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! with the
left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left, unto him will
she bring

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

forth plenty, like a loving bride on her bed, unto her beloved; the
bride will bring forth children, the earth will bring forth plenty of
fruit.

26, 27 (87-90). ‘He who would till the earth, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra!
with the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left, unto
him thus says the Earth: "O thou man! who dost till me with the left arm
and the right, with the right arm and the left hither shall people ever
come and beg (for bread <span id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_452)), here
shall I ever go on bearing, bringing forth all manner of food, bringing
forth profusion of corn <span id="fr_456"></span>[2](#fn_453)."

28, 29 (91-95). 'He who does not till the earth, O Spitama
Zarathu*s*tra! with the left arm and the right, with the right arm and
the left, unto him thus says the Earth: "O thou man I who dost not till
me with the left arm and the right, with the right arm and the left,
ever shalt thou stand at the door of the stranger, among those who beg
for bread; ever shalt thou wait there for the refuse that is brought
unto thee <span id="fr_457"></span>[3](#fn_454), brought by those who
have profusion of wealth."'

30 (96). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the food
that fills the law of Mazda <span id="fr_458"></span>[4](#fn_455)?

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is sowing corn again and again, O Spitama
Zarathu*s*tra!

31 (99). ‘He who sows corn, sows holiness: he

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

makes the law of Mazda grow higher and higher: he makes the law of Mazda
as fat as he can with a hundred acts of adoration, a thousand oblations,
ten thousand sacrifices <span id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_456).

32 (105). ‘When barley is coming forth, the Daêvas start up <span
id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_457); when the corn is growing rank <span
id="fr_461"></span>[3](#fn_458), then faint the Daêvas hearts; when the
corn is being ground <span id="fr_462"></span>[4](#fn_459), the Daêvas
groan; when wheat is coming forth, the Daêvas are destroyed. In that
house they can no longer stay, from that house they are beaten away,
wherein wheat is thus coming forth <span
id="fr_463"></span>[5](#fn_460). It is as though red hot iron were
turned about in their throats, when there is plenty of corn.

33 (111). 'Then let (the priest) teach people this holy saying: "No one
who does not eat, has strength to do works of holiness, strength to do
works of husbandry, strength to beget children. By eating every material
creature lives, by not eating it dies away <span
id="fr_464"></span>[6](#fn_461)."'

34 (116). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is the fifth
that rejoices the Earth with greatest joy?

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘\[It is he who tilling the earth, O Spitama
Zarathu*s*tra! kindly and piously gives <span
id="fr_465"></span>[1](#fn_462) to one of the faithful.\]

35 (118). 'He who tilling the earth, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! would not
kindly and piously give to one of the faithful, he shall fall down into
the darkness of Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti <span id="fr_466"></span>[2](#fn_463),
down into the world of woe, the dismal realm, down into the house of
hell.'

### IV.

36 (122). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
bury in the earth either the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man, and
if he shall not disinter it within half a year, what is the penalty that
he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Five hundred stripes with the
Aspahê-a*s*tra <span id="fr_467"></span>[3](#fn_464), five hundred
stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

37 (126). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
bury in the earth either the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man, and
if he shall not disinter it within a year, what is the penalty that he
shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'A thousand stripes with the Aspahê-a*s*tra, a
thousand stripes with the Sraoshô-*k*arana.'

38 (130). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall
bury in the earth either the corpse of a dog or the corpse of a man, and
if he shall not disinter it within the second year, what

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

is the penalty for it? What is the atonement for it? What is the
cleansing from it?

39 (135). Ahura Mazda answered: 'For that deed there is nothing that can
pay, nothing that can atone, nothing that can cleanse from it; it is a
trespass for which there is no atonement, for ever and ever.'

40 (137). When is it so?

‘It is so, if the sinner be a professor of the law of Mazda, or one who
has been taught in it <span id="fr_468"></span>[1](#fn_465). But if he
be not a professor of the law of Mazda, nor one who has been taught in
it <span id="fr_469"></span>[2](#fn_466), then this law of Mazda takes
his sin from him, if he confesses it <span
id="fr_470"></span>[3](#fn_467) and resolves never to commit again such
forbidden deeds.

41 (142). ‘The law of Mazda indeed, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! takes away
from him who confesses it the bonds of his sin <span
id="fr_471"></span>[4](#fn_468); it takes away (the sin of) breach of
trust <span id="fr_472"></span>[5](#fn_469); it takes away (the sin of)
murdering one of the faithful <span id="fr_473"></span>[6](#fn_470); it
takes away (the sin of) burying a corpse <span
id="fr_474"></span>[7](#fn_471); it takes away (the sin of)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

deeds for which, there is no atonement; it takes away the heaviest
penalties of sin <span id="fr_475"></span>[1](#fn_472); it takes away
any sin that may be sinned.

42 (149). ‘In the same way the law of Mazda, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra!
cleanses the faithful from every evil thought, word, and deed, as a
swift-rushing mighty wind cleanses the plain <span
id="fr_476"></span>[2](#fn_473).

'So let all the deeds thou doest be henceforth good, O Zarathu*s*tra! a
full atonement for thy sin is effected by means of the law of Mazda.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_430"></span>[22:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_433) The wood for the
fire altar.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[22:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_434) The baresma (now
called barsom) is a bundle of sacred twigs which the priest holds in his
hand while reciting the prayers. They were formerly twigs of the
pomegranate, date, or tamarind tree, or of any tree that had no thorns,
and were plucked with particular ceremonies, which alone made them fit
to be used for liturgic purposes (cf. Farg. XIX, 18 seq.) The Parsis in
India found it convenient to replace them by brass wires, which, when
once consecrated, can be used for an indefinite period. It is the
baresma which is alluded to by Strabo, when speaking of the bundle of
thin twigs of heath, which the Magi hold in their hand <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> while reciting their hymns (τὰς δὴ ἐπῳδὰς
ποιοῦνται πολὺν χρόνον ῥάβδων μυρικίνων λεπτῶν δέσμην κατέχουτες, XV, 3,
14).

<span id="fn_432"></span>[23:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_435) The Hâvana or mortar
used in crushing the Haoma or Hom (see Introd. IV, 28).

<span id="fn_433"></span>[23:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_436) The god that gives
good folds and good pastures to cattle (see Introd. IV, 16).

<span id="fn_434"></span>[23:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_437) By the performance
of worship.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[24:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_438) The neck of Arezûra
(Arezûrahê grîva) is 'a mount at the gate of hell, whence the demons
rush forth' (Bund. 22, 16); it is also called 'the head of Arezûra'
(Farg. XIX, 45), or, 'the back of Arezûra' (Bund. 21,17). Arezûra was
first the name of a fiend who was killed by Gayômar*d* (Mainyô-i-khard
XXVII, 15); and mount Arezûra was most likely the mountain to which he
was bound, as A*z*i Dahâka was to Demâvend (see Introd. IV, 18).

<span id="fn_436"></span>[24:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_439) Hell.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[24:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_440) See Introd. V, 9.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[24:4](sbe0409.htm#fr_441) With regard to
Dakhmas, see Introd. V, 10. 'Nor is the Earth happy at that place
whereon stands a Dakhma with corpses upon it; for that patch of ground
will never be clean again fill the day of <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> resurrection' (Gr. Rav. 435, 437). Although the erection of
Dakhmas is enjoined by the law, yet the Dakhma in itself is as unclean
as any spot on the earth can be, since it is always in contact with the
dead (cf. Farg. VII, 55). The impurity which would otherwise be
scattered over the whole world, is thus brought together to one and the
same spot. Yet even that spot, in spite of the Ravaet, is not to lie
defiled for ever, as every fifty years the Dakhmas ought to be pulled
down, so that their sites may be restored to their natural purity (V. i.
Farg. VII, 49 seq. and this Farg. § 13).

<span id="fn_439"></span>[25:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_442) 'Where there are
most Khrafstras' (Comm.); cf. Introd. V, II.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[25:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_443) Killed by an enemy.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[25:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_444) There is no
counterpart given to the first grief (§ 7), because, as the Commentary
naively expresses it, 'it is not possible so to dig out hell, which will
be done at the end of the world' (Bund. XXXI, sub fin.)

<span id="fn_442"></span>[26:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_445) No ceremony in
general can be performed by one man alone. Two Mobeds are wanted to
perform the Vendîdâd service, two priests for the Barashnûm, two persons
for the Sag-dîd (Anquetil, II, 584 n.) It is never good that the
faithful should be alone, as the fiend is always lurking about, ready to
take advantage of any moment of inattention. If the faithful be alone,
there is no one to make up for any negligence and to prevent mischief
arising from it. Never is the danger greater than in the present case,
when the fiend is close at hand, and in direct contact with the
faithful.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[26:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_446) See Introd. V, 3.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[26:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_447) As the Nasu has
taken hold of him, he has become a Nasu incarnate, and must no longer be
allowed to come into contact with men, whom he would defile.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[27:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_448) The Arme*s*t-gâh,
the place for the unclean; see Introd. V, 15.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[27:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_449) Hana means,
literally, 'an old man;' Zaurura, 'a man broken down by age;'
Pairi*s*ta-khshudra, 'one whose seed is dried up.' These words seem to
have acquired the technical meanings of 'fifty, sixty, and seventy years
old.'

<span id="fn_447"></span>[27:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_450) 'Trained to
operations of that sort' (Comm.); a headsman.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[27:4](sbe0409.htm#fr_451) Cf. Farg. IX, 49,
text and note.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[28:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_452) The performance of
the Patet. See Introd. V, 22.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[28:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_453) It seems as if the
law had formerly directed that he should be immediately put to death;
but that afterwards, when the rigour of the law had abated, the object
which had previously been fulfilled by his death, was then attained by
his confinement. He was allowed to live in confinement till he was old
and all but dead, and he was put to death by the law, just before he
would have died in the usual course of nature (see §§ 19, 20). Certain
Ravaets put the 'carrier alone' among the number of the margarzân (East
India Office Library, Zend MSS. VIII, 144); he is not only to be
punished in this world, but in the other too; he is condemned to feed in
hell on corpses of men (Ar*d*â Vîrâf XXXVIII).

<span id="fn_451"></span>[28:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_454) Cf. § 4.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[29:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_455) From the Vendîdâd
Sâdah.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[29:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_456) Or 'bearing corn
first for thee.' 'When something good grows up, it will grow up for thee
first' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_454"></span>[29:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_457) They take for
themselves what is good and send to thee what is bad' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_455"></span>[29:4](sbe0409.htm#fr_458) Literally, 'What is
the stomach of the law?'

<span id="fn_456"></span>[30:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_459) The translation
'acts of adoration' and 'oblations' is doubtful: the words in the text
ἅπαξ λεγόμενα, which are traditionally translated 'feet' and 'breasts.'
The Commentary has as follows: 'He makes the law of Mazda as fat as a
child could be made by means of a hundred feet, that is to say, of fifty
servants walking to rock him; of a thousand breasts, that is, of five
hundred nurses; of ten thousand sacrifices performed for his weal.'

<span id="fn_457"></span>[30:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_460)

John Barleycorn got up again,  
And sore surpris’d them all.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[30:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_461) Doubtful; possibly,
'When sudhus (a sort of grain) is coming forth.'

<span id="fn_459"></span>[30:4](sbe0409.htm#fr_462) Doubtful; possibly,
'When pi*s*tra (a sort of grain) is coming forth.'

<span id="fn_460"></span>[30:5](sbe0409.htm#fr_463) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[30:6](sbe0409.htm#fr_464) See Farg. IV, 47.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[31:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_465) The Ashô-dâd or
alms. The bracketed clause is from the Vendîdâd Sâdah.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[31:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_466) The earth.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[31:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_467) See Introd. V, 19.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[32:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_468) As he must have
known that he was committing sin.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[32:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_469) If he did not know
that he was committing sin.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[32:3](sbe0409.htm#fr_470) If he makes Patet
(see Introd. V, 22), and says to himself, 'I will never henceforth sin
again' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_468"></span>[32:4](sbe0409.htm#fr_471) If not knowingly
committed; see § 40 and the following notes.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[32:5](sbe0409.htm#fr_472) Draosha: refusing to
give back a deposit (Comm. ad IV, x): 'He knows that it is forbidden to
steal, but he fancies that robbing the rich to give to the poor is a
pious deed' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_470"></span>[32:6](sbe0409.htm#fr_473) Or better, 'a
Mazdean,' but one who has committed a capital crime; I he knows that it
is allowed to kill the margarzân, but he does not know that it is not
allowed to do so without an order from the judge! Cf. VIII, 74 note.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[32:7](sbe0409.htm#fr_474) 'He knows that it is
forbidden to bury a corpse; but he fancies that if one manages so that
dogs or foxes may not take it to the fire and to the water, he behaves
piously' (Comm.) See Introd. V, 9.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[33:1](sbe0409.htm#fr_475) Or, possibly, 'the
sin of usury.' He knows that it is lawful to take high interest' but 'he
does not know that it is not lawful to do so from the faithful' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_473"></span>[33:2](sbe0409.htm#fr_476) 'From chaff' (Comm.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard IV. Contracts and Outrages](sbe0410)
