[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0414)  [Next](sbe0416) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD IX.

### The nine nights’ Barashnûm.

I a (1-11). Description of the place for cleansing the unclean (the
Barashnûm-gâh).

I b (12-36). Description of the cleansing.

II (37-44). Fees of the cleanser.

III (47-57). The false cleanser; his punishment.

§§ 45, 46 belong better to the following Fargard.

The ceremony described in this Fargard is known among the Parsis as
Barashnûm nû shaba, or 'nine nights’ Barashnûm,' because it lasts for
nine nights (see § 35) <span id="fr_751"></span>[2](#fn_743). It is the
great purification, the most efficacious of all; it not only makes the
defiled man clean, but it opens to him the heavens (see Farg. XIX, 33;
cf. Introd. V, 16). So, although it was formerly intended only for the
man defiled by the dead, it became, during the Parsi period, a pious
work which might be performed without any corpse having been touched;
nay, its performance was prescribed, once at least, at the time of the
Nû zûdî (at the age of fifteen, when the young Parsi becomes a member of
the community), in order to wash away the natural uncleanness that has
been contracted in the maternal womb (Saddar 36, Hyde 40) <span
id="fr_752"></span>[3](#fn_744).

### I a.

1\. Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O most

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall
they manage here below; who want to cleanse the body of one defiled by
the dead?'

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘A godly man, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! who
speaks truth, who learns the Holy Word, and who knows best the rites of
cleansing according to the law of Mazda <span
id="fr_753"></span>[1](#fn_745), such a man shall fell the trees off the
surface of the ground on a space of nine Vîbâzus <span
id="fr_754"></span>[2](#fn_746) square.

3 (9). 'It should be the part of the ground where there is least water
and where there are fewest trees, the part which is the cleanest and
driest, and the least passed through by sheep and oxen, and by Fire, the
son of Ahura Mazda, by the consecrated bundles of baresma, and by the
faithful.'

4 (11). How far from the fire? How far from the water? How far from the
consecrated bundles of baresma? How far from the faithful?

5 (12). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Thirty paces from the fire, thirty paces
from the water, thirty paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma,
three paces from the faithful.

6 (13). ‘Then thou shalt dig a hole, two fingers deep if the summer has
come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come <span
id="fr_755"></span>[3](#fn_747).

7 (14). ‘Thou shalt dig a second hole, two fingers deep if the summer
has come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

‘Thou shalt dig a third hole, two fingers deep if

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

‘Thou shalt dig a fourth hole, two fingers deep if the summer has come,
four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

‘Thou shalt dig a fifth hole, two fingers deep if the summer has come,
four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.

'Thou shalt dig a sixth hole <span id="fr_756"></span>[1](#fn_748), two
fingers deep if the summer has come, four fingers deep if the winter and
ice have come.'

8 (14). How far from one another?

'One pace.'

How much is the pace?

‘As much as three feet.

9 (16). 'Then thou shalt dig three holes more <span
id="fr_757"></span>[2](#fn_749), two fingers deep if the summer has
come, four fingers deep if the winter and ice have come.'

How far from the former six?

'Three paces.'

What sort of paces?

'Such as are taken in walking.'

How much are those (three) paces?

‘As much as nine feet.

10 (22). 'Then thou shalt draw a furrow all around with a metal knife.'

How far from the holes?

'Three paces.'

What sort of paces?

'Such as are taken in walking.'

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

How much are those (three) paces?

‘As much as nine feet.

11 (24). 'Thou shalt draw twelve furrows <span
id="fr_758"></span>[1](#fn_750); three of which thou shalt draw around
(the first) three holes; three thou shalt draw around (the first) six
holes; three thou shalt draw around the nine holes; three thou shalt
draw around the three holes, outside the six holes <span
id="fr_759"></span>[2](#fn_751). At each of the three times nine
feet <span id="fr_760"></span>[3](#fn_752), thou shalt place stones as
steps to the holes; or potsherds, or stumps, or clods, or any hard
matter <span id="fr_761"></span>[4](#fn_753).'

### I b.

12 (31). 'Then the unclean one shall walk to the holes; thou, O
Zarathu*s*tra! shalt stand outside by the furrow, and thou shalt recite,
Nemas*k*â yâ

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

ârmaiti*s* î*z*â*k*â <span id="fr_762"></span>[1](#fn_754); and the
unclean one shall repeat, Nemas*k*â yâ ârmaiti*s* î*z*â*k*â.

13 (35). ‘The Dru*g* becomes weaker and weaker at every one of those
words which are to smite the fiend Angra Mainyu, to smite Aêshma of the
bloody spear <span id="fr_763"></span>[2](#fn_755), to smite the
Mâzainya fiends <span id="fr_764"></span>[3](#fn_756), to smite all the
fiends.

14 (40). ‘Then thou shalt sprinkle him with gômêz from a spoon of brass
or of lead; thou shalt take a stick with nine knots <span
id="fr_765"></span>[4](#fn_757), O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! and thou shalt
fasten the leaden spoon to the upper part of the stick.

15 (43). ‘They shall wash his hands first. If his hands be not washed
first, he makes his whole body unclean. When he has washed his hands
three times, after his hands have been washed, thou shalt sprinkle the
forepart of his skull; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes in front, between his
brows <span id="fr_766"></span>[5](#fn_758).

16 (50). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle him in front between the brows; then the
Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the back part of the skull.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the back part of the skull; then the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes upon the jaws.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the jaws; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
right ear.

17 (56). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right ear; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes
upon the left ear.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left ear; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
right shoulder.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right shoulder; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes
upon the left shoulder.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left shoulder; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the right arm-pit.

18 (64). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right armpit; then the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes upon the left arm-pit.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left arm-pit; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the chest.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the chest; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
back.

19 (70). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the back; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the right nipple.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right nipple; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the left nipple.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left nipple; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the right rib.

20 (76). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right rib; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes
upon the left rib.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left rib; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
right hip.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right hip; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
left hip.

21 (82). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left hip; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes
upon the sexual parts.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the sexual parts. If the unclean one be a man, thou
shalt sprinkle him first behind, then before; if the unclean one be a
woman, thou shalt sprinkle her first before, then behind; then the
Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the right thigh.

22 (88). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right thigh; then the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes upon the left thigh.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left thigh; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the right knee.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right knee; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the left knee.

23 (94). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left knee; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes
upon the right leg.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right leg; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
left leg.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left leg; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon the
right ankle.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right ankle; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the left ankle.

24 (102). ‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left ankle; then the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes upon the right instep.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the right instep; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon
the left instep.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left instep; then the Dru*g* Nasu is driven to
the sole of the foot, where what is seen of her is like the wing of a
fly.

25 (108). ‘He shall press his toes upon the ground and shall raise up
his heels; thou shalt sprinkle his right sole; then the Dru*g* Nasu
rushes upon the left sole.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left sole; then the Dru*g* Nasu is driven to
the toes, where what is seen of her is like the wing of a fly.

26 (113). ‘He shall press his heels upon the ground And shall raise up
his toes; thou shalt sprinkle his right toe; then the Dru*g* Nasu rushes
upon the left toe.

‘Thou shalt sprinkle the left toe; then the Dru*g* Nasu flies away to
the regions of the north, in the shape of a raging fly, with knees and
tail sticking out, all stained with stains, and like unto the foulest
Khrafstras.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

27 (118). ‘And thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and most-healing
words:--

‘“Yathâ ahû vairyô:--The will of the Lord is the law of holiness; the
riches of Vohu-manô shall be given to him who works in this world for
Mazda, and wields according to the will of Ahura the power he gave to
him to relieve the poor.

‘“K*e*m nâ mazdâ:--Whom hast thou placed to protect me, O Mazda! while
the hate of the fiend is grasping me? Whom, but thy Âtar and Vohu-manô,
by whose work the holy world goes on? Reveal to me the rules of thy law!

‘“K*e* verethrem *g*â:--Who is he who will smite the fiend in order to
maintain thy ordinances.? Teach me clearly thy rules for this world and
for the next, that Sraosha may come with Vohu-manô and help whomsoever
thou pleasest.

‘"Keep us from our hater, O Mazda and Ârmaiti Spe*n*ta! Perish, O
fiendish Dru*g*! Perish, O brood of the fiend! Perish, O world of the
fiend! Perish away, O Dru*g*! Rush away, O Dru*g*! Perish away, O
Dru*g*! Perish away to the regions of the north, never more to give unto
death the living world of the holy spirit <span
id="fr_767"></span>[1](#fn_759)!"

28 (119). ‘At the first hole the man becomes freer from the Nasu; then
thou shalt say those fiend-smiting and most-healing words:--"Yathâ ahû
vairyô," &c. <span id="fr_768"></span>[2](#fn_760)

‘At the second hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt say
those fiend-smiting and most-healing words:--"Yathâ ahû vairyô," &c.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

‘At the third hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt say
those fiend-smiting and most-healing words:--"Yathâ ahû vairyô," &c.

‘At the fourth hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt say
those fiend-smiting and most-healing words:--"Yathâ ahû vairyô," &c.

‘At the fifth hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt say
those fiend-smiting and most-healing words:--"Yathâ ahû vairyô," &c.

‘At the sixth hole he becomes freer from the Nasu; then thou shalt say
those fiend-smiting and most-healing words:--"Yathâ ahû vairyô," &c.

29 (120). ‘Afterwards the unclean one shall sit down, inside the
furrows <span id="fr_769"></span>[1](#fn_761), outside the furrows of
the six holes, four fingers from those furrows. There he shall cleanse
his body with thick handfuls of dust.

30 (123). ‘Fifteen times shall they take up dust from the ground for him
to rub his body, and they shall wait there until he is dry even to the
last hair on his head.

31 (125). ‘When his body is dry, then he shall step over the holes
(containing water). At the first hole he shall wash his body once with
water; at the second hole he shall wash his body twice with water; at
the third hole he shall wash his body thrice with water.

32 (130). ‘Then he shall perfume (his body) <span
id="fr_770"></span>[2](#fn_762) with perfumes from Urvâsna, or
Vohu-gaona, or Vohu-kereti, or Hadhâ-naêpata, or from any sweet-smelling

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

plant; then he shall put on his clothes, and shall go back to his house.

33 (133). ‘He shall sit down there in the place of infirmity <span
id="fr_771"></span>[1](#fn_763), inside the house, apart from the other
worshippers of Mazda. He shall not go near the fire, nor near the water,
nor near the earth, nor near the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the
faithful, either man or woman. Thus shall he continue until three nights
have passed. When three nights have passed, he shall wash his body, he
shall wash his clothes with gômêz and water to make them clean.

34 (137). ‘Then he shall sit down again in the place of infirmity,
inside the house, apart from the other worshippers of Mazda. He shall
not go near the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth, nor near
the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, either man or woman.
Thus shall he continue until six nights have passed. When six nights
have passed, he shall wash his body, he shall wash his clothes with
gômêz and water to make them clean.

35 (141). ‘Then he shall sit down again in the place of infirmity,
inside the house, apart from the other worshippers of Mazda. He shall
not go near the fire, nor near the water, nor near the earth, nor near
the cow, nor near the trees, nor near the faithful, either man or woman.
Thus shall he continue, until nine nights have passed. When nine nights
have passed, he shall wash his body, he shall wash his clothes with
gômêz and water to make them clean.

36 (145). ‘He may thenceforth go near the fire, near the water, near the
earth, near the cow, near

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

the trees, and near the faithful, either man or woman.

### II. <span id="fr_772"></span>[1](#fn_764)

37 (146). ‘Thou shalt cleanse a priest for a holy blessing <span
id="fr_773"></span>[2](#fn_765); thou shalt cleanse the lord of a
province for the value of a camel of high value; thou shalt cleanse the
lord of a town for the value of a stallion; thou shalt cleanse the lord
of a borough for the value of a bull; thou shalt cleanse the master of a
house for the value of a cow three years old.

38 (150). ‘Thou shalt cleanse the wife of the master of a house for the
value of a ploughing <span id="fr_774"></span>[3](#fn_766) cow; thou
shalt cleanse a menial for the value of a draught cow <span
id="fr_775"></span>[4](#fn_767); thou shalt cleanse a young child for
the value of a lamb.

39 (154). ‘These are the different cattle that the worshippers of Mazda
shall give to him who has cleansed them, if they can afford it; if they
cannot afford it, they shall give him any other reward that may make him
leave their houses well-pleased with them, and free from anger.

40 (157). ‘For if the man who has cleansed them leave their houses
displeased with them, and full of anger, then the Dru*g* Nasu enters
them by the nose, by the eyes, by the tongue, by the jaws, by the sexual
organs, by the hinder parts.

41 (159). ‘And the Dru*g* Nasu rushes upon them even to the end of the
nails, and they are unclean thenceforth for ever and ever.

‘It grieves the sun indeed, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra!

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

to shine upon a man defiled by the dead; it grieves the moon, it grieves
the stars.

42 (162). 'That man delights them, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! who cleanses
from the Nasu those whom she has defiled; he delights the fire, he
delights the water, he delights the earth, he delights the cow, he
delights the trees, he delights the faithful, both men and women.'

43 (164). Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the material
world, thou Holy One! What shall be his reward, after his soul has
parted from his body, who has cleansed from the Nasu any one defiled by
her?'

44 (166). Ahura Mazda answered: 'The welfare of the blessed abode thou
canst promise to that man, for his reward in the other world.'

45 <span id="fr_776"></span>[1](#fn_768) (167). Zarathu*s*tra asked
Ahura Mazda: 'O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How shall I
fight against that Dru*g* who from the dead rushes upon the living? How
shall I fight against that Nasu who from the dead defiles the living?'

46 (169). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Say aloud those words in the Gâthas
that are to be said twice; say aloud those words in the Gâthas that are
to be said thrice; say aloud those words in the Gâthas that are to be
said four times; and the Dru*g* shall fade away like the self-moving
arrow <span id="fr_777"></span>[2](#fn_769), like the carpet of the
earth <span id="fr_778"></span>[3](#fn_770) when the year is over like
its garment <span id="fr_779"></span>[3](#fn_770) which lasts a season.'

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### III.

47 (172). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man who
does not know the rites of cleansing according to the law of Mazda,
offers to cleanse the unclean, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?
How shall I then fight against that Dru*g* who from the dead rushes upon
the living? How shall I fight against that Dru*g* who from the dead
defiles the living?'

48 (175). Ahura Mazda answered: 'Then, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! the
Dru*g* Nasu waxes stronger than she was before. Stronger then are
sickness and death and the working of the fiend than they were before.'

49 (177). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What is the
penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'The worshippers of Mazda shall bind him; they
shall bind his hands first; then they shall strip him of his clothes,
they shall flay him alive, they shall cut off his head, and they shall
give over his corpse unto the greediest of the birds of the beneficent
spirit, unto the corpse-eating birds, unto the ravens, with these
words <span id="fr_780"></span>[1](#fn_771):--

‘“The man here has repented of all his evil thoughts, words, and deeds.

50 (183). '"If he has committed any other evil

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

deed it is remitted by his repentance; if he has committed no other evil
deed, he is absolved by his repentance for ever and ever <span
id="fr_781"></span>[1](#fn_772)."'

51 (18 7). Who is he, O Ahura Mazda! who threatens to take away fulness
and increase from the world, and to bring in sickness and death?

52 (188). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘It is the ungodly Ashemaogha <span
id="fr_782"></span>[2](#fn_773), O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! who in this
material world cleanses the unclean without knowing the rites of
cleansing according to the law of Mazda.

53 (190). 'For until then, O Spitama Zarathu*s*tra! sweetness and
fatness would flow out from that land and from those fields, with health
and healing, with fulness and increase and growth, and a growing of corn
and grass <span id="fr_783"></span>[3](#fn_774).'

54 (191). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! When are
sweetness and fatness to come back again to that land and to those
fields, with health and healing, with fulness and increase and growth,
and a growing of corn and grass?

55, 56 (192, 193). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Sweetness and fatness will
never come back again to that land and to those fields, with health and
healing, with fulness and increase and growth, and a growing of corn and
grass, until that ungodly Ashemaogha has been put to death, and the holy
Sraosha has been in that place, offered up a sacrifice <span
id="fr_784"></span>[4](#fn_775), for three

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

days and three nights, with fire blazing, with baresma tied up, and with
Haoma uplifted.

57 (196). 'Then sweetness and fatness will come back again to that land
and to those fields, with health and healing, with fulness and increase
and growth, and a growing of corn and grass.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_743"></span>[119:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_751) As to the word
Barashnûm, it seems not to refer to the ceremony itself, and to be
nothing more than the Zend word bareshnûm, 'the top of the head, the
skull,' the part of the body that is first to be washed (§ 15).

<span id="fn_744"></span>[119:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_752) For the plan of the
Barashnûm-gâh, see Anquetil II, p. 450.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[120:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_753) A priest.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[120:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_754) The Vîbâzu seems to
have been as much as ten paces.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[120:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_755) See Introd. V, 16.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[121:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_756) These six holes
contain gômêz. 'The holes must be dug from the north to the south'
(Comm.)

<span id="fn_749"></span>[121:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_757) The three holes to
contain water.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[122:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_758) 'The furrows must
be drawn during the day; they must be drawn with a knife; they must be
drawn with recitation of spells. While drawing the furrows the cleanser
recites three Ashem-vohus ("holiness is the best of all good," &c.), the
Fravarânê ("I declare myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of
Zarathu*s*tra, a foe of the fiend," &c.), the Khshnûman of Serosh, and
the Bâ*g* of Serosh; they must be drawn from the north' (Comm. ad § 32).
The furrow, or kesh, plays a greater part in the Mazdean liturgy than in
any other. By means of the furrow, drawn with proper spells, and
according to the laws of spiritual war, man either besieges the fiend or
intrenches himself against him (cf. Farg. XVII, 5). In the present case
the Dru*g*, being shut up inside the kesh and thus excluded from the
world outside, and being driven back, step by step, by the strength of
the holy water and spells, finds at last no place of refuge but hell,
and the world is freed from her presence.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[122:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_759) 'The three holes
for water, the six holes for gômêz' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_752"></span>[122:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_760) The nine feet
between the holes containing gômêz and those containing water, the nine
feet between the first holes and the furrows, and the nine feet between
the last hole and the furrows.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[122:4](sbe0415.htm#fr_761) That the foot of
the unclean one may not touch the earth (see Introd. V, 10).

<span id="fn_754"></span>[123:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_762) Yasna XLIX, 10.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[123:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_763) See Introd. IV, 22.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[123:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_764) See Introd. IV, 23.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[123:4](sbe0415.htm#fr_765) So long that the
cleanser may take gômêz or water from the holes, and sprinkle the
unclean one, without touching him and without going inside the furrows.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[123:5](sbe0415.htm#fr_766) Cf. Farg. VIII,
40-71.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[126:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_767) Cf. Farg. VIII,
19-21.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[126:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_768) As in preceding
clause.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[127:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_769) Between the furrows
of the six holes containing gômêz and the furrows of the holes
containing water.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[127:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_770) Or, possibly, 'his
clothes' (see Farg. XIX, 24).

<span id="fn_763"></span>[128:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_771) The Armê*s*t-gâh
(see Introd. V, 15).

<span id="fn_764"></span>[129:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_772) Cf. the tariff for
the fees of physicians, Farg. VII, 41-43.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[129:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_773) See Farg. VII, 41,
note.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[129:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_774) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[129:4](sbe0415.htm#fr_775) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[130:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_776) This clause and the
following one as far as 'and the Dru*g*' are further developed in the
following Fargard.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[130:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_777) See Introd. IV, 26.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[130:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_779) The grass.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[131:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_780) 'The cleanser who
has not performed the cleansing according to the rites, shall be taken
to a desert place; there they shall nail him with four nails, they shall
take off the skin from his body, and cut off his head. If he has
performed Patet for his sin, he shall be holy (that is, he shall go to
paradise); if he has not performed Patet, he shall stay in hell till the
day of resurrection' (Fraser Ravaet, p. 398). Cf. Farg. III, 20 seq.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[132:1](sbe0415.htm#fr_781) See Farg. III, 20
seq., and Introd. V.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[132:2](sbe0415.htm#fr_782) See Introd. IV.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[132:3](sbe0415.htm#fr_783) Cf. XIII, 52 seq.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[132:4](sbe0415.htm#fr_784) The so-called zanda
ravân, 'the sacrifice that makes the soul living,' that is to say, that
makes it enter heaven. It is probably to be performed only in case the
sinner has performed the Patet (see the note to § 49).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard X](sbe0416)
