[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0407)  [Next](sbe0409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185790/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part I (SBE04)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1880\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## FARGARD II.

### Yima (*g*amshêd).

This Fargard may be divided into two parts.

First part (1-20). Ahura Mazda proposes to Yima, the son of Vîvanghat,
to receive the law from him and to bring it to men. On his refusal, he
bids him keep his creatures and make them prosper. Yima accordingly
makes them thrive and increase, keeps death and disease away from them,
and three times enlarges the earth, which had become too narrow for its
inhabitants.

Second part (21 to the end). On the approach of a dire winter, which is
to destroy every living creature, Yima, being advised by Ahura, builds a
Vara to keep there the seeds of every kind of animals and plants, and
the blessed live there a most happy life under his rule.

The tale in the first part refers to Yima as the first man, the first
king, and the founder of civilisation (see Introd. IV, 38); the tale in

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the second part is a combination of the myths of Yima, as the first dead
and the king of the dead over whom he rules in a region of bliss, and of
old myths about the end of the world. The world, lasting a long year of
twelve millenniums, was to end by a dire winter, like the Eddic Fimbul
winter, to be followed by an everlasting spring, when men, sent back to
earth from the heavens, should enjoy, in an eternal earthly life, the
same happiness that they had enjoyed after their death in the realm of
Yima. But as in the definitive form which was taken by Mazdean cosmology
the world was made to end by fire, its destruction by winter was no
longer the last incident of its life, and therefore, the Var of Yima,
instead of remaining, as it was originally, the paradise that gives back
to earth its inhabitants, came to be nothing more than a sort of Noah's
ark (see Introd. IV, 39, and Orm. Ahr. §§ 94, 131, 184, 185).

### 1.

1\. Zarathu*s*tra asked Ahura Mazda:

O Ahura Mazda, most beneficent Spirit, Maker of the material world, thou
Holy One!

Who was the first mortal, before myself, Zarathu*s*tra, with whom thou,
Ahura Mazda, didst converse <span id="fr_403"></span>[1](#fn_401), whom
thou didst teach the law of Ahura, the law of Zarathu*s*tra?

2 (4). Ahura Mazda answered:

The fair Yima, the great shepherd, O holy Zarathu*s*tra! he was the
first mortal, before thee, Zarathu*s*tra, with whom I, Ahura Mazda, did
converse, whom I taught the law of Ahura, the law of Zarathu*s*tra.

3 (7) Unto him, O Zarathu*s*tra, I, Ahura Mazda, spake, saying: 'Well,
fair Yima, son of Vîvanghat, be thou the preacher and the bearer of my
law!'

And the fair Yima, O Zarathu*s*tra, replied unto me, saying:

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

'I was not born, I was not taught to be the preacher and the bearer of
thy law <span id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_402).'

4 (11). Then I, Ahura Mazda, said thus unto him, O Zarathu*s*tra:

'Since thou wantest not to be the preacher and the bearer of my law,
then make thou my worlds thrive, make my worlds increase: undertake thou
to nourish, to rule, and to watch over my world.'

5 (14). And the fair Yima replied unto me, O Zarathu*s*tra, saying:

'Yes! I will make thy worlds thrive, I will make thy worlds increase.
Yes! I will nourish, and rule, and watch over thy world. There shall be,
while I am king, neither cold wind nor hot wind, neither disease nor
death.'

7 (17) <span id="fr_405"></span>[2](#fn_403). Then I, Ahura Mazda,
brought two implements unto him: a golden ring and a poniard inlaid with
gold <span id="fr_406"></span>[3](#fn_404). Behold, here Yima bears the
royal sway!

8 (20). Thus, under the sway of Yima, three hundred winters passed away,
and the earth was replenished with flocks and herds, with men and

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

dogs and birds and with red blazing fires, and there was no more room
for flocks, herds, and men.

9\. Then I warned the fair Yima, saying: 'O fair Yima, son of Vîvanghat,
the earth has become full of flocks and herds, of men and dogs and birds
and of red blazing fires, and there is no more room for flocks, herds,
and men.'

10\. Then Yima stepped forward, towards the luminous space, southwards,
to meet the sun <span id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_405), and (afterwards)
he pressed the earth with the golden ring, and bored it with the
poniard, speaking thus:

'O Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti <span id="fr_408"></span>[2](#fn_406), kindly open
asunder and stretch thyself afar, to bear flocks and herds and men.'

11\. And Yima made the earth grow larger by one-third than it was
before, and there came flocks and herds and men, at his will and wish,
as many as he wished <span id="fr_409"></span>[3](#fn_407).

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

12 (23). Thus, under the sway of Yima, six hundred winters passed away,
and the earth was replenished with flocks and herds, with men and dogs
and birds and with red blazing fires, and there was no more room for
flocks, herds, and men.

13\. And I warned the fair Yima, saying: 'O fair Yima, son of Vîvanghat,
the earth has become full of flocks and herds, of men and dogs and birds
and of red blazing fires, and there is no more room for flocks, herds,
and men.'

14\. Then Yima stepped forward, towards the luminous space, southwards,
to meet the sun, and (afterwards) he pressed the earth with the golden
ring, and bored it with the poniard, speaking thus:

'O Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti, kindly open asunder and stretch thyself afar, to
bear flocks and herds and men.'

15\. And Yima made the earth grow larger by two-thirds than it was
before, and there came flocks and herds and men, at his will and wish,
as many as he wished.

16 (26). Thus, under the sway of Yima, nine hundred winters passed away,
and the earth was replenished with flocks and herds, with men and dogs
and birds and with red blazing fires, and there was no more room for
flocks, herds, and men.

17 (28). And I warned the fair Yima, saying: 'O fair Yima, son of
Vîvanghat, the earth has become full of flocks and, herds, of men and
dogs and birds and of red blazing fires, and there is no more room for
flocks, herds, and men.'

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

18 (31). Then Yima stepped forward, towards the luminous space,
southwards, to meet the sun, and (afterwards) he pressed the earth with
the golden ring, and bored it with the poniard, speaking thus:

'O Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti, kindly open asunder and stretch thyself afar, to
bear flocks and herds and men.'

19 (37). And Yima made the earth grow larger by three-thirds than it was
before, and there came flocks and herds and men, at his will and wish,
as many as he wished.

### II.

21 (42) <span id="fr_410"></span>[1](#fn_408). The Maker, Ahura Mazda,
of high renown <span id="fr_411"></span>[2](#fn_409) in the Airyana
Vaê*g*ô, by the good river Dâitya <span id="fr_412"></span>[3](#fn_410),
called together a meeting of the celestial gods.

The fair Yima, the good shepherd, of high renown <span
id="fr_413"></span>[2](#fn_409) in the Airyana Vaê*g*ô, by the good
river Dâitya, called together a meeting of the excellent mortals <span
id="fr_414"></span>[4](#fn_411).

To that meeting came Ahura Mazda, of high renown in the Airyana Vaê*g*ô,
by the good river Dâitya; he came together with the celestial gods.

To that meeting came, the fair Yima, the good shepherd, of high renown
in the Airyana Vaê*g*ô, by the good river Dâitya; he came together with
the excellent mortals.

22 (46). And Ahura Mazda spake unto Yima, saying:

'O fair Yima, son of Vîvanghat! Upon the material

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

world the fatal winters are going to fall, that shall bring the fierce,
foul frost; upon the material world the fatal winters <span
id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_412) are going to fall, that shall make
snow-flakes fall thick, even an aredvî deep on the highest tops of
mountains <span id="fr_416"></span>[2](#fn_413).

23 (52). And all the three sorts of beasts shall perish, those that live
in the wilderness, and those that live on the tops of the mountains, and
those that live in the bosom of the dale, under the shelter of stables.

24 (57). Before that winter, those fields would bear plenty of grass for
cattle: now with floods that stream, with snows that melt, it will seem
a happy land in the world, the land wherein footprints even of sheep may
still be seen <span id="fr_417"></span>[3](#fn_414).

25 (61). Therefore make thee a Vara <span
id="fr_418"></span>[4](#fn_415), long as a

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

riding-ground on every side of the square <span
id="fr_419"></span>[1](#fn_416), and thither bring the seeds of sheep
and oxen, of men, of dogs, of birds, and of red blazing fires.

Therefore make thee a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side of the
square, to be an abode for men; a Vara, long. as a riding-ground on
every side of the square, to be a fold for flocks.

26 (65). There thou shalt make waters flow in a bed a hâthra long; there
thou shalt settle birds, by the ever-green banks that bear never-failing
food. There thou shalt establish dwelling places, consisting of a house
with a balcony, a courtyard, and a gallery <span
id="fr_420"></span>[2](#fn_417).

27 (70). Thither thou shalt bring the seeds <span
id="fr_421"></span>[3](#fn_418) of men and women, of the greatest, best,
and finest kinds on this earth; thither thou shalt bring the seeds of
every kind of cattle, of the greatest, best, and finest kinds on this
earth.

28 (74). Thither thou shalt bring the seeds of every kind of tree, of
the greatest, best, and finest kinds on this earth; thither thou shalt
bring the seeds of every kind of fruit, the fullest of food and sweetest
of odour. All those seeds shalt thou bring, two of ever), kind, to be
kept inexhaustible there, so *l*ong as those men shall stay in the Vara.

29 (80). There shall be no humpbacked, none bulged forward there; no
impotent, no lunatic; no poverty, no lying; no meanness, no jealousy; no

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

decayed tooth, no leprous to be confined <span
id="fr_422"></span>[1](#fn_419), nor any of the brands wherewith Angra
Mainyu stamps the bodies of mortals.

30 (87). In the largest part of the place thou shalt make nine streets,
six in the middle part, three in the smallest. To the streets of the
largest part thou shalt bring a thousand seeds of men and women; to the
streets of the middle part, six hundred; to the streets of the smallest
part, three hundred. That Vara thou shalt seal up with the golden
ring <span id="fr_423"></span>[2](#fn_420), and thou shalt make a door,
and a window self-shining within.'

31 (93). Then Yima said within himself: 'How shall I manage to make that
Vara which Ahura Mazda has commanded me to make?'

And Ahura Mazda said unto Yima: 'O fair Yima, son of Vîvanghat! Crush
the earth with a stamp of thy heel, and then knead it with thy hands, as
the potter does when kneading the potter's clay <span
id="fr_424"></span>[3](#fn_421).'

32\. And Yima did as Ahura Mazda wished; he crushed the earth with a
stamp of his heel, he kneaded it with his hands, as the potter does when
kneading the potter's clay <span id="fr_425"></span>[4](#fn_422).

33 (97). And Yima made a Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side of
the square. There he brought the seeds of sheep and oxen, of men, of

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

dogs, of birds, and of red blazing fires. He made Vara, long as a
riding-ground on every side of the square, to be an abode for men; a
Vara, long as a riding-ground on every side of the square, to be a fold
for flocks.

34 (101). There he made waters flow in a bed a hâthra long; there he
settled birds, by the evergreen banks that bear never-failing food.
There he established dwelling places, consisting of a house with a
balcony, a courtyard, and a gallery.

35 (106). There he brought the seeds of men and women, of the greatest,
best, and finest kinds on this earth; there he brought the seeds of
every kind of cattle, of the greatest, best, and finest kinds on this
earth.

36 (110). There he brought the seeds of every kind of tree, of the
greatest, best, and finest kinds on this earth; there he brought the
seeds of every kind of fruit, the fullest of food and sweetest of odour.
All those seeds he brought, two of every kind, to be kept inexhaustible
there, so long as those men shall stay in the Vara.

37 (116) And there were no humpbacked, none bulged forward there; no
impotent, no lunatic; no poverty, no lying; no meanness, no jealousy; no
decayed tooth, no leprous to be confined, nor any of the brands
wherewith Angra Mainyu stamps the bodies of mortals.

38 (123). In the largest part of the place he made nine streets, six in
the middle part, three in the smallest. To the streets of the largest
part he brought a thousand seeds of men and women; to the streets of the
middle part, six hundred; to the streets of the smallest part, three
hundred. That

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vara he sealed up
with the golden ring, and he made a door, and a window self-shining
within.

39 (129). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! What lights are
there to give light <span id="fr_426"></span>[1](#fn_423) in the Vara
which Yima made?

40 (131). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘There are uncreated lights and created
lights <span id="fr_427"></span>[2](#fn_424). There the stars, the moon,
and the sun are only once (a year) seen to rise and set <span
id="fr_428"></span>[3](#fn_425), and a year seems only as a day.

41 (33). 'Every fortieth year, to every couple two are born, a male and
a female <span id="fr_429"></span>[4](#fn_426). And thus it is for every
sort of cattle. And the men in the Vara which Yima made live the
happiest life <span id="fr_430"></span>[5](#fn_427).'

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

42 (137). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is he who
brought the law of Mazda into the Vara which Yima made?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'It was the bird Karshipta <span
id="fr_431"></span>[1](#fn_428), O holy Zarathu*s*tra!'

43 (140). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Who is the lord
and ruler there?

Ahura Mazda answered: 'Urvata*d*-nara <span
id="fr_432"></span>[2](#fn_429), O Zarathu*s*tra! and thyself,
Zarathu*s*tra.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_401"></span>[11:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_403) 'On the law' (Comm.)

<span id="fn_402"></span>[12:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_404) In the Vedas, Yama,
as the first man, is the first priest too; he brought worship here below
as well as life, and 'first he stretched out the thread of sacrifice.'
Yima had once the same right as his Indian brother to the title of a
founder of religion: he lost it as, in the course of the development of
Mazdeism, Zarathu*s*tra became the titular law-giver (cf. Introd. IV,
40; Orm. Ahr. § 156).

<span id="fn_403"></span>[12:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_405) The § 6 is composed
of unconnected Zend quotations, that are no part of the text and are
introduced by the commentator for the purpose of showing that 'although
Yima did not teach the law and train pupils, he was nevertheless a
faithful and a holy man, and rendered men holy too (?).'

<span id="fn_404"></span>[12:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_406) As the symbol and
the instrument of sovereignty. 'He reigned supreme by the strength of
the ring and of the poniard' (Asp.)

<span id="fn_405"></span>[13:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_407) Thence is derived
the following tradition recorded by G. du Chinon: 'Ils en nomment un qui
s’allait tous les jours promener dans le Ciel du Soleil d’où il aportait
la sciance des Astres, aprez les avoir visités de si prez. Ils nomment
ce grand personnage Gemachid' (Relations nouvelles du Levant, Lyon,
1671, p. 478). There is no direct connexion, as it seems, between the
two acts of Yima, namely, between his going to the heaven of the sun and
his enlarging the surface of the earth. The meaning of the first is
given, perhaps, by the tale about the dream of Cyrus: 'He saw in a dream
the sun at his feet: thrice he tried vainly to seize it with his hands,
as the sun was rolling and sliding away. The Magi said to him that the
threefold effort to seize the sun presaged to him a reign of thirty
years' (Dino ap. Cicero, De Divin. I, 23). Yima goes three times to the
sun, to take thence royal power for three times three hundred years. In
Aryan mythology, the sun is, as is well known, the symbol and source of
royalty: Persian kings in particular are 'the brothers of the sun.'

<span id="fn_406"></span>[13:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_408) The genius of the
earth (see Introd. IV, 33).

<span id="fn_407"></span>[13:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_409) The happiness which
Yima made reign on the earth is also <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>
described Ys. IX, 4; Yt. IX, 8 seq.; Yt. XV, 15. In the Shâh Nâmah he is
the founder of civilisation, of social order, of arts and sciences, and
the first builder (cf. § 25 seq.)

<span id="fn_408"></span>[15:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_410) § 20 belongs to the
Commentary.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[15:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_413) Or perhaps, 'whose
voice was loud,' &c. (while proclaiming the law).

<span id="fn_410"></span>[15:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_412) See Farg. I,
Introd., and notes to § 2.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[15:4](sbe0408.htm#fr_414) Primitively the
souls of the righteous (see Introd. IV, 38).

<span id="fn_412"></span>[16:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_415) The Commentary has
here: Malkô*s*ân, which is the plural of the Hebrew Malkô*s*, 'rain;'
this seems to be an attempt to identify the Iranian legend with the
biblical tradition of the deluge. The attempt was both a success and a
failure; Malkô*s* entered the Iranian mythology and became naturalised
there, but it was mistaken for a proper noun, and became the name of a
demon, who by witchcraft will let loose a furious winter on the earth to
destroy it (Saddar 9). What may be called the diluvial version of the
myth is thus summed up in the Mainyô-i-khard: 'By him (*G*amshîd) the
enclosure of Jam-kard was made; when there is that rain of Malakosãn, as
it is declared in the religion, that mankind and the remaining creatures
and creations of Hôrmezd, the lord, will mostly perish; then they will
open the gate of that enclosure of Jam-kard, and men and cattle and the
remaining creatures and creation of the creator Hôrmezd will come from
that enclosure and arrange the world again' (XXVII, 27 seq.; edited and
translated by E. West).

<span id="fn_413"></span>[16:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_416) 'Even where it (the
snow) is least, it will be one Vîtasti two fingers deep' (Comm.); that
is, fourteen fingers deep.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[16:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_417) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[16:4](sbe0408.htm#fr_418) Literally, 'an
enclosure.' This Vara is known in later mythology as the Var-*G*am-kard,
'the Var made by Yima.'

<span id="fn_416"></span>[17:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_419) 'Two hâthras long on
every side' (Comm.) A hâthra is about an English mile.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[17:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_420) The last three words
are ἅπαξ λεγόμενα of doubtful meaning.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[17:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_421) To be sown in the
ground, and to grow up into life in due time (? see § 41, text and
note).

<span id="fn_419"></span>[18:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_422) See Introd, V, 14.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[18:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_423) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[18:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_424) In the Shah Nâmah
*G*amshîd teaches the Dîvs to make and knead clay; and they build
palaces at his bidding. It was his renown, both as a wise king and a
great builder, that caused the Musulmans to identify him with Solomon.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[18:4](sbe0408.htm#fr_425) From the Vendîdâd
Sâdah.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[20:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_426) From the Vendîdâd
Sâdah.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[20:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_427) Heavenly lights and
material lights. The Commentary has here the following Zend quotation:
'All uncreated light shines from above; all the created lights shine
from below.'

We give here the description of Irân-vê*g* according to a later source,
the Mainyô-i-khard (as translated by West): 'Hôrmezd created *E*rã-vê*z*
better than the remaining places and districts; and its goodness was
this, that men's life is three hundred years; and cattle and sheep, one
hundred and fifty years; and their pain and sickness are little, and
they do not circulate falsehood, and they make no lamentation and
weeping; and the sovereignty of the demon of Avarice, in their body, is
little, and in ten men, if they eat one loaf, they are satisfied; and in
every forty years, from one woman and one man, one child is born; and
their law is goodness, and religion the primeval religion, and when they
die, they are righteous (= blessed); and their chief is Gôpatshâh, and
the ruler and king is Srôsh' (XLIV, 24).

<span id="fn_425"></span>[20:3](sbe0408.htm#fr_428) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[20:4](sbe0408.htm#fr_429) From the seeds
deposited in the Vara (see §§ 27 seq., 35 seq.); in the same way as the
first human couple grew up, after forty years, in the shape of a Reivas
shrub, from the seed of Gayômar*d* received by Spe*n*ta Ârmaiti (the
Earth. See Bund. XV).

<span id="fn_427"></span>[20:5](sbe0408.htm#fr_430) 'They live there for
150 years; some say, they never die.' (Comm.) The latter are right, that
is to say, are nearer the mythical <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>
truth, as the inhabitants of the Vara were primitively the departed and
therefore immortal.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[21:1](sbe0408.htm#fr_431) 'The bird Karshipta
dwells in the heavens: were he living on the earth, he would be the king
of birds. He brought the law into the Var of Yima, and recites the
Avesta in the language of birds' (Bund. XIX and XXIV). As the bird,
because of the swiftness of his flight, was often considered an
incarnation of lighting, and as thunder was supposed to be the voice of
a god speaking from above, the song of the bird was often thought to be
the utterance of a god and a revelation (see Orm. Ahr. § 157).

<span id="fn_429"></span>[21:2](sbe0408.htm#fr_432) Zarathu*s*tra had
three sons during his lifetime (cf. Introd. IV, 40), Isa*d*-vâstra,
Hvare-*k*ithra, and Urvata*d*-nara, who were respectively the fathers
and chiefs of the three classes, priests, warriors, and husbandmen. They
play no great part in Mazdean mythology, and are little more than three
subdivisions of Zarathu*s*tra himself, who was 'the first priest, the
first warrior, the first husbandman' (Yt. XIII, 88). Zarathu*s*tra, as a
heavenly priest, was, by right, the ratu in Airyana Vaê*g*ô, where he
founded the religion by a sacrifice (Bund. XXXIII and Introd. III, 15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fargard III. The Earth](sbe0409)
