[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cha01)  [Next](cha03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087785145X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Charity*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1766\], tr. by John Whitehead
\[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Charity

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

He who does not make distinctions in regard to the neighbour in
accordance with the quality of the good and truth with him may be
deceived a thousand times; his charity becomes confused and at length
what is not charity. A devil-man may exclaim, "I am your neighbour: do
good to me!" and if you do good to him, he may kill you or others. You
are placing a knife or a sword in his hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

This is what the simple do. They say, "Every man is equally my
neighbour," also "It is not my business to investigate his quality, but
this is regarded by God; I must simply help my neighbour." Yet this is
not loving the neighbour. He who loves a neighbour from genuine charity
finds out what sort of a man he is, and does good to him with
discrimination, in accordance with the quality of his good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

In the other life such simple people are removed from others and kept
apart; for if they come among diabolical spirits they are drawn into
doing good to them, and into doing evil to the good. The evil cry out,
"Set me free, help me!" This <span id="fr_9"></span>[53-1](#fn_9) is the
very great strength that they acquire for themselves. Without the help
of the simple, and as it were conjunction with them, they are not strong
at all; but together with those they have deceived by the name of
"neighbour," they are strong.

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

Genuine charity itself is prudent and wise. The <span
id="fr_10"></span>[54-1](#fn_10) other charity is spurious, because it
is of the will or of good only, and not at the same time of the
understanding, or of truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

4\. The degree of neighbour is in accordance with the degree of good and
truth with the man; and hence one man is not neighbour in the same
degree \[as another\]. Good is distinguished, in accordance with its
degrees, into civil good, moral good, and spiritual good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

The neighbour a man ought to love from charity is spiritual good. Apart
from this good there is no charity; for the good of charity is spiritual
good, since it is in accordance with that good that, in the case of each
one in the heavens, conjunction is effected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

Moral good, which is human good itself, being the rational good
according to which man lives with man as a brother and companion, is the
neighbour according to how much it derives from spiritual good. For
moral good without spiritual good is external good; it is of the
external will, and is not internal good. It may be evil, which ought not
to be loved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

Civil good is the good of a life in accordance with the civil laws; and
its beginning and foundation, which is "not to act against those laws,"
is on account of the penalties. If there is not moral good in this good,
and spiritual good within that, then it is no other than the animal good
in which beasts are, when kept shut up or chained, towards those who
feed, punish, or caress them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

A man learns these goods in early childhood from the Decalogue. The laws
of the Decalogue are first made civil laws, next moral laws, and at
length spiritual laws; and then first the goods become goods of charity,
in accordance with these degrees.

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

Charity itself regards the good of a man's soul first, and loves it as
being that by which conjunction is effected. Next, it regards his moral
good, and loves that in so far as he lives morally, in accordance with
the state of perfection of his reason. And lastly it regards the civil
good, in accordance with which a man has his standing in the world.
Through his civil good a man is a man of the world; in accordance with
his moral good he is a man above the worldly man and lower than the
heavenly; but in accordance with his spiritual good he is a man of
heaven, or an angel. The associating of men together is effected through
this good, and then, according to these degrees, through the goods of
the lower degrees. For example: There is the spiritual man who wishes
well and does not understand well; and a man who does not understand
well does not do well, so that he is scarcely a rational moral man.
There is the man who understands well and does not wish well. He is the
neighbour according to the understanding. But a man who does not wish
well, however well he understands, is not the neighbour.

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

In a word, the will makes the neighbour, and the understanding in so far
as it is of the will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

5\. The good of the internal will is the neighbour to be loved, and not
the good of the external will, unless this makes one with it. There is
an internal will and an external will; likewise an internal and an
external understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

The internal will has conjunction with heaven, and the external will
with the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

Every good is of the will; and the good-of-charity itself is the good of
the internal will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

It is customary for these to be separated with man; and they are
separated to the greatest extent with hypocrites, pretenders, and
flatterers for the sake of gain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

But when those wills make a one, then both the goods make one good,
which is the neighbour. These things to be illustrated by means of
examples, and comparisons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

6\. Truth is the neighbour in so far as it makes one with good, and it
makes one with it as a form makes one with its essence. Every form
derives its own \[character\] from an essence; therefore, such as the
essence is, such is the form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

This can be illustrated by the fact that the understanding, regarded in
itself, is such as the will is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

It can be illustrated by sound and speech. And by several other things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

That truth is good in form, may be seen in THE APOCALYPSE
EXPLAINED. <span id="fr_11"></span>[70-1](#fn_11)

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

From this it is evident that, in a spiritual idea, good is the neighbour
to be loved; or a man according to his good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

IV THE OBJECT OF CHARITY IS A MAN, ALSO A SOCIETY, ALSO ONE'S COUNTRY,
ALSO THE HUMAN RACE; AND ALL ARE THE NEIGHBOUR IN A NARROW AND IN A WIDE
SENSE. That a man is the neighbour is well known. A society is the
neighbour because a society is a composite man; one's country is the
neighbour because it consists of many societies, and so is a more
composite man; and the human race is the neighbour because it is
composed of large societies, each one of which is a man in composite
form, hence it is a man in the widest sense. Let these things be
explained in this order: (1) Every individual man is the neighbour
according to the quality of his good. (2) A society, small or large, is
the neighbour according to the good of its use. (3) One's country is the
neighbour according to its spiritual, moral, and civil good. (4) The
human race is the neighbour in the widest sense; but, because it is
distinguished into empires, kingdoms, and republics, any one of these is
a neighbour according to the good of its religion, and according to the
good which it performs to one's country and to itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

1\. Every individual man is the neighbour according to the quality of
his good. Since, in a spiritual idea, good is the neighbour, and a man
is the subject of good, and also the object of him who does good, it
follows that in a natural idea a man is the neighbour.

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

One man is not the neighbour more than another in respect of his person
merely, but in respect of the good from which he is such and such a man;
for there are as many differences of neighbour as there are of good, and
the differences of good are infinite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

It is supposed that a brother, a kinsman, or a relation, is more the
neighbour than a stranger; and that anyone born in one's country is the
neighbour more than one born outside it; but everyone, whether Greek or
Gentile, is the neighbour according to his good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

The neighbour indeed is what everyone is according to spiritual
relationship and kinship. This can be seen from the fact that after
death every man comes among his own, with whom he is similar in respect
of good, or, what is the same, similar in regard to affections.
Moreover, natural relationships perish after death, spiritual
relationships taking their place; for all in the same heavenly society
recognize one another, and are associated together because they are in a
similar good. Of ten brothers in the world, five may be in hell, and
five in heaven, and the latter five in different societies; and when
they meet they do not recognize one another. In fact they are, each one,
in face, their own affections. From this it is evident that every man is
the neighbour according to the quality of his good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

The goods according to the quality of which a man is the neighbour are
especially spiritual goods. Charity regards these in the first place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

2\. A society, small or large, is the neighbour according to the good of
its use. Every society in a kingdom is established in accordance with
the uses \[in that kingdom\], which are various. There are societies
whose work is to administer justly various civil affairs, which are
manifold; various judicial affairs; various affairs relating to the
structure of the state; and various ecclesiastical affairs, such as
consistories, academies, and schools. There are societies for the
advancement of knowledge, which also are several.

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

Every society can be regarded no otherwise than as a man in composite
form; for which reason it is the neighbour according to the good of use
it performs. If a society performs eminent uses, it is the neighbour to
a greater extent; if lowly uses, it is the neighbour to a lesser extent;
if evil uses, it is the neighbour no otherwise than as a wicked man is;
and the good I desire for him is that he may become good, and be
provided, so far as is possible, with the means to improve, even though
it should be by threats, corrections, penalties, or privations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

A society having one function cannot be regarded except as one composite
man. When a kingdom is regarded as a man, certain persons are called
members of the government; but among themselves they constitute one man,
whose members are the individuals therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

This is the same as in heaven. There every society, small or large, is
as one man. It is also presented to view as one man. I have seen an
eminent society as one man. The form of heaven is the human form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

So, too, a society on earth appears as one man before angels in the
heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

3\. One's country is the neighbour according to its spiritual, moral,
and civil good. In everyone's idea his country is as it were one thing;
and therefore all the laws, both those relating to justice and those
relating to the structure of the state, are framed as it were for one
man. His country, therefore, is as it were a man in compound form: it
is, besides, called a body, in which the king is in the supreme
position. Its good, which ought to be considered, is termed the public
good and the common good. It is also said of the king that the people
are in the body of his government.

<span class="margnote"><span id="84.">84.</span></span>

Indeed, when it pleases the Lord, any one kingdom is presented to view
before angels in heaven as one man, in the form, moreover, answering to
its quality. That form is the form of their spiritual affection; the
form of its face being the form of the affection of its spiritual good,
and the form of its body being the form of its civil good, while its
manners, speech, and the like, are its rational good. When one sees a
kingdom as one man, it can be seen such as it really is; and in
accordance with this it is the neighbour.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

Birth does not make anyone the neighbour more than another, not even
when it is one's mother or father; nor does education. These are
estimations from natural good. Nor does kinship nor relationship make
anyone a neighbour more than another, thus country does not either.
One's country should be loved according to the quality of its good; but
it is a duty to do good to it, and this is done by having regard for its
use, since one thus has regard for the welfare of all. It is not a duty
to do good to other kingdoms outside that one, because kingdom does not
desire the good of another, but would like to destroy it as to wealth
and power, thus also as to its protection. To love another kingdom more
than one's own, therefore, by having more regard for its use, would be
contrary to the good of the kingdom one is in; for which reason one's
country should be loved in a higher degree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

Take this example: If I had been born in Venice or Rome, and if I were a
Reformed Christian; ought my country, or where I was born, to be loved,
for its spiritual good? I cannot love it on that account, nor on account
of its moral and civil good in so far as this depends, as it does, on
its spiritual good. In so far, however, as it does not depend on this, I
can, even though that country hates me. So I must not hate an unfriendly
or hostile country, but must still love it, bringing no harm upon it,
but having regard for its good, in so far as it has good, but not having
such regard to it as to confirm it in its own falsity and evil. But more
about the love of country in another place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

4\. The human race is the neighbour in the widest sense; but, because it
is distinguished into empires, kingdoms, and republics, any one of these
is a neighbour according to the good of its religion and of its moral
qualities, and according to the good which it performs to one's country,
and which makes one with its own good. These subjects are too extensive
to be separately elucidated. It is enough that, if some man or other,
from some kingdom or other, is at my house, and I am staying in the same
house as he is, or I in the same city, to me he is then the neighbour
according to his good. It is the same with all in that kingdom whom that
particular man resembles. Supposing he is an ambassador of that kingdom,
representing his king and therefore the kingdom; it cannot then be
denied that to me he is the neighbour according to the good of his
religion and of his moral qualities, and according as he wishes good to
my country and his own; especially in so far as this makes one with his
own good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

I am not speaking of any other good than the good of charity, and the
good of genuine charity. It is possible for wicked people, for robbers
and devils even, to love each other mutually, but not from charity, or
the good of interior love. But because of their joining in evil-doing,
stealing, whoring, taking revenge, killing, and blaspheming, they are
neighbours among themselves. These are not meant, however, because
charity and its good are treated of here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

I can love all in the universe according to their religion, not more so
those in my native land than those in other kingdoms, nor those in
Europe more than those in Africa. I love a Gentile in preference to a
Christian, if he lives well according to his religion, if he worships
God from the heart, saying, "I will not do this evil because it is
against God." I do not love him on account of his doctrine however, but
on account of his life; since if I love him on account of his doctrine
only, I am loving him as an external man, while if I love him on account
of his life, I am loving him as an internal man. For if he has the good
of religion, he also has moral good, and civil good as well. They cannot
be separated. But he who is only in doctrine cannot have religion. And
so his moral and civil good does not have life in it. It is merely
external. It wants to be seen, and to be thought to exist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

V MAN IS THE SUBJECT OF CHARITY, AND SUCH AS IS THE CHARITY WITH HIM
SUCH A SUBJECT OF IT HE IS; AND SUCH IS THE CHARITY HE EXERCISES TOWARDS
THE NEIGHBOUR. <span id="fr_12"></span>[90-1](#fn_12) Let these things
be explained in this order: (1) Man was created to be a form of love and
wisdom. (2) At this day, for a man to be man, he ought to be a charity
in form. (3) A man ought to be a charity in form, not from himself but
from the Lord; thus he is a receptacle of charity. (4) A man is a form
of charity of such a quality as, with him, good of the will is conjoined
to truths of the understanding. (5) Whatever proceeds from such a man
derives from that form that it is a likeness of it; thus it is charity.
(6) The neighbour can be loved from what is not charity; and yet this,
regarded in itself, is not loving the neighbour. (7) He is loving the
neighbour, who loves him from the charity in himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

1\. Man was created to be a form of love wisdom. He was created into the
image of God, into the likeness of God; <span
id="fr_13"></span>[91-1](#fn_13) and God is Love Itself and Wisdom
Itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

It is well known that such as a man is by virtue of wisdom, such is the
man; but the life of wisdom is love, and love is the essence, and wisdom
is the form of love, as is shown in many places in ANGELIC WISDOM
CONCERNING THE DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM, to which it is not necessary to
add more here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

2\. At this day, for a man to be man, he ought to be a charity in form.
It is said, at this day, because, in the process of time since the first
creation, man has become external. For from love to the Lord he has
turned away to wisdom. He has eaten of the tree of knowledge, and eaten
of wisdom; and internal love is turned into exterior love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

The third heaven, which is from the first men, is in love and wisdom;
whereas the second heaven is from the lower love called charity, and
from the wisdom called intelligence. And at length, when man has become
altogether external, then his love is called charity, and his wisdom,
faith. Such is the state of the Church with men at this day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

With some there is spiritual love, but not celestial love, and spiritual
love is charity; but with them then faith is the truth, and the truth
makes the understanding or intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

By a charity in form is meant that the man's life is a charity, and the
form is from his life; but how this is will be told in what follows in
the fourth article.

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

In heaven an angel appears in form as a charity. The quality of the
charity is apparent from the face and is heard from the voice, a man
after death becoming his own love, that is, the affection of his own
love. Neither spirit nor angel is anything else; indeed, the form of his
charity is in fact the spirit or angel himself in respect of his whole
body. By some an angel was seen, and they discerned the form of his
charity in each of his members, which is marvellous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

In the world a man is not a charity in respect of his form, in face,
body, or voice, but his mind may be; and after death his mind is a
spirit in human form. Nevertheless, a sincere man, who thinks nothing
contrary to charity, can be known from his face and voice; with
difficulty however, because there exist such hypocrites as are able to
imitate to the life, and even to put on, the sincerity of charity. But
if an angel looks at his face and hears his voice, he recognizes what he
is, not seeing the material covering that is over it, to which, however,
a material man pays attention.

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

The forms of charity are innumerable, as many as the angels of the
second heaven. In number they are unlimited. The varieties of charity
are as many as the varieties of the affection of truth from good; and
this affection is charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

He who is not a form of charity is a form of hatred, or he who is not a
form of the affection of truth from good, is a form of the affection of
falsity from evil. It is of such that hell consists: they are all
varieties of hatred and of lusting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[53-1](cha02.htm#fr_9) In the margin: "N.B."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[54-1](cha02.htm#fr_10) In the margin: "N.B."

<span id="fn_11"></span>[70-1](cha02.htm#fr_11) See nos. 136, 242:2,
478:2, 725:4.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[90-1](cha02.htm#fr_12) In the MS. this heading
has been deleted. Cf. 4a in the "Order and Arrangement" in number 0, and
V in "The sections in their series" in number 199.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[91-1](cha02.htm#fr_13) Genesis i. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](cha03)
