[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Sacred texts](../../index)  [Thelema](../index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER V The Formula of I.A.O.

This formula is the principal and most characteristic formula of Osiris,
of the Redemption of Mankind. "I" is Isis, Nature, ruined by "A",
Apophis the Destroyer, and restored to life by the Redeemer Osiris.

> *There is a quite different formula in which I is the father, O the
> Mother, A the child --- and yet another, in which I.A.O. are all
> fathers of different kinds balanced by H.H.H., 3 Mothers, to complete
> the Universe. In a third, the true formula of the Beast 666, I and O
> are the opposites which form the field for the operation of A. But
> this is a higher matter unsuited for this elementary handbook. See,
> however, Liber Samekh, Point II, Section J.*

The same idea is expressed by the Rosicrucian formula of the Trinity:

"Ex Deo nascimur. In Jesu Morimur

Per Spiritum Sanctum reviviscimus."

This is also identical with the Word Lux, L.V.X., which is formed by the
arms of a cross. It is this formula which is implied in those ancient
and modern monuments in which the phallus is worshipped as the Saviour
of the World.

The doctrine of resurrection as vulgarly understood is false and absurd.
It is not even "Scriptural". St. Paul does not identify the glorified
body which rises with the mortal body which dies. On the contrary, he
repeatedly insists on the distinction.

The same is true of a magical ceremony. The magician who is destroyed by
absorption in the Godhead is really destroyed. The miserable mortal
automaton remains in the Circle. It is of no more consequence to Him
that the dust of the floor.

> *It is, for all that, His instrument, acquired by Him as an astronomer
> buys a telescope. See Liber Aleph, for a full explanation of the
> objects attained by the stratagem of incarnation; also Part IV of this
> Book 4.*

But before entering into the details of "I.A.O." as a magick formula it
should be remarked that it is essentially the formula of Yoga or
meditation; in fact, of elementary mysticism in all its branches.

In beginning a meditation practice, there is always

> *If not, one is not working properly.*

a quiet pleasure, a gentle natural growth; one takes a lively interest
in the work; it seems easy; one is quite pleased to have started. This
stage represents Isis. Sooner or later it is succeeded by depression ---
the Dark Night of the Soul, an infinite weariness and detestation of the
work. The simplest and easiest acts become almost impossible to perform.
Such impotence fills the mind with apprehension and despair. The
intensity of this loathing can hardly be understood by any person who
has not experienced it. This is the period of Apophis.

It is followed by the arising not of Isis, but of Osiris. The ancient
condition is not restored, but a new and superior condition is created,
a condition only rendered possible by the process of death.

The Alchemists themselves taught this same truth. The first matter of
the work was base and primitive, though "natural". After passing through
various stages the "black dragon" appeared; but from this arose the pure
and perfect gold.

Even in the legend of Prometheus we find an identical formula concealed;
and a similar remark applies to those of Jesus Christ, and of many other
mythical god-men worshipped in different countries.

> *See J.G.Frazer, "The Golden Bough:" J.M.Robertson "Pagan Christs;" A.
> Crowley "Jesus," etc., etc.*

A magical ceremony constructed on this formula is thus in close
essential harmony with the natural mystic process. We find it the basis
of many important initiations, notably the Third Degree in Masonry, and
the 5 Degree = 6Square ceremony of the G.'. D.'. described in Equinox I,
III. A ceremonial self-initiation may be constructed with advantage on
this formula. The essence of it consists in robing yourself as a king,
then stripping and slaying yourself, and rising from that death to the
Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel

> *This formula, although now superseded by that of HORUS, the Crowned
> and Conquering Child, remains valid for those who have not yet
> assimilated the point of view of the Law of Thelema. But see Appendix,
> Liber SAMEKH. Compare also "The Book of the Spirit of the Living
> Gods," -- where there is a ritual given "in extenso" on slightly
> different lines: Equinox I, III, pages 269-272.*

. There is an etymological identity between Tetragrammaton and "I A O",
but the magical formulae are entirely different, as the descriptions
here given have schewn.

Professor William James, in his "Varieties of Religious Experience," has
well classified religion as the "once-born" and the "twice-born"; but
the religion now proclaimed in Liber Legis harmonizes these by
transcending them. There is no attempt to get rid of death by denying
it, as among the once-born; nor to accept death as the gate of a new
life, as among the twice-born. With the A.'. A.'. life and death are
equally incidents in a career, very much like day and night in the
history of a planet. But, to pursue the simile, we regard this planet
from afar. A Brother of A.'. A.'. looks at (what another person would
call) "himself", as one --- or, rather, some --- among a group of
phenomena. He is that "nothing" whose consciousness is in one sense the
universe considered as a single phenomenon in time and space, and in
another sense is the negation of that consciousness. The body and mind
of the man are only important (if at all) as the telescope of the
astronomer to him. If the telescope were destroyed it would make no
appreciable difference to the Universe which that telescope reveals.

It will now be understood that this formula of I A O is a formula of
Tiphareth. The magician who employs it is conscious of himself as a man
liable to suffering, and anxious to transcend that state by becoming one
with god. It will appear to him as the Supreme Ritual, as the final
step; but, as has already been pointed out, it is but a preliminary. For
the normal man today, however, it represents considerable attainment;
and there is a much earlier formula whose investigation will occupy
Chapter VI.

THE MASTER THERION, in the Seventeenth year of the Aeon, has
reconstructed the Word I A O to satisfy the new conditions of Magick
imposed by progress. The Word of the Law being Thelema, whose number is
93, this number should be the canon of a corresponding Mass.
Accordingly, he has expanded I A O by treating the O as an Ayin, and
then adding Vau as prefix and affix. The full word is then

Vau Yod Aleph Ayin Vau

whose number is 93. We may analyse this new Word in detail and
demonstrate that it is a proper hieroglyph of the Ritual of
Self-Initiation in this Aeon of Horus. For the correspondence in the
following note, see Liber 777. The principal points are these:

    --------------.---.-------------.---.--------------.------------------------
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
         Atu      :No.:   Hebrew    :No.:Correspondence:          Other         
                  :of :             :of :              :                        
    (Tarot Trump) :Atu:  letters    :let:  in Nature   :       Correspondences  
                  :   :             :ter:              :                        
    --------------+---+-------------+---+--------------+------------------------
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
    The Hiero-    : V :Vau (a nail) : 6 :Taurus   (An  :The Sun.  The son in Te-
      phant. (Osi-:   : English V,  :   :  earthy sign : tragrammaton. (See Cap.
      ris throned :   : W, or vo-   :   :  ruled by    :  III).  The  Pentagram 
      & crowned,  :   : wel between :   :  Venus; the  :  which shows Spirit    
      with Wand.  :   :  O and U-   :   :  Moon exalt- :  master & reconciler of
                  :   : ma'ajab and :   :  ed therein. :  the Four Elements.    
                  :   : ma'aruf.    :   :  but male.)  :                        
    Four  Wor-    :   :             :   :  Liberty,i.e.:The Hexagram which un-  
      shippers;the:   :             :   :  free will.  :  God and Man. The cons-
      four ele-   :   :             :   :              :  sciousness or Ruach.  
      ments.      :   :             :   :              :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :Parzival as the Child in
                  :   :             :   :              :  his widowed mother's  
                  :   :             :   :              :  care:  Horus, son of  
                  :   :             :   :              :  Isis and the slain    
                  :   :             :   :              :  Osiris.               
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :Parzival as King &      
                  :   :             :   :              : Priest in Montsalvat  
                  :   :             :   :              : performing the mir-   
                  :   :             :   :              : acle of redemption;   
                  :   :             :   :              : Horus crowned and     
                  :   :             :   :              : conquering, taking the
                  :   :             :   :              : place of his father.  
                  :   :             :   :              :                       
                  :   :             :   :              :Christ-Bacchus in Hea-  
                  :   :             :   :              :  ven-Olympus saving the
                  :   :             :   :              :  world.                
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
    The Hermit    :IX :Yod (a hand) : 10:Virgo (an     :The root of the Alphabet
      (Hermes     :   :  English I  :   :  earthy sign : The Spermatozoon.  The
      with Lamp,  :   :  or Y.      :   :  ruled by    : youth setting out on  
      Wings,      :   :             :   :  Mercury     : his adventures after  
      Wand,       :   :             :   :  exalted     : receiving the Wand.   
      Cloak, and  :   :             :   :  therein;    : Parzival in the desert
      Serpent).   :   :             :   :  sexually    : Christ taking refuge  
                  :   :             :   :  ambivalent) : in Egypt, and on      
                  :   :             :   :  Light, i.e. : the Mount tempted by  
                  :   :             :   :  of Wisdom,  : the Devil.  The uncon-
                  :   :             :   :  the Inmost. : scious Will, or Word. 
    --------------+---+-------------+---+--------------+------------------------
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :                        
    The Fool      : O :Aleph (an ox): 1 :Air (The con- :The free breath.  The   
      (The Babe   :   : English A,  :   :  dition of   :  Svastika. The Holy    
      in the Egg  :   : more or     :   :  all Life,   :  Ghost.  The Virgin's  
      on the Lo-  :   : less        :   :  the impar-  :  Womb.  Parzial as "der
      tus, Bacchus:   :             :   :  tial vehicle:  reine Thor" who knows 
      Diphues,    :   :             :   :  Sexually    :  nothing.  Horus.      
      etc.        :   :             :   : undevelop-   :  Christ-Bacchus as the 
                  :   :             :   : ed). Life;   :  innocent babe, pursued
                  :   :             :   : i.e. the     :  by Herod-Here.        
                  :   :             :   : organ of     :  Hercules strangling   
                  :   :             :   : possible     :  the serpents. The     
                  :   :             :   : expression.  :  Unconscious Self not  
                  :   :             :   :              :  yet determined in any 
                  :   :             :   :              : direction.             
                  :   :             :   :              :                         
                  :   :             :   :              :                         
    The Devil     :XV :Ayin (an     : 70:Capricornus   :Parzival in Black Armour,
      (Baphomet   :   :  eye)  En-  :   :  (an earthy  :  ready to return to    
      throned &   :   :  glish A, or:   :  sign ruled  :  Montsalvat as Redeemer-
      adored by   :   :  O more or  :   :  by Saturn;  :  King:  Horus come to  
      Male & Fe-  :   :  less:  the :   :  Mars exalt- :  full growth. Christ- 
      male.  See  :   :  bleat of a :   :  ed therein. :  Bacchus with Calvary- 
      Eliphas     :   :  goat, A'a. :   :  Sexually    :  Cross Kithairon ---   
      Levi's de-  :   :             :   :  male)       : Thyrsus.              
      sign.)      :   :             :   :  love: i.e.  :                       
                  :   :             :   :  the instinct:                        
                  :   :             :   :  to satisfy  :                        
                  :   :             :   :  Godhead by  :                        
                  :   :             :   :  uniting it  :                        
                  :   :             :   :  with the    :                        
                  :   :             :   : Universe.    :                        
                  :   :             :   :              :                        

Iota-Alpha-Digamma varies in significance with successive Aeons.

"Aeon of Isis." Matriarchal Age. The Great Work conceived as a
straightforward simple affair. We find the theory reflected in the
customs of Matriarchy. Parthenogenesis is supposed to be true. The
Virgin (Yod-Virgo) contains in herself the Principle of Growth --- the
epicene Hermetic seed. It becomes the Babe in the Egg (A ---
Harpocrates) by virtue of the Spirit (A = Air, impregnating the
Mother---Vulture) and this becomes the Sun or Son ( Digamma = the letter
of Tiphareth, 6, even when spelt as Omega, in Coptic. See 777).

"Aeon of Osiris." Patriarchal age. Two sexes. I conceived as the
Father-Wand. (Yod in Tetragrammaton). A the Babe is pursued by the
Dragon, who casts a flood from his mouth to swallow it. See "Rev." VII.
The Dragon is also the Mother --- the "Evil Mother" of Freud. It is
Harpocrates, threatened by the crocodile in the Nile. We find the
symbolism of the Ark, the Coffin of Osiris, etc. The Lotus is the Yoni;
the Water the Amniotic Fluid. In order to live his own life, the child
must leave the Mother, and overcome the temptation to return to her for
refuge. Kundry, Armida, Jocasta, Circe, etc., are symbols of this force
which tempts the Hero. He may take her as his servant

> *Her sole speech in the last Act is "Dienen: Dienen".*

when he has mastered her, so as to heal his father (Amfortas), avenge
him (Osiris), or pacify him (Jehovah). But in order to grow to manhood,
he must cease to depend on her, earning the Lance (Parzival), claiming
his arms (Achilles), or making his club (Hercules)

> *Note that all these three remain for a time as neuters among woman,
> prevented from living the male life.*

, and wander in the waterless wilderness like Krishna, Jesus, Oedipus,
chi. tau. lambda. --- until the hour when, as the "King's Son" or
knight-errant, he must win the Princess, and set himself upon a strange
throne. Almost all the legends of heroes imply this formula in
strikingly similar symbols. Digamma. Vau the Sun --- Son. He is supposed
to be mortal; but how is this shewn? It seems an absolute perversion of
truth: the sacred symbols have no hint of it. This lie is the essence of
the Great Sorcery. Osirian religion is a Freudian phantasy fashioned of
man's dread of death and ignorance of nature. The parthenogenesis-idea
persists, but is now the formula for incarnating demi-gods, or divine
kings; these must be slain and raised from the dead in one way or
another.

> *All these ideas may be explained by reference to anthropology. But
> this is not their condemnation, but their justification; for the
> customs and legends of mankind reflect the true nature of the
> species.*

"Aeon of Horus." Two sexes in one person.

Digamma Iota Alpha Omicron Digamma: 93, the full formula, recognizing
the Sun as the Son (Star), as the pre-existent manifested Unit from
which all springs and to which all returns. The Great Work is to make
the initial Digamma Digamma of Assiah (The world of material illusion)
into the final Digamma Iota Digamma of Atziluth,

> *For these spellings see 777.*

the world of pure reality.

Spelling the Name in full, Digamma Digamma + Iota Digamma Delta + Alpha
Lambda Pi + Omicron Iota Nu + Digamma Iota = 309 = Sh T = XX + XI = 31
the secret Key of the Law.

Digamma is the manifested Star. Iota is the secret Life ..............
Serpent

--- Light ............. Lamp

--- Love .............. Wand

--- Liberty ........... Wings

--- Silence ........... Cloak

These symbols are all shewn in the Atu "The Hermit".

They are the powers of the Yod, whose extension is the Vau.

Yod is the Hand wherewith man does his Will. It is also

The Virgin; his essence is inviolate.

Alpha is the Babe "who has formulated his Father, and made fertile

his Mother" --- Harpocrates, etc., as before; but he develops

to

Omicron The exalted "Devil" (also the "other" secret Eye) by the

formula of the Initiation of Horus elsewhere described in

detail. This "Devil" is called Satan or Shaitan, and regarded with
horror by people who are ignorant of his formula, and, imagining
themselves to be evil, accuse Nature herself of their own phantasmal
crime. Satan is Saturn, Set, Abrasax, Adad, Adonis, Attis, Adam, Adonai,
etc. The most serious charge against him is that he is the Sun in the
South. The Ancient Initiates, dwelling as they did in lands whose blood
was the water of the Nile or the Euphrates, connected the South with
life-withering heat, and cursed that quarter where the solar darts were
deadliest. Even in the legend of Hiram, it is at high noon that he is
stricken down and slain. Capricornus is moreover the sign which the sun
enterers when he reaches his extreme Southern declination at the Winter
Solstice, the season of the death of vegetation, for the folk of the
Northern hemisphere. This gave them a second cause for cursing the
south. A third; the tyranny of hot, dry, poisonous winds; the menace of
deserts or oceans dreadful because mysterious and impassable; these also
were connected in their minds with the South. But to us, aware of
astronomical facts, this antagonism to the South is a silly superstition
which the accidents of their local conditions suggested to our animistic
ancestors. We see no enmity between Right and Left, Up and Down, and
similar pairs of opposites. These antitheses are real only as a
statement of relation; they are the conventions of an arbitrary device
for representing our ideas in a pluralistic symbolism based on duality.
"Good" must be defined in terms of human ideals and instincts. "East"
has no meaning except with reference to the earth's internal affairs; as
an absolute direction in space it changes a degree every four minutes.
"Up" is the same for no two men, unless one chance to be in the line
joining the other with the centre of the earth. "Hard" is the private
opinion of our muscles. "True" is an utterly unintelligible epithet
which has proved refractory to the analysis of our ablest philosophers.

We have therefore no scruple in restoring the "devil-worship" of such
ideas as those which the laws of sound, and the phenomena of speech and
hearing, compel us to connect with the group of "Gods" whose names are
based upon Sht, or D, vocalized by the free breath A. For these Names
imply the qualities of courage, frankness, energy, pride, power and
triumph; they are the words which express the creative and paternal
will.

Thus "the Devil" is Capricornus, the Goat who leaps upon the loftiest
mountains, the Godhead which, if it become manifest in man, makes him
Aegipan, the All.

The Sun enters this sign when he turns to renew the year in the North.
He is also the vowel O, proper to roar, to boom, and to command, being a
forcible breath controlled by the firm circle of the mouth.

He is the Open Eye of the exalted Sun, before whom all shadows flee
away: also that Secret Eye which makes an image of its God, the Light,
and gives it power to utter oracles, enlightening the mind.

Thus, he is Man made God, exalted, eager; he has come consciously to his
full stature, and so is ready to set out on his journey to redeem the
world. But he may not appear in this true form; the Vision of Pan would
drive men mad with fear. He must conceal Himself in his original guise.

He therefore becomes apparently the man that he was at the beginning; he
lives the life of a man; indeed, he is wholly man. But his initiation
has made him master of the Event by giving him the understanding that
whatever happens to him is the execution of this true will. Thus the
last stage of his initiation is expressed in our formula as the final:

Digamma --- The series of transformations has not affected his identity;
but it has explained him to himself. Similarly, Copper is still Copper
after

Cu+O = CuO:+H SO =CuS O(H O):+K S=CuS(K SO ):

2 4 4 2 2 2 4 + blowpipe and reducing agent = Cu(S).

It is the same copper, but we have learnt some of its properties. We
observe especially that it is indestructible, inviolably itself
throughout all its adventures, and in all its disguises. We see moreover
that it can only make use of its powers, fulfill the possibilities of
its nature, and satisfy its equations, by thus combining with its
counterparts. Its existence as a separate substance is evidence of its
subjection to stress; and this is felt as the ache of an
incomprehensible yearning until it realises that every experience is a
relief, an expression of itself; and that it cannot be injured by aught
that may befall it. In the Aeon of Osiris it was indeed realised that
Man must die in order to live. But now in the Aeon of Horus we know that
every event is a death; subject and object slay each other in "love
under will"; each such death is itself life, the means by which one
realises oneself in a series of episodes.

The second main point is the completion of the A babe Bacchus by the O
Pan (Parzival wins the Lance, etc.).

The first process is to find the I in the V --- initiation,
purification, finding the Secret Root of oneself, the epicene Virgin who
is 10 (Malkuth) but spelt in full 20 (Jupiter).

This Yod in the "Virgin" expands to the Babe in the Egg by formulating
the Secret Wisdom of Truth of Hermes in the Silence of the Fool. He
acquires the Eye-Wand, beholding the acting and being adored. The
Inverted Pentagram --- Baphomet --- the Hermaphrodite fully grown ---
begets himself on himself as V again.

Note that there are now two sexes in one person throughout, so that each
individual is self-procreative sexually, whereas Isis knew only one sex,
and Osiris thought the two sexes opposed. Also the formula is now Love
in all cases; and the end is the beginning, on a higher plane.

The I is formed from the V by removing its tail, the A by balancing 4
Yods, the O by making an inverted triangle of Yods, which suggests the
formula of Nuit --- Hadit --- Ra-Hoor-Khuit. A is the elements whirling
as a Svastika --- the creative Energy in equilibrated action.
