[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m15038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXXIX

"Narada said, 'The king has not been burnt to death by an unsanctified
fire. I have heard this there. I tell thee, O Bharata, such has not been
the fate of Vichitraviryya. It has been heard by us that when the old
king endued with great intelligence and subsisting on air alone entered
the woods (after his return from Gangadwara), he caused his sacrificial
fires to be duly ignited. Having performed his sacred rites therewith,
he abandoned them all. Then the Yajaka Brahmanas he had with him cast
off those fires in a solitary part of the woods and went away as they
liked on other errands, O foremost one of Bharata's race. The fire thus
cast off grew in the woods. It then produced a general conflagration in
the forest. Even this is what I have heard from the ascetics dwelling on
the banks of Ganga. United with that (sacred) fire of his own, O chief
of the Bharatas, the king, as I have already said unto thee, met with
death on the banks of Ganga. O sinless one, this is what the ascetics
have told me,--those, *viz.*, whom I saw on the banks of the sacred
Bhagirathi, O Yudhishthira. Thus O lord of Earth, king Dhritarashtra,
coming into contact with his own sacred fire, departed from this world
and attained to that high goal that has been his. Through service
rendered by her to her seniors, thy mother, O lord of men, has attained
to very great success. There is not the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

slightest doubt of this. It behoveth thee, O king of kings, to now
discharge the rites of water to their honour, with all thy brothers.
Let, therefore, the necessary steps be taken towards that end.'

"Vaisampayana continued,--'Then that lord of Earth, that foremost of
men, that upholder of the burthens of the Pandavas, went out,
accompanied by all his brothers as well as the ladies of his household.
The inhabitants of the city as also those of the provinces, impelled by
their loyalty, also went out. They all proceeded towards the banks of
Ganga, every one clad in only single peace of raiment. Then all those
foremost of men, having plunged into the stream, placed Yuyutsu at their
head, and began to offer oblations of water unto the high-souled king.
And they also gave similar oblations unto Gandhari and Pritha, naming
each separately and mentioning their families. Having finished those
rites that cleanse the living, they came back but without entering their
capital took up their residence outside of it. They also despatched a
number of trusted people well conversant with the ordinances relating to
the cremation of the dead, to Gangadwara where the old king had been
burnt to death. The king, having rewarded those men beforehand,
commanded them to accomplish those rites of cremation which the bodies
of Dhritarashtra and Gandhari and Kunti still awaited. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) On twelfth day, the king, properly
purified, duly performed the *Sraddhas* of his deceased relations, which
were characterised by gifts in abundance. Referring to Dhritarashtra,
Yudhishthira made many gifts of gold and silver, of kine and costly
beds. Uttering the names of Gandhari and Pritha, the king, endued with
great energy, made many excellent gifts. Every man received what thing
he wished and as much of it as he wished. Beds and food, and cars and
conveyances, and jewels and gems, and other wealth were given away in
profusion. Indeed, the king referring to his two mothers, gave away cars
and conveyances, robes and coverlets, various kinds of food, and female
slaves adorned with diverse ornaments. Having thus made many kinds of
gifts in profusion, that lord of Earth then entered his capital called
after the elephant. Those men who had gone to the banks of Ganga at the
command of the king, having disposed of (by cremation) the remains of
the king and two queens, returned to the city. Having duly honoured
those remains with garlands and scents of diverse kinds and disposed of
them, they informed Yudhishthira of the accomplishment of their task.
The great Rishi Narada, having comforted king Yudhishthira of righteous
soul, went away to where he liked. Even thus did king Dhritarashtra make
his exit from this world after having passed three years in the forest
and ten and five years in the city. Having lost all his children in
battle, he had many gifts in honour of his kinsmen, relatives, and
friends, his brethren and own people. King Yudhishthira after the death
of his uncle, became very cheerless. Deprived of his kinsmen and
relatives, he somehow bore the burthen of sovereignty.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

One should listen with rapt attention to this Asramavasika Parvan, and
having heard it recited, one should feed Brahmanas with Habishya,
honouring them with scents and garlands."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62:1](m15039.htm#fr_61) The verb *anvacat* from
root *sas* can govern two objectives. Here the two objectives are
*purushan* and *krityani*.

*The end of Asramavasika Parvan*.
