[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m15016) 
[Next](m15018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### SECTION XVII

"Kunti said, 'It is even so, O mighty-armed son of Pandu, as thou
sayest. Ye kings, formerly when ye were cheerless, it was even in this
way that I excited you all. Yes, seeing that your kingdom was wrested
from you by a match at dice, seeing that you all fell from happiness,
seeing that you were domineered over by kinsmen, I instilled courage and
high thoughts into your minds. Ye foremost of men, I encouraged you in
order that they that were the sons of Pandu might not be lost, in order
that their fame might not be lost. You are all equal to Indra. Your
prowess resembles that of the very gods. In order that you might not
live, watching the faces of others, I acted in that way. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) I instilled courage into thy heart in
order that thou who art the foremost of all righteous persons, who art
equal to Vasava, might not again go into the woods and live in misery. I
instilled courage into your hearts in order that this Bhima who is
possessed of the strength of ten thousand elephants and whose prowess
and manliness are widely known, might not sink into insignificance and
ruin. I instilled courage into your hearts in order that this Vijaya,
who was born after Bhimasena, and who is equal unto Vasava himself might
not be cheerless. I instilled courage into your hearts in order that
Nakula and Sahadeva, who are always devoted to their seniors, might not
be weakened and rendered cheerless by hunger. I acted in that way in
order that this lady of well-developed proportions and of large
expansive eyes might not endure the wrongs inflicted on her in the
public hall without being avenged. In the very sight of you all, O
Bhima, Dussasana, through folly, dragged her trembling all over like a
plantain plant, during the period of her functional illness, and after
she had been won at dice, as if she were a slave. All this was known to
me. Indeed, the race of Pandu had been subjugated (by foes). The Kurus,
*viz.*, my father-in-law and others, were cheerless when she, desirous
of a protector, uttered loud lamentations like a she-osprey. When she
was dragged by her fair locks by the sinful Dussasana with little
intelligence, I was deprived of my senses, O king. Know, that for
enhancing your energy, I instilled that courage into your hearts by
reciting the words of Vidula, O my sons. I instilled courage into your
hearts, O my sons, in order that the race of Pandu, represented by my
children, might not be lost. The sons and grandsons of that person who
brings a race to infamy never succeed in attaining to the regions of the
righteous. Verily, the ancestors of the Kaurava race were in danger of
losing those regions of felicity which had become theirs. As regards
myself, O my sons, I, before this, enjoyed the great fruits of that
sovereignty which my husband had acquired. I made large gifts. I duly
drank the Soma juice in sacrifice. <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34)
It was not for my own sake that I had urged Vasudeva with the stirring
words of Vidula. It was

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

for your sake that I had called upon you to follow that advice. O my
sons, I do not desire the fruits of that sovereignty which has been won
by my children. O thou of great puissance, I wish to attain, by my
penances, to those regions of felicity which have been acquired by my
husband. By rendering obedient service to my father-in-law and
mother-in-law both of whom wish to take up their abode in the woods, and
by penances, I desire, O Yudhishthira, to waste my body. Do thou cease
to follow me, O foremost one of Kuru's race, along with Bhima and
others. Let thy understanding be always devoted to righteousness. Let
thy mind be always great.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[28:1](m15017.htm#fr_33) To live watching the
faces of others is to live in [dependence](errata.htm#2) on others.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[28:2](m15017.htm#fr_34) It has been pointed out
before that *mahadana* means gifts of such things as elephants, horses,
cars and other vehicles, boats, etc. The giver wins great merit by
making them, but the receiver incurs demerit by acceptance, unless he
happens to be a person of exceptional energy. To this day, acceptors of
such gifts are looked upon as fallen men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XVIII](m15018)
