[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m15013) 
[Next](m15015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### SECTION XIV

"Vaisampayana said,--'Thus addressed by Vidura, king Dhritarashtra
became highly pleased, O monarch, with the act of Yudhishthira and
Jishnu. Inviting then, after proper examination, thousands of deserving
Brahmanas and superior Rishis, for the sake of Bhishma, as also of his
sons and friends, and causing a large quantity of food and drink to be
prepared, and cars and other vehicles and clothes, and gold and jewels
and gems, and slaves both male and female, and goats and sheep, and
blankets and costly articles to be collected, and villages and fields,
and other kines of wealth to be kept ready, as also elephants and steeds
decked with ornaments, and many beautiful maidens who were the best of
their sex, that foremost of kings gave them away for the advancement of
the dead, naming each of them in due order as the gifts were made.
Naming Drona, and Bhishma, and Somadatta, and Valhika, and king
Duryodhana, and each one of his other sons, and all his well-wishers
with Jayadratha numbering first, those gifts were made in due order.
With the approval of Yudhishthira, that Sraddha-sacrifice became
characterised by large gifts of wealth and profuse presents of jewels
and gems and other kinds of treasure. Tellers and scribes on that
occasion, under the orders of Yudhishthira, ceaselessly asked the old
king.--Do thou command, O monarch, what gifts should be made to these.
All things are ready here.--As soon as the king spoke, they gave away
what he directed. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) Unto him that was
to receive a hundred, a thousand was given, and unto him that was to
receive a thousand was given ten thousand, at the command of the royal
son of Kunti. <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30) Like the, clouds
vivifying the crops with their downpours, that royal cloud gratified the
Brahmanas by downpours of wealth. After all those gifts had been
distributed, the king, O thou of great intelligence, then deluged the
assembled guests of all the four orders with repeated surges of food and
drink of diverge tastes. Verily, the Dhritarashtra-ocean, swelling high,
with jewels and gems for its waters, rich with the villages and fields
and other foremost of gifts constituting its verdant islands, heaps of
diverse kinds of precious articles for its rich caves, elephants and
steeds for its alligators and whirlpools, the sound of Mridangas for its
deep roars, and clothes and wealth and precious stories for its waves,
deluged the Earth. It was even in this way, O king, that that monarch
made gifts for the advancement in the other world of his sons and
[grandsons](errata.htm#1) and Pitris as also of himself and Gandhari. At
last when he became tired with the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

task of making gifts in such profusion, that great Gift-sacrifice carne
to an end. Even thus did that king of Kuru's race perform his
Gift-sacrifice. Actors and mimes continually danced and sang on the
occasion and contributed to the merriment of all the guests. Food and
drink of diverse tastes were given away in large quantities. Making
gifts in this way for ten days, the royal son of Amvika, O chief of
Bharata's race, became freed from the debts he owed to his sons and
grandsons."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[24:1](m15014.htm#fr_29) The usual way in which
gifts are made at the present day on occasions of Sraddhas and marriages
or other auspicious rites very nearly resembles what is described here.
Instead of dedicating each gift with *mantras* and water and making it
over to the receiver, all the articles in a heap are dedicated with the
aid of *mantras*. The guests are then assembled, and are called up
individually. The *Adhyaksha* or superintendent, according to a list
prepared, names the gifts to be made to the guest called up. The tellers
actually make them over, the scribes noting them down.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[24:2](m15014.htm#fr_30) Each gift that was
indicated by Dhritarashtra was multiplied ten times at the command of
Yudhishthira.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XV](m15015)
