[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m15027) 
[Next](m15029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION XXVIII

"Vaisampayana said, 'After the high-souled Pandavas had all been seated,
Satyavati's son Vyasa said,--O Dhritarashtra of mighty arms, hast thou
been able to achieve penances? Is thy mind, O king, pleased with thy
residence in the woods? Has the grief that was thine, born of the
slaughter of thy sons

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

in battle, disappeared from thy heart? Are all thy perceptions, O
sinless one, now clear? Dost thou practise the ordinances of forest life
after having made thy heart firm? Does my daughter-in-law, Gandhari,
allow herself to be overwhelmed by grief? She is possessed of great
wisdom. Endued with intelligence, that queen understands both Religion
and Wealth. She is well conversant with the truths that relate to both
prosperity and adversity. Does she still grieve? Does Kunti, O king, who
in consequence of her devotion to the service of her seniors, left her
children, attend to thy wants and serve thee with all humility? Have the
high-minded and high-souled king, Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma and
Bhima and Arjuna and the twins been sufficiently comforted? Dost thou
feet delight at seeing them? Has thy mind become freed from every stain?
Has thy disposition, O king, become pure in consequence of the increase
of thy knowledge? This aggregate of three, O king, is the foremost of
all concerns, O Bharata, *viz.*, abstension from injury to any creature,
truth, and freedom from anger. Does thy forest life any longer prove
painful to thee? Art thou able to earn with thy own exertions the
products of the wilderness for thy food? Do fasts give thee any pain
now? Hast thou learnt, O king, how the high-souled Vidura, who was
Dharma's self, left this world? Through the curse of Mandavya, the deity
of Righteousness became born as Vidura. He was possessed of great
intelligence. Endued with high penances, he was high-souled and
high-minded. Even Vrihaspati among the celestials, and Sukra among the
Asuras, was not possessed of such intelligence as that foremost of
persons. The eternal deity of Righteousness was stupefied by the Rishi
Mandavya with an expenditure of his penances earned for a long time with
great care. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) At the command of the
Grandsire, and through my own energy, Vidura of great intelligence was
procreated by me upon a soil owned by Vichitraviryya. A deity of
deities, and eternal, he was, O king, thy brother. The learned know him
to be Dharma in consequence of his practices of Dharana and
Dhyana. <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) He grows with (the growth
of) truth, self-restraint, tranquillity of heart, compassion, and gifts.
He is always engaged in penances, and is eternal. From that deity of
Righteousness, through Yoga-puissance, the Kuru king Yudhishthira also
took his birth. Yudhishthira, therefore, O king, is Dharma of great
wisdom and immeasurable intelligence. Dharma exists both here and
hereafter, and is like fire or wind or water or earth or space. He is, O
king of kings, capable of going everywhere and exists, pervading the
whole universe. He is capable of being beheld by only those that are the
foremost of the deities and those that are cleansed of every sin and
crowned with ascetic success. He that is Dharma is Vidura; and he

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

that is Vidura is the (eldest) son of Pandu. That son of Pandu. O king,
is capable of being perceived by thee. He stays before thee as thy
servitor. Endued with great Yoga-puissance, thy high-souled brother,
that foremost of intelligent men, seeing the high-souled Yudhishthira,
the son of Kunti, has entered into his person. These also, O chief of
Bharata's race, I shall unite with great benefit. Know, O son, that I am
come here for dispelling thy doubts. Some feat that has never been
accomplished before by any of the great Rishis, some wonderful effect of
my penances,--I shall show thee. What object is that, O king, whose
accomplishment thou desirest from me? Tell me what is that which thou
wishest to see or ask or hear? O sinless one, I shall accomplish it.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[42:1](m15027.htm#fr_43) *Audumvaran* is an
adjective of *kalasan*. It means 'made of copper'. *Praveni* is a
*kutha* or blanket. *Sruk* is a ladle having the cup like cavity at one
extremity only. *Sruv* is a ladle having cup-like cavities at both
extremities.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[43:1](m15028.htm#fr_44) Whenever a Brahmana
cursed another, his penances underwent a diminution. Forgiveness was the
highest virtue of the Brahmana. His power lay in forgiveness. Hence,
when Mandavya cursed Dharma, he had to spend a portion of his
hard-earned penances. Previously, the plea of minority or non-age could
not be urged in the court of Dharma. Mandavya forced Dharma to admit
that plea in the matter of punishment for offences.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[43:2](m15028.htm#fr_45) Both *Dharana* and
*Dhyana* are processes or, rather, stages of Yoga. The former implies
the fixing of the mind on one thing; the latter is the
[abstraction](errata.htm#4) of the mind from surrounding objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXIX](m15029)
