[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m15006) 
[Next](m15008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### SECTION VII

"Dhritarashtra said, 'O best of kings, thou shouldst also reflect
properly on war and peace. Each is of two kinds. The means are various,
and the circumstances also, under which war or peace may be made, are
various, O Yudhishthira. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) O thou of
Kuru's race, thou shouldst, with coolness, reflect on the two (*viz.*,
thy strength and weakness) with regard to thyself. Thou shouldst not
suddenly march against a foe that is possessed of contented and healthy
soldiers, and that is endued with intelligence. On the other hand, thou
shouldst think carefully of the means of vanquishing him. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) Thou shouldst march against a foe that is
not provided with contented and healthy combatants. When everything is
favourable, the foe may be beaten. After that, however, the victor
should retire (and stay in a strong position). He should next cause the
foe to be plunged into various calamities, and sow dissensions among his
allies. He should afflict the foe and inspire terror in his heart, and
attacking him weaken his forces. The king, conversant with the
scriptures that marches against a foe, should think of the three kinds
of strength, and, indeed, reflect on his own strength and of his
foe. <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19) Only that king, O Bharata, who
is endued with alacrity, discipline, and strength of counsels, should
march against a foe. When his position is otherwise, he should avoid
defensive operations. <span id="fr_20"></span>[4](#fn_20) The king
should provide himself with power of wealth, power of allies, power of
foresters, power of paid soldiery, and power of the mechanical and
trading classes, O puissant one. <span id="fr_21"></span>[5](#fn_21)
Among all these, power of allies and power of wealth are superior to the
rest. The power of classes and that of the standing army are equal. The
power of spies is regarded by the king as equal in efficacy to either of
the above, on many occasions, when the time comes for applying each.
Calamity, O king, as it overtakes rulers should be regarded as of many
forms. Listen, O thou of Kuru's race, as to what those diverge forms
are. Verily of various kinds are calamities, O son of Pandu. Thou
shouldst always count them, distinguishing their forms, O king, and
strive to meet them by applying the well-known ways of conciliation and
the rest (without concealing them through idleness). The king should,
when

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

equipt with a good force, march (out against a foe), O scorcher of
enemies. He should attend also to the considerations of time and place,
while preparing to march, as also to the forces he has collected and his
own merits (in other respects). That king who is attentive to his own
growth and advancement should not march unless equipt with cheerful and
healthy warriors. When strong, O son of Pandu, he may march in even an
unfavourable season. The king should make a river having quivers for its
stones, steeds and cars for its current, and standards for the trees
that cover its banks, and which is miry with foot-soldiers and
elephants. Even such a river should the king apply for the destruction
of his foe. Agreeably to the science known to Usanas, arrays called
*Sakata*, *Padma*, and *Vijra*, should be formed, O Bharata, for
fighting the enemy. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](m15008.htm#fn_22)
Knowing everything about the enemy's strength through spies, and
examining his own strength himself the king should commence war either
within his own territories or within those of his foe. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](m15008.htm#fn_23) The king should always gratify
his army, and hurl all his strongest warriors (against the enemy). First
ascertaining the state of his kingdom, he should apply conciliation or
the other well-known means. By all means, O king, should the body be
protected. One should do that which is highly beneficial for one both
here and hereafter. The king, O monarch, by behaving duly according to
these ways, attains to Heaven hereafter, after ruling his subjects
righteously in this world. O foremost one of Kuru's race, it is even
thus that thou shouldst always seek the good of thy subjects for
attaining to both the worlds. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[3](m15008.htm#fn_24) Thou hast been instructed in all
duties by Bhishma, by Krishna, and by Vidura, I should also, O best of
kings, from the affection I bear thee, give thee these instructions. O
giver of profuse presents in sacrifices, thou shouldst do all this duly.
Thou shalt, by conducting thyself in this way, become dear to thy
subjects and attain to felicity in Heaven. That king who adores the
deities in a hundred horse-sacrifices, and he who rules his subjects
righteously, acquire merit that is equal.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[14:1](m15007.htm#fr_17) War and peace are each
of two kinds, *i.e.*, war with a strong foe and that with a weak foe:
peace with a strong foe and that with a weak foe. The Bengal texts
wrongly read *dividhopayam* or *vividhopayam*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[14:2](m15007.htm#fr_18) I expand this verse a
little, following the commentator.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[14:3](m15007.htm#fr_19) Strength is of three
kinds, as explained in the next verse.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[14:4](m15007.htm#fr_20) *Utsaha* is readiness
or alacrity, of the forces to attack the foe: *prabhusakti* is the
complete mastery of the king over his forces, *i.e.*, through
discipline. By strength of counsels, in this connection, is meant
well-formed plans of attack and defence.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[14:5](m15007.htm#fr_21) *Maulam* is explained
as the strength of money. In modern warfare also, money is called 'the
sinews of war'. *Atavivala* or the force consisting of foresters, was,
perhaps, the body of Irregulars that supported a regular army of
combatants. *Bhritavala* implies the regular army, drawing pay from the
state at all times. In India, standing armies have existed from remote
times. *Sreni-vala* is, perhaps, the forces of artisans, mechanics, and
engineers, who looked after the roads and the transport, as also of
traders who supplied the army with provision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section VIII](m15008)
