[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ath03)  [Next](ath05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766171663/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Athanasian Creed*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1759\], tr. by Samuel H.
Worcester \[1885\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Athanasian Creed

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.">151.</span></span>

It has been said that the chief essential of the church is to know and
recognize its God, and that without this chief essential there is not
any conjunction with God, and thus there is not heaven and eternal life;
the reason of which is, that in the spiritual world thought and will
have their conjunction with him who is regarded and loved; He turns
Himself in that direction, and then also all things belonging to the
man; wherefore the direction of all heaven is towards the Lord.
(Concerning which conjunction, see Heaven and Hell n. 141- 153.)
(Experiences concerning the turning according to the thoughts, and
according to the love; and concerning enlightenment when the turning is
toward the Lord.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.">152.</span></span>

There are many other arcana concerning man's turning and the
enlightenment therefrom. All have societies to which they turn when they
are in obscurity; there is presence when they are thinking of anyone;
there is conjunction with him whom they love; they who acknowledge other
gods, turn themselves to their own loves; they who to the Father, turn
in various ways; but the greater part towards the summit of heaven,
whence there is no turning; wherefore they who do not acknowledge the
Lord cannot be with the angels of heaven; etc., etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.">153.</span></span>

The ancients, when they represented God in their pictures, represented
Him as Man, surrounded about the head with a radiant circle, as if the
rays of the sun were round about it. So is the Lord represented by those
of the present day; and this from the common idea which all have from
heaven, that the Divine is like the sun, or that God is encompassed with
a sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.">154.</span></span>

In like manner the ancients represented God as Man in their pictures;
and the same is done at the present day, as may be seen by consulting
paintings; and this, too, from the common idea concerning God that comes
from heaven. But still, the idea of the Divine as in the Human form has
at this day been destroyed; and the reason is that they draw conclusions
from space, since there is an extension of the sphere from the Divine
into the universe, like that of the sun; and indeed the sphere
proceeding from angels extends itself into much of heaven. The cause of
such a conception is that men are too external, and hence are limited
like the sensual. The inhabitants of all the earths perceive God to be
in the Human form. The wise men of old, as Abraham, had such perception;
men of interior wisdom of the present day, as the Africans, have the
same; not so our wise men; but the simple-minded only, with whom the
common idea of God that comes from heaven has not been extinguished by
perverted reasonings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.">155.</span></span>

Let those things also be seen which have been said and which have been
adduced from the Word in Apocalypse Explained (n. 684), showing that the
Lord alone as to the Divine Human was united to Jehovah, because in Him
was the Divine good of the Divine love, which is signified by "oil," and
which was represented by anointing. Passages from the Word may there be
seen also; and thence it may be seen that His Human is Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.">156.</span></span>

A canon which will be explained more particularly: That the Lord is "the
Anointed of Jehovah," "the Messiah" and "the Christ," also "the Son of
God," as to the Divine Human, from the fact that the Divine good of the
Divine love, which is Jehovah and the Father, was in Him from
conception, from which His Human was made the Divine truth when He was
in the world, thus such as is heaven; but afterwards it was successively
made the Divine good of the Divine love by unition with the Father,
which was the esse of His life, and was His soul, which is called
Jehovah. Hence the Lord became one with Jehovah, and thus the Father as
to each. The Divine truth which makes heaven and is called the Holy
Spirit then proceeds. They who receive it from the Lord are "sons of
God." From these considerations it may also be manifest that the Lord in
time was not only conceived of Jehovah, but was also born of Him; and
that the Holy Spirit proceeds from Him. (See the passages adduced in
Apocalypse Explained, n. 684.) That the Anointed, the Messiah, the
Christ, and the Son of God are synonymous terms, how also He was king,
and that they are the Lord as to the Divine Human, may also be seen in
Apocalypse Explained (n. 684).

<span class="margnote"><span id="157.">157.</span></span>

The Divine Human is "the Holy One" (spoken of in Luke 1, and elsewhere
in the Word; from Psalm 89:4-5, 20; also Dan. 9); "the Holy of Holies"
(as in many passages); "the Holy One of Israel." (Let passages be freely
quoted.) That "the Holy One" is the Divine Human, is plain in Luke
(1:35).

<span class="margnote"><span id="158.">158.</span></span>

That "the Spirit" is the proceeding Divine, is made plain in Isaiah
(11:2-3), where the Lord is treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="159.">159.</span></span>

In the doctrine of our Faith it is also said that the Lord overcame
death, and ascended with triumph into heaven, and sitteth at the right
hand of the Father. What else is meant by "death" which He overcame, and
by "triumph," than the subjugation of the hells? For "death" signifies
hell, because all who are there are called "dead." And what else is
meant by "sitting at the right hand of the Father," than the Divine
omnipotence? For how can a human which is not at the same time Divine,
sit at the right hand of the infinite Divine?

<span class="margnote"><span id="160.">160.</span></span>

They who separate from the Lord the Divine which is called the Father,
and who place the Divine of the Father outside of the Human of the Lord,
should be named Philippians from Philip, who asked of the Lord that he
might see the Father; to whom the Lord made answer that He saw Him, and
that he who seeth Him seeth the Father, because the Father is in Him and
He in the Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="161.">161.</span></span>

That the Lord put off all the maternal in the sepulcher, and rising
therefrom glorified Himself, and that for this He died, is manifest from
considering that the Lord spoke concerning the seed cast into the earth,
that first it dies; also that He said to the woman that she should not
yet touch Him, because He had not yet ascended to the Father; for in the
sepulcher all such was to be dissipated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="162.">162.</span></span>

That the Lord, in the sepulcher, and thus by death, rejected all the
human from the mother and dissipated it (from which he underwent
temptations and the passion of the cross, and whereas this could not be
conjoined with the Divine Itself), and that so He assumed the Human from
the Father, thus that the Lord, thoroughly and clearly glorified, rose
with the Human - this also is from the faith of the church, that He
overcame death, that is, hell, and rose with triumph. The "third day,"
on which He rose, also signifies full, and the whole; and "the Passover"
signifies that glorification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="163.">163.</span></span>

That the Lord carried sins, signifies that He endured the hells and
properly that He represented the falsities and the evils of the church,
for the representatives are many, especially those which belong to His
passion (which may be enumerated, and confirmed by those things which
the Prophets underwent and whereby they represented the church; which,
on account of their number, need not be adduced; it is there said of
Isaiah that he carried sins, Isa. 20:3). That thus, also, they are taken
away, is an arcanum which may be explained; here, by temptations
admitted into himself, etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="164.">164.</span></span>

The words in the Creed of Athanasius sound as if it were permissible to
think of three Gods but to name only one God. Let the words be quoted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="165.">165.</span></span>

What it is to carry iniquities: (1) That it is to endure all the hells,
by temptations; (2) In order that in Him might be represented the states
of the church; as in the case of the prophet who was to take a harlot to
wife, who was to go naked and barefoot, who was to eat a cake prepared
with dung, and was to lie on the right side and on the left, and carry
iniquities. So it was with the Lord, in the particulars of His passion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="166.">166.</span></span>

It was permitted to say three Persons, for the reason that at the
beginning there could be no thought unless of Jehovah God, the Father,
the Creator of the universe, and it could scarcely be thought that the
Lord was He; wherefore it was useful. This seemed to them to be a thing
that could not be received, that the Creator of the universe so
descended and became Man; simply the idea of Jehovah as filling all
heaven and all the world from His presence and His providence, would
stand somewhat in the way of that. Wherefore in the sense of the letter
of the Word three are named for that reason; as if they were three
Persons into whose names they were to baptize. Hence also it was
permitted that similar things should be said in the Athanasian Faith,
which was to be received for Christianity; but still, so that it should
be possible for the trine of one Person, thus of the Lord, to be
received by those who are in enlightenment; and likewise so that in the
end of the church it might be received. The Athanasian Faith is such as
to be incomprehensible, and thence incredible, and likewise
contradictory. (Let things that are therein be adduced.) This truth is
laid open, and that Faith does not preclude anyone from receiving it;
but this may be done by those who wish to understand what they believe;
let those, however, who do not wish to understand what they believe,
remain in their own opinion; but let them know that in the spiritual
world no one receives anything which he does not see, that is,
understand; for he says, "Perhaps it is not true."

<span class="margnote"><span id="167.">167.</span></span>

\(1\) Mohammedans have not acknowledged three Persons, but one God; they
have therefore denied the Divinity of the Lord, and have acknowledged
the Father alone as God. (2) The Socinians, also, do the same, and for
the same reason; they say that there is one God, and that He is the
Father. (3) For the same reason many others, both learned and simple,
silently acknowledge the Father only, and the Lord but as a common man.
Let each one examine himself to see whether he has the idea of Divinity
in respect to the Lord; and yet there must be belief in Him, that men
may have eternal life. (4) On the same grounds the Jews revile the
Christians, as having three Gods. (5) For the same reason, the greater
part in the other life, when they are explored, are found to worship the
Father only, or the Holy Spirit, and not the Lord; and, yet, without
faith in the Lord there is no safety. (6) All these things, because
among us they have distinguished divinity into three Persons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="168.">168.</span></span>

To say three Persons and one God is contradictory, for the term "person"
involves something distinct and different from another. The distinction
and the difference, also, is itself laid down in the doctrine of the
church; and because the distinction differs among the persons, it
follows that each is a separate God from another; and if separate, it
follows that there are three Gods. That the substance or essence makes
one God therefrom, this falls within the idea of no one, when the
essence or substance is itself distinguished by the attributes of the
one not proper to the other; for so one is worshiped for this attribute
and another for that.

<span class="margnote"><span id="169.">169.</span></span>

But if you think that the substance or essence is what is called person,
then there necessarily results one Person and the Trine in that; and
thus Unity in Trinity and Trinity in Unity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="170.">170.</span></span>

And still further, each attribute by which one Person is distinguished
from another, is Divine. The attribute of the Father is Divine, the
attribute of the Son is Divine, the attribute of the Holy Spirit is
Divine; and whatever Divine there is in the three Persons is a distinct
Divine substance or essence; and because Athanasius saw this, he took
care that the three should all be in each single attribute. From these
considerations it follows that the substance and essence also is not one
unless it be in one Person.

<span class="margnote"><span id="171.">171.</span></span>

That the Human of the Lord is Divine is manifest from this also: that it
is said in John that it was the Word by which all things were made and
created, and that the eternal Word is called God (John 1:1, 2); and that
it is also said that this was made flesh; consequently, that God, who is
the Word, was made flesh, that is, Man. Hence it follows that the Lord's
Human is Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="172.">172.</span></span>

That in the world the Lord accomplished a Last Judgment, is manifest
from all the passages in the Prophets where His Coming is spoken of;
which is called "the terrible day," "cruel," etc., etc., etc.

<span class="margnote"><span id="173.">173.</span></span>

The Coming of the Lord is revealed, in the end of the church. At the end
of the Jewish church, the Lord Himself came into the flesh, and He then
revealed Himself as being God or Jehovah who was to come, as told in the
Prophets, and still further, that He it is who rules heaven with the
earth, and who is the one only God. This, in the Gospels (Matt. 24), is
also called His Coming. Hitherto, however, He has been almost neglected,
because in thought and in idea He has been like a common man; in regard
to whom there has been almost no thought of anything Divine, for the
reason that men have in their idea placed the Divine outside of Him and
not within Him, as nevertheless He teaches that it is; and by the Divine
outside of Him, most have understood the Father, and thus another
person; so that the Lord has been almost neglected in the world, at the
end. Consequently His new and second Coming is made.

<span class="margnote"><span id="174.">174.</span></span>

That the Lord is the Creator is manifest in John: "By the Word were all
things made that were made"; and also that He is the proceeding Divine
because He is "the Light."

<span class="margnote"><span id="175.">175.</span></span>

That the Lord is so often called the Father, was because the Lord before
His Advent was Himself the one who is called the Father; and then the
Son was the proceeding Divine, or the Word; this was then the Son, and
this was then the Divine Human; and they who are mentioned in the Old
Testament, before the Lord was born, and before He was called the Son of
God as to the Divine Human, knew no other Father, for there was no
other. He therefore so frequently speaks of the Father. But afterwards
the Lord was made the Father as to the Divine Human also, and from this
is the proceeding Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="176.">176.</span></span>

The proceeding good is called by the Lord "the Father in the heavens";
to see this is to be in love and in innocence. But the proceeding Divine
truth, the Lord calls "the Son of Man."

<span class="margnote"><span id="177.">177.</span></span>

The proceeding Divine before the Coming of the Lord, is described as to
its quality by circles and by degrees, through the heavens and through
the interiors of man. The degrees are successive (concerning which, see
Heaven and Hell); wherefore while it is in every degree, they correspond
with each other, and they thus as it were transfer to each other; but
when in the ultimate degree there is no longer a reception of the
Divine, as was the case in the church with the Jews, then the proceeding
Divine could not be extended thither. Wherefore the Lord Himself took on
the Human, from which the proceeding Divine would go forth; and this can
also be in ultimates, and so can preserve the heavens and save the human
race. Thence is the omnipresence of His Human in the Holy Supper. He
spoke of His omnipresence in Matthew.

<span class="margnote"><span id="178.">178.</span></span>

The proceeding Divine, however, is such that in things greatest and in
things least it is Man. For such as it is in what is greatest, such it
is in every least thing, and this in nature where the proceeding Divine
is in ultimates. For all things were so created that affection which is
of good, or love which is of good, or good which is of affection and
love, clothes itself with what is human in the several degrees from
first to last. Hence angels are human forms; and so it is in nature;
whence the human form is there. This arcanum has been hitherto unknown
in the world. That there is such a disposition in the several degrees,
that is, that affection clothes itself with a body, and this from the
proceeding Divine, is for the reason that what proceeds from the Lord
proceeds from the single things of His body, interior and exterior. It
is in consequence of this that the proceeding Divine is the Lord in the
heavens, and is called "the Son of Man," and likewise "the Paraclete,"
and "the Holy Spirit." From this it is evident what His omnipresence is.
Since affection and love put on that human form in every heaven or in
every degree, it follows that the human which is put on is Divine truth,
and that they are in the proceeding Divine and are truly men who are in
love and the truth therefrom. Hence, also, love is the complex of all
truths, and love is the being \[esse\] whose existence \[existere\] is
the human in form, in every particular of which must be the being from
love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="179.">179.</span></span>

(The cause of the Lord's Coming: because strength is in ultimates, and
so in the material body. Let the causes be investigated, whence it is
that strength is in ultimates; see Psalm 68:28-30; otherwise it has no
power over the natural man, where all evil is; "the wild beast of the
reed" (verse 30) is the natural man. From this the Lord is called
"Strength," also "Right hand," by which is signified all power.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="180.">180.</span></span>

The Lord is the only God, Isa. 45:13, 14; there concerning the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="181.">181.</span></span>

The whole life of the Lord was representative, so that He might be in
ultimates, and so from things first by things ultimate might subjugate
the hells and reduce all things into order; in ultimates is all
strength. It is for this reason that by all things of His passion, also,
was represented the state of the church; how it is against the Divine,
and against the truths and goods of heaven and the church. It is an
arcanum that spirits do not see the man, but only his affections; and
the evil are wholly opposed to the affections of truth and good, and
have them in hatred, and attempt to destroy them utterly. So did the
Lord admit temptations into Himself, for the reason that He was at the
same time in ultimates. And so it is to be understood that He fulfilled
all things of the Law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="182.">182.</span></span>

Concerning the temptations of the Lord, with which may be compared the
temptations with man - namely, that the temptations with man cause the
hells to be removed, and man to become spiritual and an angel; what then
was done by the temptations of the Lord, who from conception was God,
and who brought them to their completion from His own Divine? Does it
not follow that He subjugated all the hells, and glorified His Human?

<span class="margnote"><span id="183.">183.</span></span>

Let it be considered whether one and the same essence or substance, in
which are like properties and like attributes, can be called otherwise
than one, and without distinction into persons; otherwise, when specific
properties and specific attributes are of the same essence or substance,
it may then be distinguished into persons; but still it is not then the
same essence which from three makes one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="184.">184.</span></span>

Purity coming from an imputation of the merit of the Lord can be
understood by no one, if the man be not purified as to the life. Can the
imputation of the Lord's merit reform, alter and change a man, and from
a devil make him an angel? Must not the evil of life be removed? Can
this be done by the imputation of merit, and by condoning sins, and by
justification through faith alone, so that God gives no attention to the
evils? The evils remain, and they infect and infest societies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="185.">185.</span></span>

According to the common idea, the Divine is distinguished into three
Persons; but according to the idea drawn from the Creed of Athanasius,
the second Person is not only Divine, but is Human also; so that in the
second Person there is more than there is in the first or the third,
namely, the Human; and this can in no wise be saved unless there be a
Trine in the Lord, and unless His Human be Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="186.">186.</span></span>

When it is said that God became Man; also that God was willing to be
born of the virgin Mary; then that the Word, which was God, was made
flesh; also as stated in the Creed of Athanasius, that the Divine took
to Itself the Human; does it not then clearly follow that the Human is
Divine? (Let this be taken up again and shown.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="187.">187.</span></span>

That the Lord was not Mary's son, is also evident from the words of the
Lord to the Pharisees, that He was not David's son (Matt. 22); wherefore
neither was He Mary's.

<span class="margnote"><span id="188.">188.</span></span>

In the Creed of Athanasius it is said that the Divine took upon Itself
the Human. Hence it follows that the Human is the Divine Human;
otherwise the Human could not be assumed by the Divine, when they are as
soul and body. And consequently there is not commixture, but union; like
that of soul and body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="189.">189.</span></span>

There is the idea of the Divine Human concerning God in all the earths
in the universe (references); it also exists with the Gentiles of our
earth, as with the Africans; and this from the influx of heaven. But
this idea has been destroyed with Christians, especially the
intelligent, for the reason that they think from space, and thus from
extension; when nevertheless, He as Man is girded about with the Divine
love; this appears about the Lord as Man, like a sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="190.">190.</span></span>

This love, or sun, is His Divine love that proximately proceeds from
Him; the radiant circles are devolutions of the infinite, so that it may
be applied to the angels in their order; for an angel can bear the
presence of the Divine love no more than a man can bear the presence of
the fire of the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="191.">191.</span></span>

The proceeding Divine is what is extended into the universe; and it is
the Divine truth, and the light of that sun. Hence it is the inmost of
the spiritual world; and it is this from which nature had its origin;
this is also extended in the created universe; it is afterwards formed
successively into spheres, the last of which is the atmosphere of the
natural world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="192.">192.</span></span>

(Let it also be described how He could expel the maternal human -
namely, that the maternal human was infirm which adheres to nature; and
because that is evil, it was in correspondence with hell. When this is
expelled, then succeed those things which are concordant with the Divine
and in correspondence with it. For the body is only a correspondence of
the soul or spirit of man; and there is correspondence with heaven so
far as this is removed; so also, what is new is set in its place, and
thus man is regenerated and is made spiritual and an angel. The Lord,
however, whose soul was the Divine Itself, made His body correspondent
with the Divine Itself that was in Him; and thus above heaven. But evil,
with man, cannot be expelled, but is removed. Because he is not in life
in himself, and because he is not the Divine as to soul, but is only a
recipient of the Divine, therefore man dies, as to the body. But the
Lord from the Divine in Himself expelled the evil which was from the
mother; wherefore He rose with the whole body. He retained the infirm
while He was in the world because in no other way could He be tempted,
and least of all on the cross; there the whole maternal was expelled.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="193.">193.</span></span>

Following the Athanasian doctrinal concerning the Trinity, the thought
must necessarily be that three Gods together make one Divine; for of
three that are consentient there can be the thought of one thing, but
not of God as a Person. Since this is so, and this was foreseen by
Athanasius, it was said that although there are three, still according
to the Catholic faith it must not be said otherwise than one God. But
the thought and the speech must be alike and the same; nor can they be
otherwise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="194.">194.</span></span>

That the Lord made His Human Divine, is also evident from this, that He
subjugated all the hells. For the evils with man are from no other
source than hell, or from influx therefrom through evil spirits; and
when these are removed, man is as it were without evils. But the Lord
from His Divine so removes the hells that they do not gape open to look
at Him, nor are they able to name Him; thus He removed them by
separating the hells and their crews from Himself; and He continually
separates them; and when these are removed, evils also are removed, for
to remove the hells and to remove the evils is the same thing. But the
Lord, because from the Divine, and being the Divine as to the life and
soul, completely separated them from Himself. And from this also it is
evident that He made His Human Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="195.">195.</span></span>

When it is said that God the Father assumed the Human, it is perceived
by the man of the church as a thing too exalted to be thought of, and
greater than could possibly be done. But still, it is according to the
faith concerning the Divine of the Lord, that His Divine is altogether
equal to the Divine of the Father, and no one greatest or least, prior
and posterior; and that as the one is eternal, uncreate, almighty, God,
and Lord, so is the other; thus there is likeness, nor is one more
exalted than the other; wherefore to think otherwise is only from the
idea of man who is such.

<span class="margnote"><span id="196.">196.</span></span>

That the Lord's Divine is what He calls the Father, is evident from the
Word, and also from the Faith of the church; but that He calls this the
Father has not been thought hitherto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="197.">197.</span></span>

(Let passages concerning the Father be adduced, and let the Gospel of
John be read, from beginning to end.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="198.">198.</span></span>

The idea of Europeans, especially of the learned, is also a fallacy; it
comes from this, that it cannot possibly be thought that man, or what is
human, can be Divine; when, nevertheless, they who are in the third
heaven, cannot at all have any other idea, and this from the influx of
heaven (of which elsewhere).

<span class="margnote"><span id="199.">199.</span></span>

Also the wise men of old, as is evident from the Word throughout, when
angels were seen, called them Jehovah, and Creator of the universe. (Let
passages be adduced, also, from Revelation.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="200.">200.</span></span>

(Also let the many passages concerning the Lord be quoted, which are
found in Revelation, where many Divine things are said concerning the
Lord or the Lamb.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 201-250](ath05)
