[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch06) 
[Next](pch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 3.

At the close of his work, apparently forgetting the propositions of his
first chapter as to the priority of the sense of obstacle in the
primitive man's notion of supernatural forces, Dr. Jevons affirms that
the "earliest attempt" towards harmonising the facts of the "external
and inner consciousness"—by which is meant observation and reflection

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">took the form of ascribing the external prosperity
which befell a man to the</span>

</div>

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">action of the divine love of which he was conscious
within himself; and the misfortunes which befell him to the wrath of the
justly offended divine will. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)</span>

</div>

Here we have either a contradiction of the thesis before cited, or a
resort to the extremely arbitrary assumption that in taking credit to
himself for successful management of things, and imputing his
miscarriages to a superior power, the primitive man is not trying to
"harmonise the facts of his experience." Such an argument would be on
every ground untenable; but it appears to be all that can stand between
Dr. Jevons and self-contradiction. The way to a sound position is by
settling impartially the definition of the term "religion." How Dr.
Jevons misses this may be gathered from the continuation of the passage
under notice:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Man, being by nature religious, began by a religious
explanation of nature. To assume, as is often done, that man had no
religious consciousness 1, begin with, and that the misfortunes which
befell him inspired him with fear, and fear led him to propitiate the
malignant beings whom he imagined to be the causes of his suffering,
fails to account for the very thing it intended to explain—namely, the
existence of religion. It might account for superstitious dread of
malignant beings: it does not account for the grateful worship of
benignant beings, nor for the universal satisfaction which man finds in
that worship.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As we have seen,
Dr. Jevons himself had at the outset plainly posited what he now
describes as a fallacious assumption. On his prior showing, man's
experience of apparent hostility in Nature "first called forth" his
belief in supernatural power. The interposed phrase, "was not created
but," looks like an after attempt to reconcile the earlier proposition
with the later. But there is no real reconciliation, for Dr. Jevons thus
sets up only the vain suggestion that the primitive man was from the
first conscious of the existence of good supernatural powers but did not
think they did him any good—another collapse in countersense—or else the
equally unmanageable notion that primitive man recognised helpful
supernatural being-, but was not grateful to them for their help.

That the argument has not been scientifically conducted is further clear
from the use now of the expression "superstitious dread" as the
equivalent of "fear," while "grateful worship" stands for
"satisfaction." Why "superstitious dread" and not "superstitious
gratitude"? A scientific inquiry will treat the phenomena on a moral
par, and will at this stage simply put aside the term "superstition." It
is relevant only as imputing a superior degree of gratuitousness of
belief (whether by way of fear or of satisfaction) at a comparatively

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

advanced state of culture. To call a savage superstitious when he fears
a God, and religious when he thanks one, is not only to warp the
"science of religion" at the start, but to block even the purpose in
view, for, as we have seen, Dr. Jevons is constrained by his own motive
of edification to assume that the benignant God ought by rights to be
sometimes feared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[8:1](pch07.htm#fr_29) Work cited, p. 410.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 4. Scientific View of the Religious Evolution](pch08)
