[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch05) 
[Next](pch07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 2.

In the midst of much dispute, moral science approaches agreement on the
proposition that all primitive beliefs and usages, however strange or
absurd, are to be understood as primarily products of judgment,
representing theories of causation or guesses at the order of things. To
such agreement, however, hindrance is set up by the reversion of some
inquirers to the old view that certain savage notions are "irrational"
in the strict sense. Thus Dr. F. B. Jevons decides that "there is no
rational principle of action in taboo: it is mechanical; arbitrary,
because its sole *basis* is the *arbitrary association of ideas;*
irrational, because its principle is \[in the words of Mr. Lang\] 'that
causal connection in thought is equivalent to causative connection in
fact.'" <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18) Again, Dr. Jevons lays it
down <span id="fr_19"></span>[3](#fn_19)

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

that "Taboo......is the conviction that there are certain things which
must—absolutely must, and not on grounds of experience of 'unconscious
utility'—be avoided."

It is significant that in both of these passages the proposition runs
into verbal insignificance or counter-sense. In the first cited we are
told (1) that a certain association of ideas is arbitrary *because* its
*basis* is an arbitrary association of ideas, and (2) that it is all the
while a "causal" (*i.e.*, a non-arbitrary) connection in thought. In the
last we are in effect told that the tabooer is conscious that he is not
proceeding on an ancestral experience when he is merely not conscious of
doing so. When instructed men thus repeatedly lapse into mere nullities
of formula, there is presumably something wrong with their theory. Now,
the whole subject of taboo is put outside science by the assumption that
the practice is *in origin* "irrational" and "absolute" and "arbitrary"
and independent of all experience of utility. As Dr. Jevons himself
declares in another connection, the savage's thought is subject to
mental laws as much as is civilised man's. How, then, is this dictum to
be reconciled with that? What is the "law" of the savage's
"arbitrariness"?

Conceivably part of it lies before us in Dr. Jevons’s page of denial.
The very illustration first given by him for the proposition last cited
from him is that "the mourner is as dangerous as the corpse he has
touched," "the mourner is as dangerous to those he loves as to those he
hates." Here, one would suppose, was a pretty obvious clue to an
intelligible causation. Is it to be "arbitrarily" decided that primitive
men never observed the phenomena of contagion from corpse to mourners,
and from mourners to their families; or, observing it, never sought to
act on the experience? Is it not notorious that among contemporary
primitives there is often an intense and vigilant fear of contagious
disease? <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20)

The only fair objection to accepting such a basis for one species of
taboo is that for other species no such explanation is available. But
what science looks for in such a matter is not a direct explanation for
every instance: it suffices that we find an explanation or explanations
for such a principle or conception as taboo, and then recognise that,
once set up, it may be turned to really "arbitrary" account by chiefs,
priests, and adventurers.

"Arbitrary" has two significations, in two references: it means
"illogical" in reference to reason, or "representative of one will as
against the general will." In the first sense, it is here irrelevant,
for

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

no one pretends that taboo is right; but it may apply in the other in a
way not intended by Dr. Jevons. For nothing can be more obvious than the
adaptability of the idea of taboo, once crystallised or conventionalised
in a code, to purposes of individual malice, and to all such procedure
as men indicate by the term "priestcraft." Dr. Jevons, in his concern to
prove, what no one ever seriously disputed, that priests did not and
could not create the religious or superstitious instinct, leaves
entirely out of his exposition, and even by implication denies, the
vitally relevant truth that they exploit it. And in overlooking this he
sadly burdens, if he does not wreck, his own unduly biassed theory of
the religious instinct as something relatively "deep," and as proceeding
in terms of an abnormal consciousness of contact with "the divine." For
if those relatively "arbitrary" and "irrational" forms of taboo do not
come from the priest—that is, from the religion-maker or -monger,
whether official or not—they must, on Dr. Jevons’s own showing, come
from "religion."

It may be that he would not at once reject such a conclusion; for the
apparent motive of much of his treatment of taboo is the sanctification
of it as an element in the ancestry of the Christian religion. For this
purpose he is ready to go to notable lengths, as when <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) he allows cannibalism to be sometimes
"religious in intention." But while insisting at one point on the
absolute unreasonedness and immediate certitude of the notion of taboo,
apparently in order to place it on all fours with the "direct
consciousness" which for him is the mark of a religious belief, he
admits in so many words, as we have seen, that it is "arbitrary" and
"irrational," which is scarcely a way of accrediting it as a religious
phenomenon. Rather the purpose of that aspersion seems to be to open the
way for another aggrandisement of religion as having *suppressed*
irrational taboo. On the one hand we are told <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22) that the savage's fallacious belief in the
transmissibility of taboo was "the sheath which enclosed and protected a
conception that was to blossom and bear a priceless fruit—the conception
of Social Obligation." This is an arguable thesis, not framed by Dr.
Jevons for the purposes of his theorem, but spontaneously set forth by
several missionaries. <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23) Here we need
but note the implication of the old fallacy that when any good is seen
to follow upon an evil we *must* assume the evil to have been a
*conditio sine quâ non* of the good. The missionaries and

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dr. Jevons have
assumed that but for the device of taboo there could have been no social
code—a thesis not to be substantiated either deductively or inductively.
But with this problem we need not now concern ourselves, since Dr.
Jevons himself turns the tables on it. After the claim has been made for
the salvatory action of taboo, we read <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) that "it was only among the minority of
mankind, and there only under exceptional circumstances, that the
institution bore its best fruit......Indeed, in many respects the
evolution of taboo has been fatal to the progress of humanity." And
again:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">In religion the institution also had a baneful
effect: the irrational restrictions, touch not, taste not, handle not,
which constitute formalism, are essentially taboos—essential to the
education of man at one period of his development, but a bar to his
progress later.</span>

</div>

But now is introduced <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) the theorem of
the process by which taboo has been *converted into* an element of
civilisation: it is this:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

From the fallacy of magic man was delivered by religion; and there are
reasons.....for believing that it was by the same aid he escaped from
the irrational restrictions of taboo. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26)

In the higher forms of religion.....the trivial and absurd restrictions
are cast off, and those alone retained which are essential to morality
*and religion*. <span id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_27)

</div>

We shall have to deal later with the direct propositions here put; but
for the moment it specially concerns us to note that the *dénoûment*
does not hold scientifically or logically good. The fact remains that
irrational taboo as such was, in the terms of the argument, strictly
religious; that religion in this aspect had "no sense in it," inasmuch
as taboo had passed from a primitive precaution to a priest-made
convention; <span id="fr_28"></span>[5](#fn_28) and that what religion
is alleged to deliver man from is just religion. Thus alternately does
religion figure for the apologist as a rational tendency correcting an
irrational, and as an irrational tendency doing good which a rational
one cannot. And the further we follow his teaching the more frequently
does such a contradiction emerge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[4:2](pch06.htm#fr_18) Jevons, Introduction
cited, p. 91; Lang, *Myth, Ritual, and Religion*, 1st ed. i, 95.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[4:3](pch06.htm#fr_19) As cited, pp. 11-12. Cp.
p. 68, where the question is begged with much simplicity.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[5:1](pch06.htm#fr_20) *E.g.*, Turner, *Samoa a
Hundred Years Ago*, 1884, pp. 306, 322.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[6:1](pch06.htm#fr_21) P. 201.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[6:2](pch06.htm#fr_22) P. 87.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[6:3](pch06.htm#fr_23) *E.g.*, Rev. Richard
Taylor, *Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants*, 1870, pp.
8, 163 *sq*.; Rev. J. Buller, *Forty Years in New Zealand*, 1878, p.
203.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[7:1](pch06.htm#fr_24) P. 88.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[7:2](pch06.htm#fr_25) P. 89.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[7:3](pch06.htm#fr_26) P. 91.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[7:4](pch06.htm#fr_27) P. 93.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[7:5](pch06.htm#fr_28) Cp. Rev. R. Taylor, as
cited, ch. viii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 3. Dr. Jevons’ Theories of Religious Evolution](pch07)
