[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch18) 
[Next](pch20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### COMPARISON AND APPRAISEMENT OF RELIGIONS

#### § 1. Early Forces of Reform.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> main obstacle to a "science of
religion," naturally, is the survival either of simple belief in a given
religion or of sociological predilections set up by such a belief; and
we have seen how a scholarly treatise may still be affected by one or
the other. That a learned and thoughtful "Introduction to the History of
Religion" should treat the whole vast drama of religious development up
till the period of the Roman Empire as "the propaideutic of the world to
Christ" <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219) is perhaps not to be
wondered at in view of English culture-conditions in general; but it is
none the less unfortunate. A view of the history of religion which
merely ignores or discredits on the one hand the entire religious life
of the non-Christian world, and on the other the entire monotheistic or
unitarian evolution in the Christian world, cannot meet the needs of
scientific thought. The perorational statement that "of all the great
religions of the world it is the Christian Church alone which is so far
heir of all the ages as to fulfil the dumb, dim expectation of mankind,"
is but a sectarian shibboleth; and the claim, "In it alone the
sacramental meal commemorates *by ordinance of its founder* the divine
sacrifice which is a propitiation for the sins of all mankind," is an
all-too-simple solution of the historic problem. We are being treated
merely to a new adjustment of "Christian Evidence."

On the side of science, again, there is certainly a danger that the
necessary effort to eliminate partisanship and predilection may somewhat
sway the balances. Dr. Jevons justly argues <span
id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_220) that religion is no more to be conceived
or classified in terms of primeval superstition than science is to be
classified in terms of primeval animism and magic. But the very tactic
of his own treatise, aiming as it does at certificating one set of
developments on behalf of the special apparatus of the Christian Church,
is a hindrance to the recognition of religion as an aspect of the
process of civilisation. In terms of the analogy with science, religion
ought to be to-day at a far higher level than it was in ancient Syria,
or in the Græco-Roman

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

decadence. But here the special-pleader reverts to the Newmanian thesis
of "special genius," arbitrarily placing the highest genius for religion
in antiquity, and implying (apparently) that whatever genius there has
been since is joyfully subservient to that.

Now, genius is certainly a factor in every line of mental evolution, in
the sense that all marked mental capacity is a "variation"; and insofar
as religions have been moralised or rationalised, genius for
righteousness or for reason has clearly been at work. But just as
certain as the fact of genius is the fact that it is in large part
wasted; and we shall utterly misread the history of mankind if we
conceive the "religious consciousness" as readily susceptible of
impulses from the moral or rational genius of the gifted few. <span
id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) On the contrary, nothing is harder than
even the partial imposition of the higher view on the religious
multitude; and this precisely because the crowd supposes (with the
countenance of Dr. Jevons) that it has "inner consciousness" of the
veracity of its congenital beliefs. King Akhunaton of Egypt, presumably,
had such consciousness of the truth of his monotheism; but even his
autocratic power failed to annul the inner consciousness of the
polytheists around him, or, for that matter, the "direct consciousness"
of the priests that their bread was buttered on the polytheistic
side. <span id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_222)

There is, I think, no known case in history of a "going" priesthood
reforming its own cult, in the sense of willingly making an important
change on moral lines. There is indeed abundant reason to credit
priesthoods with the alteration of the rule under which the priest
himself was the primary subject for sacrifice; <span
id="fr_223"></span>[3](#fn_223) but the change consisted solely in
laying the burden upon others. Apart from the presumptive changes of
view set up in Israel during the exile, it seems to have been always by
*kings* (or queens or heroes <span id="fr_224"></span>[4](#fn_224)) that
human sacrifices were suppressed in antiquity, never by the choice of
priesthoods. <span id="fr_225"></span>[5](#fn_225) Thus King Eurypylus
is associated with the abolition of the human sacrifice to Artemis
Triclaria; <span id="fr_226"></span>[6](#fn_226) Cecrops with the
substitution of cakes for living victims to Zeus Lycæus; <span
id="fr_227"></span>[7](#fn_227)

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Iphicrates <span
id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228) and Gelon <span
id="fr_229"></span>[2](#fn_229) with the attempted stoppage of human
sacrifices at Carthage; King Diphilus with its cessation at Cyprus;
Amosis with its abrogation at Heliopolis in Egypt. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[3](#fn_230) In the ancient history of Japan, it is
an Emperor who, about the beginning of the Christian era, recoils from
the practice of burying servitors alive at the funeral of a prince; and
it is on his appeal that one of his ministers hits on the device of
substituting clay images. <span id="fr_231"></span>[4](#fn_231) Among
the Samoans one legend ran that the human sacrifices to the Sun, which
were destroying the race, were put an end to by the lady Ui giving
herself up and being accepted by the pacified Sun as his bride; while
another version makes Ui the daughter of the King of Manu’a, who gave up
his daughter as a final sacrifice, and then abolished the
practice. <span id="fr_232"></span>[5](#fn_232) In another case a Tongan
queen, named Manu, saved alive a number of those destined for her
husband's cannibal feasts; and in yet another a cannibal
*God*—presumably the priest or incarnation of a higher deity—is
destroyed by the action of a daring youth. <span
id="fr_233"></span>[6](#fn_233) The powerful King Finow of Tonga, again,
showed a disposition to check some forms of human sacrifice; <span
id="fr_234"></span>[7](#fn_234) and King Gezo of Dahome is credited with
"materially reducing the number of human sacrifices throughout his
kingdom" <span id="fr_235"></span>[8](#fn_235) during his lifetime. King
Gelele, again, promising that "by and by, little by little, much may be
done" in the way of curtailing the sacrifices, declared: "If I were to
give up this custom at once, my head would be taken off
to-morrow." <span id="fr_236"></span>[9](#fn_236) Such was the power of
the priests. Similarly the abolition of human sacrifices in ancient
China was effected only by the action of humane princes; and the attempt
in earlier times seems to have involved insurrection and desperate
war. <span id="fr_237"></span>[10](#fn_237)

Elsewhere such attempts are known to have failed, and the work of King
Gezo of Dahome was undone after him. "The

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

fetisheer is all-powerful in Dahome. The last monarch was notably
desirous of modifying the horrors and the expenses of the national
worship: his son has been compelled to walk in the old path of
blood." <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238) The strongest
characteristic of priesthoods is their conservatism; and though moral
and religious innovators have arisen among them, practical moral reforms
have always to be forced on them from the outside. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_239) Where a powerful king resists them from
humane motives, even if he put them down by force for the time, he is
not unlikely to be the victim in the end. <span
id="fr_240"></span>[3](#fn_240) Where substitutes have been made for
human sacrifices among "nature-folk" without governmental pressure, as
apparently among the Malays and some tribes in India, there is no
priesthood to speak of; and these simple people have silently attained
what passes for a great "reform" where "religious history" is
concerned. <span id="fr_241"></span>[4](#fn_241)

For every man of moral genius, probably, who has been able to modify for
the better the form or course of an organised religion, there have been
ten who were slain or silenced by its organisation. Indeed, if we reckon
solely the ostensible historical cases of fortunate innovation on the
direct appeal of genius, the balance is immeasurably the other way. What
is more, the economic and social conditions in antiquity were such that
the man who succeeded even indirectly in modifying a cult or creed for
the better did so by some measure of fraud. Dr. Jevons, as we have seen,
lightly decides that such reformers "have usually considered
themselves......to be speaking, *not* their own words or thoughts, but
those of their God." If they did, be it said once more, they would only
be feeling as did the common run of early priests in *their* normal
procedure. The full significance of the case will come out much better
if we say that reformers found they stood the best chance of a hearing
when they professed to be speaking the words of the God. What this meant
in the way of demoralisation it is depressing to surmise.

It is indeed customary of late to substitute for the exaggerated notion
of "pagan" priestcraft that used to be held by most Christians and by
some freethinkers the much more arbitrary notion of an absolute
rectitude in the pristine "religious consciousness"; but critical
science can accept no such fantasy. There are

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

evidences of conscious fraud on the surface of the most
primitive-looking cults known to us; <span
id="fr_242"></span>[1](#fn_242) the majority of travellers
unhesitatingly impute fraud to the magicians and priests of savage
tribes; and while there is reason to believe that early man and savage
man have a less clear sense than we of the difference between truth and
falsehood (in this respect partly approximating to the child-mind),
there is really no reason for supposing them less capable of resort to
wilful deception. On the contrary, they seem in religious matters to
have been more prompt at fabrication, in the ratio of the greater
credulity they met with. Unless, then, we proceed with Dr. Jevons to
make gratuitous exceptions in favour of all cases on the line of
evolution of our own creed, we must conclude that the ancient conditions
often, if not always, drove reformers to make-believe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[59:1](pch19.htm#fr_219) Work cited, Index,
*s.v.* Sacrifice, *end*. Cp. p. 415.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[59:2](pch19.htm#fr_220) Work cited, p. 9.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[60:1](pch19.htm#fr_221) Dr. Jevons, to be
sure, has denied that the religious process is either moral or rational;
but here we must try to save his thesis from himself. Otherwise it
becomes a mere disguised assertion that all religious truth is revealed,
that genius consists in getting the revelation, and that beliefs
otherwise got are either not true or not religious. Of such a doctrine
there can be no historical discussion.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[60:2](pch19.htm#fr_222) Cp. Tiele, Egyptian
Religion, pp. 23, 179-185; Maspero, *Hist. ancienne des peuples de
l’orient*, 4e édit. pp. 53-54, 285-6; Diodorus Siculus, i, 73.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[60:3](pch19.htm#fr_223) Cp. Adolf Bastian,
*Der Mensch in der Geschichte*, 1860, iii, 114; Frazer, *Golden Bough*,
ch. i, § 1; ch. iii, § 1; *Lectures on the Early History of the
Kingship*, p. 291; Jevons. *Introd. to Hist. of Relig.*, pp. 281-296.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[60:4](pch19.htm#fr_224) Dr. Frazer gives a
list of hero-stories in his note on Pausanias in his edition, ix, 26, 7.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[60:5](pch19.htm#fr_225) Cp. Bastian, as cited,
iii, 109.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[60:6](pch19.htm#fr_226) Pausanias, vii, 19.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[60:7](pch19.htm#fr_227) *Id*. viii, 2.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[61:1](pch19.htm#fr_228) Porphyry, *De
Abstinentia*, ii, 56.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[61:2](pch19.htm#fr_229) Plutarch, *Regum et
imper. apophtheg.*, Gelon, i.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[61:3](pch19.htm#fr_230) Porphyry, last cit.
ii, 55.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[61:4](pch19.htm#fr_231) J. Murdoch, *A History
of Japan*, 1910, i, 69.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[61:5](pch19.htm#fr_232) Turner, *Samoa a
Hundred Years Ago*, 1884, pp. 201-2.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[61:6](pch19.htm#fr_233) *Id*. pp. 236-8.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[61:7](pch19.htm#fr_234) Mariner, *Tonga
Islands*, 1827, ii, 178.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[61:8](pch19.htm#fr_235) Sir A. B. Ellis, *The
Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast*, 1890, pp. 128, 136.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[61:9](pch19.htm#fr_236) Burton, *A Mission to
Gelele*, 1864, ii, 359.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[61:10](pch19.htm#fr_237) Cp. Kurz, *Mémoire
sur l’état politique et religieux de la Chine 2300 ans avant notre ére*,
from *Nouveau Journal Asiatique*, 1830 (7), pp. 74-82; and Miss Simcox,
*Primitive Civilisations*, ii, 36-37. Terrien de la Couperie pronounces
all human sacrifices in ancient China to have been introduced under
alien influence (*Western Origin of the Early Chinese Civilisation*,
1894, pp, 134,.362-3, citing in support Edkins, *Church Review*, xvi.,
339; xix, 55-6). The practice of *siün*—the voluntary submission of
servants to be buried alive in grave of their masters—he represents to
have begun 678 B.C. in the west State of Ts’in, "undoubtedly under
Tartar influence," and to have been common in the fourth century, but to
have ceased after 210 B.C., when it had been made compulsory at the
funeral of She Hwang Ti. Thereafter wooden figures were buried in the
graves as surrogates, as in Japan. M. La Couperie, however, appears to
accept simple *suttee* as indigenous; and it is hard to see how the
purely alien character of either *siün* or human sacrifice proper can be
established for all China (pp. 133-8). He notes that the drowning of
girls, as brides for the River God, was suppressed in Wei after 424 by a
new Governor, but survived elsewhere. (Pp. 90, 359.)

<span id="fn_238"></span>[62:1](pch19.htm#fr_238) Burton, *A Mission to
Gelele*, 1864, ii, 149. "To abolish human sacrifice here," says Burton
in another passage, "is to abolish Dahome. The practice originates from
filial piety; it is sanctioned by long use and custom; and it is
strenuously upheld by a powerful and interested priesthood." (*Id*. ii,
26.)

<span id="fn_239"></span>[62:2](pch19.htm#fr_239) See below, Part IV, §
5, as to the similar rule in the lower civilisations of Polynesia, and
in ancient Mexico.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[62:3](pch19.htm#fr_240) See the case of King
Mesi of Porto Novo, narrated by Sir A. B. Ellis, *The Ewe-Speaking
Peoples of the Slave Coast*, 1890, p. 145; and cp. B. Thomson, The
Fijians, 1909, introd. p. xi.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[62:4](pch19.htm#fr_241) The legend of the
saving of Sunahsepa, offered for a sacrifice on behalf of King
Harischandra (R. W. Frazer, *Lit. Hist. of India*, pp. 87-89), is
obscure.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[63:1](pch19.htm#fr_242) Cp. the author's
*Short History of Freethought*, 2nd ed. i, 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 2. Reform as a Religious Process](pch20)
