[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch15) 
[Next](pch17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 12.

It is necessary to clear up the historic problem of ancestor-worship in
order to reach a sound definition of religion. And to begin with, we
find the historical evidence is all against Dr. Jevons’s later thesis.
Not only have we the many cases in which contemporary savages, like
ancient Gnostics, think of a God as an ancestor or of the first man as a
God, <span id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171) and the record in ancient
Egypt of the process by which a deceased king became a God; <span
id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_172) but we have the relatively late doctrine
in Hesiod, <span id="fr_173"></span>[3](#fn_173) according to which the
men of the first age became just and beneficent daimons, passing
invisibly over the earth, dispensing rewards and retributions and good
fortune.

There is a risk of confusion over this last conception, which, with
others of a similar kind, is taken by Mr. Lang as a proof that "early
men, contrary to Mr. Frazer's account, suppose *themselves* to be
naturally immortal." <span id="fr_174"></span>[4](#fn_174) Dr. Frazer's
words were that, "lacking the idea of eternal duration, primitive man
naturally supposes the gods to be mortal like himself." <span
id="fr_175"></span>[5](#fn_175) Here the verbal confusion is complete.
In the very act of claiming that "far from lacking the idea of eternal
duration of life, 'primitive man' has no other idea," Mr. Lang admits:
"Not that he formulates his ideas in such a term as 'eternal.'" <span
id="fr_176"></span>[6](#fn_176) But neither does he formulate it in such
a phrase as "naturally immortal"; he has, in fact, no clear idea to
formulate; <span id="fr_177"></span>[7](#fn_177) and Dr. Frazer of all
men should have remembered as

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

much. As we have seen, <span id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178) the savage
commonly believes that he would never die save for the acts of hostile
spirits, sorcerers, or enemies; yet he knows that all his race die.

What has happened is that men at a certain stage became capable of
conceptually noting at once death and the apparent survival (in dreams)
of men in some different fashion after death, without framing any
theory. But chronic crises in their political or tribal history had the
effect of singling out from the vague crowd of ancestral memories those
of a particular group or generation who made or led some migration or
conquest; and these became for a time "the" ancestors *par excellence*,
early man being unable to construct the human past save by way of some
definite beginning. At some point in the long vista he needed a "first
man," or beast, or plant, or stone, or pair; and he had to make such out
of some of his ancestral material, with whatever fanciful
embellishments. In virtue of the same state of mind, we find tribes and
even nations convinced of their special descent from one later man, who
at one stage definitely ranks as a God, <span
id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_179) though another religious concept may
ultimately undeify him, as in the cases of Abraham and Jacob.

As a result of all these tendencies, at a stage in which the primordial
belief in the "spiritual" or occult survival of ancestors in general has
begun to be definitely contradicted <span
id="fr_180"></span>[3](#fn_180) by the conceptual recognition of death,
and by disbelief in the land beyond the grave, there emerges a vague
compromise in the notion that either the first pair or the men of the
first age were of a different order as regarded their liability to
death; and this belief holds the ground until haply a general doctrine
of resurrection or ghostly immortality pushes it in turn to the
background. But though the notion of the survival of ancestors has thus
in a succession of forms subsisted from a very remote period, it clearly
does not follow that early men conceived *themselves* to be immortal in
the sense in which they were later held to be so by their descendants.
The definite or conceptual belief is retrospective. It is, however,
sufficiently general to dispose of Mr. Lang's argument that among the
Australians Gods cannot be developed from ancestors. "No ghost of a
man," he insists, "can grow into a god if his *name* is tabooed and
*therefore forgotten*." <span id="fr_181"></span>[4](#fn_181) And again:
"In Australia, where even the recent ghosts are unadored is it likely
that some remote ghost is remembered as

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

founder of the ancient mysteries?" <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182)
It is after this contention that, apparently without realising the
bearing of the statement upon the argument under notice, Mr. Lang
triumphantly tells us that there is *Australian* as well as other
evidence of the nearly universal vogue of the belief that the first
men—*i.e.*, ancestors—were deathless.

Obviously the very habit of tabooing proper names might conduce to the
deifying of ancestors under special epithets, since that resort is
always open under tabooism. <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183) The
tabooing of ancestors’ names, which is one of the most widespread of
savage practices, <span id="fr_184"></span>[3](#fn_184) can no more
destroy the notion that those ancestors have existed than the tabooing
of God-names among Egyptians, Babylonians, Hebrews, and Romans put the
Gods in question out of recollection. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[4](#fn_185) Was not Yahweh scrupulously specified in
many Hebrew rituals as Adonai, *the Lord*, and by Samaritans as Shema,
*the Name?* <span id="fr_186"></span>[5](#fn_186) It is well to ask
*why* savages taboo the names of the dead before we deduce views as to
the consequences. The reasons doubtless vary, but some instances may
illuminate the practice. Among the Battaks, where a man on becoming a
father of a boy, N.N., is henceforth known only as "father of N.N.,"
children must not utter the names of their parents, and spouses call
each other "father of N.N." and "daughter of the ——," naming her family.
Here the idea is that to know a man's name is to have some power over
his various souls. <span id="fr_187"></span>[6](#fn_187) Among the
Narrinyeri of South Australia "the name of the dead must not be
mentioned *until his body has decayed*, lest a want of sorrow should
seem to be indicated by a common and flippant use of his name. A native
would have the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

deceased believe that he cannot hear or speak his name without
weeping." <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188) There is no tendency to
oblivion here. In other cases, again, it is clear that when at death a
man's name is "buried" he is simply re-named. Among the Masai, "should
there be *anything* which is called by that \[the deceased's\] name, it
is given another name which is not like that of the deceased. For
instance, if an unimportant person called *Ol-onana* (he who is soft or
weak or gentle) were to die, gentleness would not be called on-nanai in
that kraal, as it is the name of a corpse, but it would be called by
another name, such as *epolpol* (it is smooth)." <span
id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_189) If then Ol-onana were an important
person, is it to be supposed that his personality would be forgotten?
Would not he too be re-labelled? <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_190)
*All* dead men's names are tabooed: is it to be supposed that the
personalities, or even the old names, of *all* are forgotten? Re-naming
would be a necessity, for men as for things. Among the Narrinyeri,
apparently, this would be only temporary, the original name being
reverted to after the decay of the body; and even if it were not, the
reminiscence would be unbroken, so that a notable man could as well be
deified among name-tabooers as among tribes who had not the practice.
Nor is there any force in the argument from recent disuse of such
deification. Even if we admit the probability that Australian tribes
have latterly <span id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_191) ceased to deify
ancestors, the fact remains that, as Mr. Lang admits, they think of
remote ancestors as undying, even as they do of Gods.

Recognising, however, that the definite conception of ancestors as
abnormal in point of deathlessness is retrospective, we must not on the
other hand fall into the error of supposing that only in late ages, and
by way of poetic retrospect, did men conceive of their deceased
predecessors as exercising powers of the kind credited to whatever
beings for the time answered to our general notion of "Gods." <span
id="fr_192"></span>[5](#fn_192) The true solution is that in men's vague
ideas the early "Gods" approximated much more to themselves; and that
gradually

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the Gods" as such
were relatively raised, the change proceeding for ages without involving
the absolute negation of ancestral spirits, <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) and, à fortiori, without necessarily
removing from the order of fully-established Gods all who might have
been ancestors to start with.

Indeed, there is evidence, as we have seen, that in early stages of
religion the Gods were actually conceived as destructible; <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194)' and in the Vedas and Brâhmanas the Gods
actually *acquire* immortality in different ways—by the help of Agni, by
drinking the Soma, by continence and austerity, thus gradually raising
themselves above the Asuras, with whom they were originally equal. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_195) So in the Babylonian deluge epic
Parnapishtim <span id="fr_196"></span>[4](#fn_196) and his wife, who had
been mortal, are raised to immortality. <span
id="fr_197"></span>[5](#fn_197) This conception may be a reflex of the
same doctrine as first framed for mortals; but there the fact stands
that the Gods were not definitely conceived as "necessarily immortal" to
start with.

To see in the Hesiodic or modern-savage theory only a late or "eventual"
raising of ancestors to a divine status would be to do violence to all
anthropology. Rather it stands for a theological process of
discrimination, by which the priesthoods of the Gods carefully reduced
deified ancestors as such to a lower level of divinity, while still
recognising their immortality and supernatural power. Such a process had
demonstrably occurred in the Hebrew system, where the patriarchs and
heroes of the Sacred Books have been actually identified as ancient
Semitic deities; <span id="fr_198"></span>[6](#fn_198) and it was just
as likely to occur in those other developments of Semitic theology which
can be shown to underlie the cosmology of Homer and Hesiod. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[7](#fn_199) Reasoning à priori, again, we have not
the faintest ground for supposing that primeval man discriminated
between orders of spirits to the extent of conceiving his ancestors as
dispensing supernatural favours and yet at the same time ranking far
below Gods who did the same thing. How should men conceivably begin to
deify confessed mortals as beside "great" Gods,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

having never ventured to deify them before the Gods had been so
magnified? On that line there is no solution. In the words of Professor
Robertson Smith, the origins of all religion "go back to a stage of
human thought in which the question of the nature of the Gods, as
distinguished from other beings, did not even arise in any precise form,
because no one series of existences was strictly differentiated from
another." <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200) In the light of all the
facts, in fine, we realise that the common process, seen among the
historic Greeks, <span id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_201) of demi-deifying
a hero, was merely prevented by the presence of fully-established cults
from developing just as those cults had done earlier. It of course does
not follow that they had all originated in that fashion; but that the
ancestor cults as it were played into the solar and vegetal cults from
time immemorial is on all grounds probable.

On the other line of reasoning under notice we end in a mere
counter-sense as to the definition of "ancestor." You cannot have
ancestor-worship, says Dr. Jevons at one point, till you have the
family. Yet he himself has just been describing the totem of the early
community as an "ancestor" worshipped as a God before the family was
recognised. We seem to be left with the puzzle: "When is an ancestor not
an ancestor?" as the sole fruit of a chapter of investigation. If by a
sudden *petitio principii* ancestor-worship is to be defined as strictly
a private or family-cult of the kind seen in historic times, then indeed
the denial of the priority of ancestor-worship is justified; and it is
justified again if it be meant that hostile Gods preceded friendly ones.
But in terms of Dr. Jevons’s own theory of the totemistic sacrament, the
ancestor-God is the type of the first friendly-God, who on this view is
later than the unfriendly Gods; and the friendly-God is ancestral
precisely because friendliness was apt to be associated with
ancestors, <span id="fr_202"></span>[3](#fn_202) who were certainly
regarded as were "spirits."

The warranted inference, however, is merely that the ancestor-spirit was
*one of* the types of friendly-God. Just as myths so-called can be seen,
on a fair induction, to have originated in a dozen different modes of
natural fallacy—inference from phenomena, misinterpretation of names and
objects of art, constructions from analogy, misinterpretation of ritual,
conjunctions of worships, and so forth <span
id="fr_203"></span>[4](#fn_203)—so other religious beliefs so-called are
to be inferred as

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

originating in many lines of the animistic and explanatory instinct. The
God-idea is simply the most typical myth. Adapting the popular rhyme, we
may reasonably say that "there are nine-and-twenty modes of making
tribal Gods, and every single one of them is"—natural.

There is really no conceptual limit to the primeval faculty of
God-making. The Roman pantheon alone, wherein are Gods of diseases, of
drains, of sneezing, of every bodily act, and of a hundred verbal
abstractions, might have warned any theorist against denying that early
man might deify his ancestors; and the record of the fortunes of many
cults might equally warn us against denying that any one deity might
attain the highest status. Osiris, on one theory, is like Hades a God
made out of the abstraction of the *abode* of the departed; <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_204) Dionysos, like Soma, is plausibly held
to be the deified abstraction of mere wine, <span
id="fr_205"></span>[2](#fn_205) sacramentally regarded, as Agni is
certainly the deified abstraction of the sacrificial fire; and Hathor,
who ran Isis hard in divine honours in Egypt, is in origin simply
Hat-Hor, the dwelling of Horus, to wit, the Dawn and the Sunset; <span
id="fr_206"></span>[3](#fn_206) as Venus is possibly a Roman deification
of the term Benoth in the Carthaginian phrase Succoth Benoth, <span
id="fr_207"></span>[4](#fn_207) the tents of prostitution. The Gods and
Goddesses, in fact, are made out of man's needs and passions, his
fancies and his blunders, his fears and his hopes; and it would be
strange if he never made them, even the highest of them, from the
nucleus of his reverent and affectionate retrospect on his own kind.
Round his elders and his ancestors were formed his first and fundamental
notions of right and duty and obedience. How then should he fail to
bring at times his religious and his primary ethical ideals into
combination?

Von Ihering indeed has argued that the offerings at the graves of the
dead—at least among Aryans—are the products not of love, as commonly
supposed, but of fear. <span id="fr_208"></span>[5](#fn_208) It is
characteristic of the mode of progression of the sciences that nobody
appears to suppose they might be both, some people fearing the dead,
some loving them. <span id="fr_209"></span>[6](#fn_209)

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But even supposing
them to have originated in fear of the importunities of the neglected
ghost, it would not be unnatural that from the propitiated ghost there
should be expected special favour. Doubtless the principle operated
differently in different stages. The thesis of Fustel de Coulanges, that
"what unites the members of the ancient family is the religion of the
hearth and of ancestors," and that "the ancient family......is a
religious rather than a natural association," <span
id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210) may be perfectly true (under his own
reservation that religion of course did not *create* the family); and it
would follow that ancestor-worship took on special features from the
time that the family dwelt by or over the family tomb. But this does not
dispose of the problem as to the religion of the nomads who have no
fixed hearth and tomb, <span id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_211) and of the
peoples who either burned or exposed their dead.

Taking the nomadic period in general, and assuming <span
id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_212) that the horde preceded the family in
order of evolution, we must admit that there were ideas of "ghosts" and
other quasi-human "spirits" before the strict family-ancestor was
evolved. But there is nothing to show that the idea of a general
ancestor or ancestors was not elaborated in the horde-period, out of the
normal idea of the ancestor-ghost as well as out of the idea of the
non-ancestral spirit, those ideas being easily able to coalesce. A horde
was likely to have a horde-ancestor-God; else why should the Greeks be
found speaking of their family Gods, Gods of their blood, paternal Gods,
gentile Gods? <span id="fr_213"></span>[4](#fn_213) If the *theos* were
previously conceived solely as a stupendous cosmocrator, how (once more)
came men to make *theoi* of the household? If on the other hand the
family and the tribe were roughly coeval, and the notion of a
family-ancestor be about as old as the notion of a tribe-ancestor or
First Man, we are still left facing ancestor-worship as one of the norms
of the cult of a friendly-God. Even in the Aryan horde elders would make
themselves respected, and lost fathers and mothers would be missed; and
there was no way in which early man could conceive of a providential or
punitive deity save in terms of the punitive and providential practices
of elders towards juniors, or of chiefs or patriarchs towards groups; or
in terms of the action of hostile groups or persons.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That the
abstraction of divine judges and lawgivers and avengers, thus reached,
should be employed to sanction the codes or customs of the seniors or
the patriarchs, was psychologically a matter of course; but that does
not affect the fact of the à posteriori origination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[47:1](pch16.htm#fr_171) See Kranz, *Natur- and
Kulturleben der Zulus*, 1880, pp. 109-110; Paul Wurm, *Handbuch der
Religionsgeschichte*, 1908, p. 41; Tylor, *Primitive Culture*, 3rd ed.
ii, 311-15; Turner, *Samoa a Hundred Years Ago*, 1884, pp. 288-9, 318,
345; and J. G. Müller, *Amerikanische Urreligionen*, 2te Aufl. pp.
133-136. Cp., however, p. 73. And see above, pp.
[40](pch15.htm#page_40)-1, and below, p. [48](#page_48).

<span id="fn_172"></span>[47:2](pch16.htm#fr_172) The argument does not
require specification of such a process, but reference may be made to an
ancient form of the Book of the Dead (cit. by Budge, Introd. p. cxiv,
from the text of Unas; cp. Wiedemann, *Religion of the Ancient
Egyptians*, Eng. trans. 1897, p. 303; Erman, *Handbook of Egyptian
Religion*, Eng. trans. pp. 90-91), where it is told how the deceased
king Unas as a soul in the form of a god devours his fathers and mothers
and mankind generally *and gods*. He hunts and entraps the gods in the
plains of the next world," and kills, cooks, and eats them. "He eats the
hearts carefully so that he may absorb the vital powers of the gods,"
etc. Wiedemann puts a certain strain on our ideas of definition, as well
as on our sense of humour, in calling such conceptions "these
Pantheistic views," This text, which dates from B.C. 3333, chances to
preserve for us a much earlier conception of deification. But Dr. Frazer
notes further that an ancient king often was as such ranked as an actual
God, as are many savage kings in our own day. (*Golden Bough*, i, 8,
130, 141, 145, etc.) So also with the early Hebrew judges.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[47:3](pch16.htm#fr_173) *Works and Days*, 121,
299. See Mariner, *Tonga Islands*, 3rd ed. ii, 103-4, 108-9; and compare
the similar doctrine among the Khonds, given in Macpherson's *Memorials
of Service in India*, p. 86; and cit. in note on p. 90 as to ancestral
Gods in New Zealand. Among the early Aryan Hindus "the Fathers" were
separately created, and are thus distinct from men; but are of different
degrees of divinity. Muir, *Sanskrit Texts*, v, 287, 310.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[47:4](pch16.htm#fr_174) *Magic and Religion*,
p. 85.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[47:5](pch16.htm#fr_175) *G. B.* ii, 1.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[47:6](pch16.htm#fr_176) Last cit. p. 86.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[47:7](pch16.htm#fr_177) Thus in Gen. ii, 17,
it is vaguely implied that man was "naturally immortal," and the whole
myth is an attempt to account for the origin of death; yet in iii, 22,
it is implied that only by eating of the tree of life could man live for
ever."

<span id="fn_178"></span>[48:1](pch16.htm#fr_178) Above, pp. 1-2.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[48:2](pch16.htm#fr_179) Cp. Waitz,
*Anthropologie der Naturvölker*, iii, 183; Dobrizhoffer, *Account of the
Abipones*, Eng. tr. 1821, ii, 64, 89; above, pp. 40-41.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[48:3](pch16.htm#fr_180) The contradictory
beliefs, it must be remembered survive side by side or at different
levels of culture for an indefinite time.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[48:4](pch16.htm#fr_181) *Magic and Religion*,
p. 70.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[49:1](pch16.htm#fr_182) *Id*. p. 31.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[49:2](pch16.htm#fr_183) Cp. Clodd, *Tom Tit
Tot*, p. 125 *sq*., and Frazer, *G. B.* i, 403-447, for a full view of
taboos of names, which often apply to the living as well as to the dead,
and therefore do not mean oblivion. "The Abipones think it a sin to
utter *their own names*" (Dobrizhoffer, *Account of the Abipones*, as
cited, ii, p. 444). Mr. Lang (*Magic and Religion*, p. 56) overlooks
this, taking it for granted that when a dead man's proper name is
tabooed he is forgotten. Among the Native Americans, the slayer of the
victim in certain human sacrifices received a new name by way of honour.
Lafitau, *Early History of Mankind*, 1724, ii, 303-4. Similar usages
were noted by Dobrizhoffer among the Abipones (work cited, ii, p. 445).
Other motives than "honour," of course, may have operated in such cases.
Among the Abipones all the friends and relatives of the deceased change
their names (Dobrizhoffer, ii, D. 274). Among the Bataks a father
changes his name when a son is born to him, and becomes henceforth
"father of N.N." (Warneck, *Die Religion der Batak*, 1909, p. 124).

<span id="fn_184"></span>[49:3](pch16.htm#fr_184) Cp. Waitz,
*Anthropologie der Naturvölker*, iii, 334; Tylor, *Early History of
Mankind*, 1865, 139-143; Lafitau, *Mœurs des sauvages ameriquains*, as
cited, ii, 434; Dobrizhoffer, *Account of the Abipones*, as cited, ii,
273, 444-5; A. C. Hollis, *The Masai*, 1905, pp. 304-5; A. F. Calvert,
*The Aborigines of Western Australia*, 1894, p. 20; Sir H. Johnston,
*The Uganda Protectorate*, 1902, ii, 826; Cunningham, *Uganda and its
Peoples*, 1905, p. 14, F. W. Christian, *The Caroline Islands*, 1899, p.
74; Warneck, as cited; Clodd, *Tom Tit Tot*, p. 164 *sq*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[49:4](pch16.htm#fr_185) Cp. Clodd, *Tom Tit
Tot*, p. 173 *sq*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[49:5](pch16.htm#fr_186) Originally the Jews
also read "ha-Shem" (J. W. Nutt, *Fragments of a Samaritan Targum*,
1874, Introd. pp. 38-39, ref. to Geiger, *Urschrift*, 262; Nicolas, *Des
Doctrines Samaritan religieuses des Juifs*, 1860, p. 167). It is
possible that the Jews dropped the word Shem because that was known to
be the name of a distinct God, once worshipped in Samaria. where however
the Yahwists retained it for purposes of syncretism.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[49:6](pch16.htm#fr_187) Warneck, *Die Religion
der Batak*, 1909, p. 124. Cp. Clodd, as before cited.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[50:1](pch16.htm#fr_188) The *Narrinyeri: An
Account of the tribes of South Australian Aborigines*, by the Rev.
George Taplin, 2nd ed. Adelaide, 1878, p. 19.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[50:2](pch16.htm#fr_189) Hollis, *The Masai*,
1905, pp. 304-5. Among the Samoans, similarly, objects with names
resembling those of Gods were often re-named. Turner, *Samoa a Hundred
Years Ago*, 1884, pp. 33, 60.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[50:3](pch16.htm#fr_190) It is told of the
Malagasy that they hold it a crime to mention the dead "by the names
they had when living." Spencer, *Principles of Sociology*, i, 274 (1
144), citing Drury. This leaves open a fresh naming.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[50:4](pch16.htm#fr_191) Mr. Lang supposes
(*Magic and Religion*, p. 227) that "the Zulus once had an idea of a
creative being; that they reduced him......to a first man; that they
neglected him in favour of serviceable ghosts; and that they now think
him extinct; like the ghosts themselves when they cease to be
serviceable."

<span id="fn_192"></span>[50:5](pch16.htm#fr_192) M. Girard,
anticipating Dr. Jevons, speaks of the Hesiodic doctrine as "a sort of
apotheosis which *raises* the first men to the rank of intermediaries
between the earth and the Supreme God" (*Le sentiment religieux en
Grèce*, 1869, p. 222). If it be implied that never before were men
conceived as beneficent daimons, the assumption is illicit. Even if that
doctrine came as a novelty to some recipients, the greater antiquity of
the notion is anthropologically certain.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[51:1](pch16.htm#fr_193) Compare the universal
worship of ancestors in China, and the Roman worship of Lares and Manes.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[51:2](pch16.htm#fr_194) "Dem ältesten glauben
\[of the Greeks\] ist die Anschauung, dass die Götter sterben, ganz
geläufig (E. Meyer, *Geschichte des Alterthums*, ii, 100).

<span id="fn_195"></span>[51:3](pch16.htm#fr_195) Muir, *Sanskrit
Texts*, 3rd ed. v, 14-15, 266, 316, etc.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[51:4](pch16.htm#fr_196) "Offspring of life."
The name is otherwise read *Sitnapishtim*, and again *Shamsnapishta*,
"The sun of life, and *um napishtum*, "the day of life."

<span id="fn_197"></span>[51:5](pch16.htm#fr_197) Jastrow, p. 505.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[51:6](pch16.htm#fr_198) See *Christianity and
Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 99-102, 107-8, 306, 309, 325, 370. Cp. Jer. ii
27, where the Jews are described as calling their idols their ancestors.
And see Winckler *Geschichte Israels*, ii, 20-49, 56-60, 70, 75-77, as
to the originally divine status of Abraham and Isaac, Jacob and Joseph.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[51:7](pch16.htm#fr_199) Cp. Sayce, Hibbert
Lectures, pp. 371-391; *Ancient Empires of the East*, pp. 157-8; *Die
Griechische Culte and Mythen*, 1887, pp. 165, 577, 587, 589, 593; F. A.
Paley, *The Epics of Hesiod*, 1883, Introd. pp. xvi-xvii; W. Christ,
*Gesch. der griech. Literatur*, 1889, p. 94 and notes; E. Meyer,
*Geschichte de Alterthums*, ii, § 117.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[52:1](pch16.htm#fr_200) *Religion of the
Semites*, p. 88. Cp. Frazer, *G. B.* i, 129-130, etc.; Tylor, *Primitive
Culture*, 3rd ed. i, 428-436; Spencer, *Principles of Sociology*, vol.
i, chs. viii, xvi.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[52:2](pch16.htm#fr_201) Cp. Girard, *Le
Sentiment religieux en Grèce, d’Homère à Éschyle*, 1869, pp. 227-240.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[52:3](pch16.htm#fr_202) There is, however,
abundant evidence as to fear of ancestral spirits among savage,;.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[52:4](pch16.htm#fr_203) See *Christianity and
Mythology*, pp. 21, 28 *sq*., 32 *sq*., 68, 79 *sq*., 107. 121-2, 126,
136, and Part III, *passim*.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[53:1](pch16.htm#fr_204) Lang, *Myth, Ritual,
and Religion*, 2nd. ed. ii. 146, citing Lefébure, *Osiris*, p. 129.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[53:2](pch16.htm#fr_205) Spencer, *Principles
of Sociology*, vol. i, ch. xxxii, on plant-worship; Muir, *Sanskrit
Texts*, v, sect. xvi. But cp. Lang, as last cited, ii, 242. Latterly,
Miss Harrison has convincingly shown that Dionysos is primarily a
beer-God, four of his most obscure epithets being soluble as names of
kinds of grain from which beer is made. The wine-idea is later. *Proleg.
to Greek Relig.*, 2nd. ed. pp. 413-425.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[53:3](pch16.htm#fr_206) Le Page Renouf,
Hibbert Lectures, pref. p. ix, 2nd ed.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[53:4](pch16.htm#fr_207) Selden, *De Diis
Syris*, Syntag. ii c. 7. Cp. Preller, *Römishe Mythologie*, pp. 382-5 as
to the Phœnician connections of the cult.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[53:5](pch16.htm#fr_208) *Evolution of the
Aryan*—Eng. trans. of *Vorgeschichte der Europäer*—p. 38.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[53:6](pch16.htm#fr_209) Von Ihering (p. 36)
has a doctrine, inconsistent with his general principles of racial
determination (pp, 70-73), that early Aryans were devoid of all save
conjugal family and that (*teste* the Fifth Commandment) Semites were
particularly filial (p. 34). The latter view is no doubt broadly true;
but Roman law is tolerably strong on the *patria potestas*, and
rebellions of sons against fathers have always been familiar in the
Semitic <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> States, despite the standing
precept. On the other hand, female infanticide, which Von Ihering seems
to hold specially Aryan, was prevalent among the Arabs before Mohammed.
The myth of the dethronement of Uranus, again, which Von Ihering cites
against the Aryans (p. 33), is probably Semitic in origin. Finally, it
is clear that the highly filial Chinese originally sacrificed abundantly
at their parents’ graves. Was *that* from love or from fear?

<span id="fn_210"></span>[54:1](pch16.htm#fr_210) *La Cité Antique*, pp.
40-41 (éd. Sième).

<span id="fn_211"></span>[54:2](pch16.htm#fr_211) Fustel de Coulanges of
course recognised that there were such nomads (pp. 62, 66), though Von
Ihering (p. 47) seems to suppose that he did not.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[54:3](pch16.htm#fr_212) This is not asserted
as an established fact.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[54:4](pch16.htm#fr_213) Refs. in Fustel de
Coulanges, p. 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 13. The Authoritarian Element a Mark of Religion](pch17)
