[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch38) 
[Next](pch40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 12. The Eucharist in Orthodox Judaism.

That there were both orthodox and heterodox forms of a quasi-Mithraic
bread-and-wine ritual among the Jews is to be gathered even from the
sacred books. In the legend of the Exodus, Aaron and the elders of
Israel "eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God" <span
id="fr_880"></span>[5](#fn_880)—that is, twelve elders and the Anointed
One or Christos eat a bread sacrament with a presumptive ancient deity,
Moses himself being such. And wine would not be wanting. In the
so-called Song of Moses, which repudiates a hostile God, "their Rock in
which they trusted, which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
the wine of their drink-offering," Yahweh also is called "our Rock"; and
in an obscure passage *his* wine seems to be extolled. <span
id="fr_881"></span>[6](#fn_881) Even if the Rock in such allusions were
originally the actual tombstone or altar on which sacrifices were laid
and libations poured, there would be no difficulty about making it into
a God *with* whom the worshipper ate and drank; <span
id="fr_882"></span>[7](#fn_882) and such an adaptation was as natural
for Semites as for Aryans.

But there are clearer clues. Of the legend of Melchizedek, who gave to
Abraham a sacramental meal of bread and wine, and who

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

was "King of Peace" and "priest of El Elyon," <span
id="fr_883"></span>[1](#fn_883) we know that it was a subject of both
canonical <span id="fr_884"></span>[2](#fn_884) and extra-canonical
tradition. He was fabled to have been "without father, without mother,
without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but
made like unto the Son of God." <span id="fr_885"></span>[3](#fn_885) As
the name meant King of Righteousness, and El Elyon was a Phœnician
deity, the legend that Abraham paid him tithes tells simply of one more
extra-Yahwistic cult among the Israelites; and the description cited
must originally have applied to the Most High God himself. "Self-made"
was a title of the Sun-Gods, <span id="fr_886"></span>[4](#fn_886) and
King of Righteousness a title of many Gods (not to mention Hammurabi and
Buddha) as well as of Yahweh and Jesus. <span
id="fr_887"></span>[5](#fn_887) It is vain to ask whether the
bread-and-wine ritual was connected directly with the solar
worship, <span id="fr_888"></span>[6](#fn_888) or with that of a King of
Peace who stood for the moon, or both moon and sun; but it suffices that
an extra-Israelitish myth connected with such a ritual was cherished
among the dispersed Jews of the Hellenistic period. And the use made of
the story of Melchizedek by Justin Martyr <span
id="fr_889"></span>[7](#fn_889) and Tertullian, <span
id="fr_890"></span>[8](#fn_890) as proving that a man could be a priest
of the true God without being circumcised or observing the Jewish law,
would certainly be made of it by earlier Jews of the more cosmopolitan
sort.

Further, the denunciations of the prophets against the drink-offerings
to other Gods did not veto a eucharist eaten and drunk in the name of
Yahweh. Those denunciations to start with are a proof of the commonness
of eucharists among the Jews about the exilic period. Jeremiah tells of
a usage, especially popular with women, of incense-burnings and
drink-offerings to the Queen of Heaven. <span
id="fr_891"></span>[9](#fn_891) This, as a nocturnal rite, would be a
"Holy Supper." And in the last chapters of the Deutero-Isaiah <span
id="fr_892"></span>[10](#fn_892) we have first a combined charge of
child-sacrifice and of unlawful drink-offerings against the polytheistic
Israelites, and again a denunciation of those who "prepared a table for
Gad (Fortune), and that fill up mingled wine unto Meni." <span
id="fr_893"></span>[11](#fn_893) Now, Meni, translated "Destiny," is in
all

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

likelihood simply Mên the Asiatic Moon-God, who is virtually identified
with Selênê-Mênê the Moon-Goddess in the Orphic hymns, and like her was
held to be twy-sexed. <span id="fr_894"></span>[1](#fn_894) In that case
Meni is only another aspect of the Queen of Heaven, <span
id="fr_895"></span>[2](#fn_895) the wine-eucharist being, as before
remarked, a lunar rite. Whether or not this Deus Lunus was then, as
later, identified with Mithra, we cannot divine. It suffices that the
sacrament in question was extremely widespread. <span
id="fr_896"></span>[3](#fn_896)

The allusion to the "mingled wine" apparently implies an objection such
as we know existed in Greece to any dilution of the wine devoted to the
Wine-God. There the practice was to keep unmixed the cup to the "Good
Deity" (*agathos daimon*) Dionysos, <span
id="fr_897"></span>[4](#fn_897) but to mix with water that which was
drunk to Zeus the Saviour, he being the rain-giver. <span
id="fr_898"></span>[5](#fn_898) In the worship of Yahweh, whether or not
he were originally a variant of Dionysos, <span
id="fr_899"></span>[6](#fn_899) the priests would naturally stipulate
for a drink-offering of unmixed wine, since in all likelihood they
themselves consumed it, <span id="fr_900"></span>[7](#fn_900) though
there is a suggestion in the code that it sweetened the
burnt-offering. <span id="fr_901"></span>[8](#fn_901) In Philo Judæus
there is a passage which notably combines the idea of the virtue of
unmixed wine with that of its mystical connection with human
sacrifice:—"Who then is the chief butler of God? The priest who offers
libations to him, the truly great high-priest who, having received a
draught of everlasting graces, offers himself in return, pouring in an
entire libation of unmixed-wine." <span id="fr_902"></span>[9](#fn_902)
Here, as so often

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

elsewhere in Philo, the conception of sacrifice has become mystical; but
his identification of the sacrifice with the Logos, which "pours a
portion of blood" for the purposes of the bodily life; <span
id="fr_903"></span>[1](#fn_903) and his comparison of the celestial food
of the soul to manna, which the Logos "divides in equal portions among
all who are to use it, caring greatly for equality," <span
id="fr_904"></span>[2](#fn_904) tells of a more concrete interpretation
of texts among the more normally religious.

On the other hand, as Yahweh like Zeus was the rain-giver, and good
sense vetoed much drinking of the strong unmixed wine, there was no
solid reason why in the Hebrew cult also the wine should not be diluted;
and in the Talmud we find the act in a measure prescribed, <span
id="fr_905"></span>[3](#fn_905) the practice of the Ebionites and the
early Christians <span id="fr_906"></span>[4](#fn_906) being thus
anticipated. In any case, we find the drink-offering of wine expressly
connected in one—apparently interpolated—section of the priestly
code <span id="fr_907"></span>[5](#fn_907) with the passover feast of
first-fruits and the firstling lamb; and here it is stipulated that no
bread shall be eaten till the oblation has been made. Thus both as an
orthodoxy and as a heresy a Holy Supper of bread and wine in connection
with a symbolic sacrifice of a firstling lamb was known among the
pre-Christian Israelites.

What bearing, finally, the practice may have had on the use of the
sacred shew-bread of the temple remains problematic; but that the
shew-bread stood for some quasi-sacramental meal is the only explanation
we have of it. <span id="fr_908"></span>[6](#fn_908) Concerning the
twelve cakes or loaves of fine flour which were placed every sabbath day
"upon the holy table before the Lord," the code prescribed that "it
shall be for Aaron and his sons; and they shall eat it in a holy place;
for it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord." <span
id="fr_909"></span>[7](#fn_909) A sacrament is implied in the
description. And when we remember that the oxen sacrificed at the temple
of Yahweh wore crowns and had their horns gilt <span
id="fr_910"></span>[8](#fn_910) exactly like those sacrificed by the
pagans, <span id="fr_911"></span>[9](#fn_911) we are entitled to doubt
whether the temple-priests did not in most other respects conform to
common pagan practice. <span id="fr_912"></span>[10](#fn_912) Priestly
sacramental banquets

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

of flesh and cakes we know to have been usual in Rome. <span
id="fr_913"></span>[1](#fn_913) Even on Judaic principles, however, the
priests were likely to make of their sacred loaves—or a few of them, for
they were large—a Banquet for Twelve. <span
id="fr_914"></span>[2](#fn_914) According to Maimonides, the daily
sacrifice required thirteen priests for its performance; <span
id="fr_915"></span>[3](#fn_915) and on the principle that the bread and
wine constituted a sacrifice, the presiding priest and twelve others
would be the fit consumers. We know further that there was a dispute
between the school of Shamai and that of Hillel as to the meal on the
Sabbath-eve, wherein wine was drunk, the Shamaites holding that a
blessing should first be asked on the day, the Hillelites putting first
the wine, *which consecrated the day*. <span
id="fr_916"></span>[4](#fn_916) If, then, the loaves and the wine were
eaten on the evening following the Sabbath, it would represent a
pre-Christian bread-and-wine eucharist or Holy Supper of thirteen
priestly persons on the Day of the Sun. In this, as in all sacraments,
the God mystically joined; and if the High Priest presided there was in
his person a Christos or Anointed One. <span
id="fr_917"></span>[5](#fn_917)

Now, we know (1) that the High-Priest officiated on the sabbaths; <span
id="fr_918"></span>[6](#fn_918) (2) that the retiring course of priests
received six of the loaves and the incoming one the other six; <span
id="fr_919"></span>[7](#fn_919) and (3) that they were eaten stale, each
sabbath's supply being consumed on the next sabbath. <span
id="fr_920"></span>[8](#fn_920) Here then was an apparent necessity for
an eating of the sacred bread by the priests in the company of the
High-Priest, as representing Aaron; and inasmuch as wine was forbidden
to all during their period of service <span
id="fr_921"></span>[9](#fn_921) there is an implication that they were
free to drink it when the service was over <span
id="fr_922"></span>[10](#fn_922)—that is, on the sabbath day, after the
high-priest had officiated. <span id="fr_923"></span>[11](#fn_923)

Of course the number may not have been twelve; it may have been
twenty-four, the number of the courses of the priests <span
id="fr_924"></span>[12](#fn_924) and of the heavenly band of "elders" in
the Judæo-Christian Apocalypse; <span id="fr_925"></span>[13](#fn_925)

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

and the bread may have been eaten not with wine but with water. Either
way, at least, there was a sacrament very much on the later Christian
lines; and this suffices for our theory, which does not require that we
should find in the very temple a close Judaic precedent for the
Christian weekly supper of bread and wine. Indeed, there is a
presumption that it originated, as before suggested, outside of the
immediate sphere of the temple priesthood. But the fact that there was a
certain precedent in the priestly practice would be a point in favour of
an outside rite, which might conceivably be specialised among the Twelve
Apostles of the High-Priest, whose official function is the real basis
of the myth of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus. <span
id="fr_926"></span>[1](#fn_926) Even this hypothesis, in turn, is not
essential to our theory of sacramental evolution. It suffices that
beyond all question there were many Gentile precedents for the
eucharist, and that its connection with the Lord's Day <span
id="fr_927"></span>[2](#fn_927) was quite independent of the myth of the
Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week; the rite being so
fixed in both its solar and its lunar connection, which was implicit in
the cults of Dionysos and Mithra, both of them two-formed, and both
combining the attributes of sun and moon. <span
id="fr_928"></span>[3](#fn_928) And as the myth of the sacrifice of the
God-Man as king, and the kindred sacrament of the Lamb-God, were derived
through Judaic channels, there is a presumption that the habitual rites
of the first Christists came in the same way. On that view it remains to
trace further the Judaic evolution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_880"></span>[175:5](pch39.htm#fr_880) Exod. xviii, 12.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[175:6](pch39.htm#fr_881) Deut. xxxii, 31-33,
37-39.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[175:7](pch39.htm#fr_882) Cp. Jevons, *Introd.
to Hist. of Relig.* pp. 291, 295; Prof. Kittel, *Studien zur hebräischen
Archäologie*, 1908, 102 *sq*., 114 *sq*.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[176:1](pch39.htm#fr_883) Gen. xiv, 18.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[176:2](pch39.htm#fr_884) Cp. Ps. cx, 4.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[176:3](pch39.htm#fr_885) Heb. vii, 3. Cp. v,
6, 10; and vii, 11, 17.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[176:4](pch39.htm#fr_886) *E.g.*, Helios and
Herakles in the *Orphica*, viii, 3; xii, 9. Nature also is "autopator"
and "without father." *Id*. x, 10. A Talmudic writer identifies
Melchizedek with Shem (*Encyc. Bib.* *s.v.* Melchisedek). Cp. Gregorie,
*Works*, ed. 1671, pref., for an Arabic genealogy which makes
Melchisedec son of Heraclim or Phaleg.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[176:5](pch39.htm#fr_887) Ps. xlv, 6, 7; Heb.
i, 8.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[176:6](pch39.htm#fr_888) According to one
account, wine was never offered in the Greek worship of the Sun-God
(Athenæus, xv, 48); but in the assimilation of the cults of Apollo and
Dionysos this rule was probably got over, lust as in the assimilation of
those of Dionysos and Dêmêtêr wine was used, though that was originally
*nefas* in the worship of the Corn-Goddess. Cp. Servius on Virgil,
*Georg*. i, 344, and the discussion in Alexander ab Alexandro, *Genial.
Dier.* ed. 1673, 1, 695-6. 705-6.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[176:7](pch39.htm#fr_889) *Dialogue with
Trypho*, c. 19.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[176:8](pch39.htm#fr_890) *Adversus Judæos*,
cc. 2, 3.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[176:9](pch39.htm#fr_891) Jer. xliv, 17, 18,
25. Cp. xix, 13; xxxii, 29.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[176:10](pch39.htm#fr_892) Isa. lvii, 5-6.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[176:11](pch39.htm#fr_893) Isa. lxv, 11
(marg.).

<span id="fn_894"></span>[177:1](pch39.htm#fr_894) *Orphica*, ix, 1-3;
Athenæus, xiii, 71 (v. 15); Gerhard, *Griechische Mythologie*, 1854, §
481, Anh. § 1001 L.; Lenormant, *Chaldean Magic*, p. 133; Foucart, *Des
Associations religieuses chez les Grecs*, pp. 26, 119; K. O. Müller,
*Manual of Ancient Art*, Eng. tr. p. 532. See also below, Pt. III.,
*Mithraism*, § 5. The Hebraists apparently refuse the identification
because the traditional vocalisation of the word in its solitary mention
in Isaiah is Mĕnī—a very insufficient reason as against the implications
of Mên and Mênê. In Pontus, where there was a great temple of Mên of
Pharnaces at Ameria, the royal oath was, "By the Fortune of the King,
and by Mên of Pharnaces" (Strabo, B. xii, c. iii. § 31)—the same
collocation as we find in Gad (Fortune) and Meni. The connection between
the fixed recurrence of the changes of the moon and the idea of Destiny
is clear in the Egyptian worship of Maat, the Measurer, and Goddess of
Law (Renouf. Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. pp. 71-119). Dr. Cheyne (*Encyc.
Bib.* art. <span class="smallcaps">Fortune and Destiny</span>) suggests
the old Arabic deity Manah or Manât (Koran, Sura, liii, 20), as to whom
see Sale, *Prelim. Discourse*, ed. 1833, i, 40, 41. The sex of Manah is
not clear, but the God seems to have been associated with bloody
sacrifices, and to connect with the place Mina, still the valley of
sacrifices for Moslems. There is finally a possibility that such a Manah
may connect with the mythic "manna," "the bread which the Lord hath
given you to eat" (Ex. xvi, 15). The Revised Version and the Kautzsch
version not very plausibly decide for the reading "What is it?" as
against the alternatives "It is manna" or "It is a portion," on the
theory that mân is a contracted Aramaic particle = What? Sayce and
Lenormant tell of an Assyrian God of Destiny, Manah, but he seems a bare
name.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[177:2](pch39.htm#fr_895) Cp. Kalisch, *Comm.
on Levit.*, i, 370.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[177:3](pch39.htm#fr_896) Cp. Jerome *in.
loc.*; Spencer, *De legibus Hebræorum*, ed. 1686, ii, 138-9; Selden, *De
Diis Syris*, ed. 1680, pp. 6-8.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[177:4](pch39.htm#fr_897) Athenæus, ii, 7, p.
38; xv, 47, 48, pp. 69.2-3. This had to be merely tasted, by reason of
the strength of the unmixed wine of the ancients.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[177:5](pch39.htm#fr_898) *Id*. ii, 7; xv, 17,
p. 675; Diodorus Siculus, iv, 3.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[177:6](pch39.htm#fr_899) Cp. *Christianity and
Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 99.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[177:7](pch39.htm#fr_900) It was poured out at
the base of the altar (Josephus, *Antiq.* iii, 9, § 3; cp. Smith, *Rel.
of Semites*, p. 213 and note); and it is extremely unlikely that the
enormous quantity of, wine offered in libations was allowed to drain
away as mere sewage. Cp. the tone of Joel, i, 9, 13.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[177:8](pch39.htm#fr_901) Num. xv, 7, 10. But
cp. v, 24; xxviii, 7; Ex. xxix, 40. Presumably a little of the wine
would be thrown on the fire or on the sacrifice,

<span id="fn_902"></span>[177:9](pch39.htm#fr_902) *De Somniis*, ii, 27;
Yonge's translation.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[178:1](pch39.htm#fr_903) *Quis haeres rer.
div.* c. 28.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[178:2](pch39.htm#fr_904) *Id*. c. 39.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[178:3](pch39.htm#fr_905) "No blessing is to be
pronounced over the cup of wine, unless water has first been mixed with
it. Such are the words of Rabbi Eleezer (1st c.). But the wise men are
not particular." *Berachoth*, fol. 50, col. 1, cited by Hershon,
*Genesis*, p. 231, *n*. 26.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[178:4](pch39.htm#fr_906) Cp. Justin Martyr,
*Apol*. 1, 55-57.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[178:5](pch39.htm#fr_907) Lev. xxiii, 9-14.
Verses 8 and 15 appear to have been originally in context.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[178:6](pch39.htm#fr_908) Cp, Robertson Smith,
*Religion of the Semites*, pp. 207-8; Bähr, *Symbolik des Mosaischen
Cultus*, 1835, i, 425-438. Gesenius (*Comm. über den Jesaja*, ii, 287,
cited by Bähr) decides that the table of shew-bread was simply a
*Lectisternium*.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[178:7](pch39.htm#fr_909) Lev. xxiv, 5-9. Cp.
Philo Judæus, *De Victimis*, 3.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[178:8](pch39.htm#fr_910) Schürer, *Hist. of
the Jewish People in the time of Jesus Christ*, 2nd Div. Eng. tr. i,
237.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[178:9](pch39.htm#fr_911) Porphyry, *De
Abstinentia*, ii, 15, 60; Homer, *Iliad*, x, 294; Virgil, *Æneid*, ix,
627. Cp. Newton, *Essays in Art and Archæology*, 1880, p. 174. As to
Chinese practice, see above, [p. 140](pch32.htm#page_140).

<span id="fn_912"></span>[178:10](pch39.htm#fr_912) On pagan
Lectisternia and "shew-bread" in general, cp. Bähr, as cited.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[179:1](pch39.htm#fr_913) Suetonius,
*Claudius*, 33; *Vitellius*, 13.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[179:2](pch39.htm#fr_914) Cp. Bähr, as cited,
p. 430. The fact that Philo (*De Victimis*, 3) and Josephus (Wars, v, 5,
§ 5) refer the number of loaves respectively to the months and to the
signs of the zodiac, suggests the presence of the same symbols in other
cults; and as the twelve stones on the breastplate of the high-priest
stood for the signs of the zodiac (Clem. Alex., *Stromata*, i, 5; Philo,
*De Mose.* iii, 12; *De Monarchia*, ii, 5—cp. *De Profugis*, 14, where
the patriarchs are divided in two ranks like the signs) there is a
strong presumption that the detail came directly from Babylon, where the
twelve signs represented twelve Gods (Jastrow, pp. 434, 462-3).

<span id="fn_915"></span>[179:3](pch39.htm#fr_915) Cited by Conder,
*Handbook to the Bible*, p. 109.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[179:4](pch39.htm#fr_916) Hershon, *Genesis
with a Talm. Comm.* p. 230, n. 11, citing *Succah*, fol. 56, col. 1; and
Maimonides, *Hilch. Shabbath*, Sect. 29, *Halachah* 7.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[179:5](pch39.htm#fr_917) Schürer, as cited,
pp. 215-216.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[179:6](pch39.htm#fr_918) Josephus, *Wars*, v,
5, § 7.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[179:7](pch39.htm#fr_919) Schürer, as cited, p.
236, *note*, ref. to *Succah*, v, 7, 8. In the same way there were
always six lambs ready for sacrifice. Conder, p. 110.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[179:8](pch39.htm#fr_920) Josephus, *Antiq.*
iii, 10, § 7.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[179:9](pch39.htm#fr_921) Ezek. xliv, 21; Lev.
x, 8. Cp. Schürer, p. 278.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[179:10](pch39.htm#fr_922) This is clearly
implied by Josephus, *Wars*, v, 5, § 7.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[179:11](pch39.htm#fr_923) Schürer, pp. 273-4,
and refs.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[179:12](pch39.htm#fr_924) *Id*. pp. 219, 275.
Cp. Conder, p. 108.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[179:13](pch39.htm#fr_925) Rev. iv, 10, etc.
This number probably came from the twenty-four "counsellor-Gods" of the
Babylonian religion (Diod. Sic. ii, 31; Tiele, *Hist. comp.* p. 249;
Gunkel, *Zum religionsgeschichtlichen Verständnis des Neuen Testaments*,
1903, p. 43), where the golden tables of Bel (Herod. i, 181, 183) may
have served for a lectisternium. Cp. Bahr, *Symbolik des Mosaischen
Cultus*, i, 438.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[180:1](pch39.htm#fr_926) *Christianity and
Mythology*, 2nd ed. p. 344.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[180:2](pch39.htm#fr_927) That the word
*Kyriakos* is not a Christian coinage is now fully established. See
Deissmann in *Encyc. Bib.* s.v. <span class="smallcaps">Lord's
Day</span>, citing his own *Neue Bibelstudien*, 1897, 0.44, *sq*., and
cp. the expression κυριακὴν Κυρίου in the *Didachê*, ch. 14.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[180:3](pch39.htm#fr_928) Below, Part III, § 5;
*Orphica*, xxx, 2, 3; xlii, 4. The double sex of Dionysos in the
mysteries is often ignored by the mythologists. *E.g.*, Preller does not
give his epithets διφυης and διμορφος; and Gerhard (1 451, 1) makes the
latter term apply to his different ages and animal shapes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 13. Special Features of the Crucifixion Myth](pch40)
