[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch32) 
[Next](pch34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 6. The Cannibal Sacrament.

Given such a modification, however, we have to reckon with a tendency
that is seen to have been chronic in religious history—the tendency,
namely, to revert to a foreign or archaic form of sacrifice or mystery
in times of national disaster and uncertainty. <span
id="fr_663"></span>[3](#fn_663) It is expressed alike in the Roman
resort to eastern and Egyptian Gods

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

in times of desperate war, in the revival or preservation of the cults
of subdued races, <span id="fr_664"></span>[1](#fn_664) in the
multiplication of magical rites for decaying civilisations, and in the
chronic reversion during times of excitement to palmistry and other
modes of fortune-telling. <span id="fr_665"></span>[2](#fn_665) And that
the *idea* of religious anthropophagy prevailed in the early Christian
world is obvious from the central ritual of the cult, where the
formulas: "Take eat, this is my body"; "Drink ye all of it, for this is
my blood," cannot conceivably be other than adaptations from a mystery
ritual in which a sacrificed God so spoke by the mouth of his
priest. <span id="fr_666"></span>[3](#fn_666) In the fourth gospel we
have an amplification in the same sense, the act of symbolical
anthropophagy or theophagy being made the means to immortality:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">I am the bread of life......I am the living bread,
which came down out of heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever: yea, and the bread which I will give is my flesh, *for
the life of the world*......Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man
and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves. He that eateth my
flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life; *and I will raise him up
at the last day*. For my flesh is true meat, and my blood is true drink.
*He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in
him*. <span id="fr_667"></span>[4](#fn_667)</span>

</div>

The very repetitions are ritualistic; we have them in the ritual of the
Khonds, and in the ritual of the pre-Christian Mexicans. <span
id="fr_668"></span>[5](#fn_668) And there is another curious parallel in
a certain ritual of Dahome, where, with all the stress of human
sacrifice, cannibalism occurred in one set of cases only—those killed by
lightning, a death "which renders sepulture, as among the Romans,
unlawful." In these cases the official "wives" of the Thunder-God place
the body upon a platform, cut from it lumps which they chew without
eating, crying to passers-by: 'We sell you meat, fine meat, come and
buy.'" <span id="fr_669"></span>[6](#fn_669)

Now, the eucharist stands both in the myth and in the nature of the cult
in the closest relation to the act of human sacrifice; and to explain
the latter without reference to the former is to miss part of the
problem. For the compilers of the fourth gospel, as we have noted, the
Crucified One *is* the final and universal paschal sacrifice, being
slain at the time of the paschal lamb-eating, whereas in the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

synoptics he had previously partaken thereof. And that this conception
existed among the Judæo-Christists before the gospels were written is
clear from the book of Revelation, where we have a Judaic writer of the
early days of the Gentile schism <span id="fr_670"></span>[1](#fn_670)
identifying Jesus with the Alpha and the Omega = the Almighty, and at
the same time with "the Lamb that was slain," and that has seven horns
and eyes, like the symbol of Mithra, the slain God actually appearing as
a Lamb in the vision. Thus in the Jesuine eucharist, as in so many
others, there is embodied the primitive countersense of the God eating
himself, in that the sacred or sacrificial animal which he eats is his
own manifestation. There could not well occur in respect of the lamb the
further myth-evolution seen in some other cults, as in that of the
goat-eating Dionysos, where "we have the strange spectacle of a God
sacrificed to himself on the ground that he is his own enemy." But the
primary principle is the same: whether through totemism or through an
early application of the zodiacal principle, making the spring sacrifice
consist in a lamb because the Sun is then in the constellation of the
Ram-Lamb, the lamb stands for the God; and "as the God is supposed to
partake of the victim offered to him, it follows that, when the victim
is the God's own self, the God eats of his own flesh." <span
id="fr_671"></span>[2](#fn_671) In the gospel legend this happens by a
double necessity, inasmuch as the God must found his own eucharist
before his death.

It was doubtless by way of refining upon the earlier practice of
flesh-eating that in the synoptics the God is made to call the bread his
flesh; though in the course of the supper he presumptively ate of the
prescribed flesh of his special symbol and representative, the lamb. In
the same way the Mithraists, whose God was symbolised by both the bull
and the lamb, had a sacred meal of bread and wine and one of bread and
water, though the God is normally figured as slaying the bull, and a
lamb was at certain times eaten in the mysteries. <span
id="fr_672"></span>[3](#fn_672) So in the mystical eucharist of the
Egyptians, wherein the divine beings "eat the God Bah \[God of the
water-flood\] and drink the drink offerings," <span
id="fr_673"></span>[4](#fn_673) the "cakes and ale" so constantly
mentioned in the funeral ritual clearly stand for bread and wine as
symbolising flesh and blood, the cakes being made of white grain, and
the ale from red grain. <span id="fr_674"></span>[5](#fn_674) The
worshippers of Dionysos inferribly did the same when his worship was
linked to that of Dêmêtêr or Ceres, the Corn-Goddess, and in his cult in
turn the wine was

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

mixed with water. <span id="fr_675"></span>[1](#fn_675) But it is on
record that though some Christian worshippers in the second century and
later, whether imitating the Mithraists or proceeding on general ascetic
principles, substituted water for wine in the normal sacrament (a
mixture of wine and water being the common usage), <span
id="fr_676"></span>[2](#fn_676) an actual lamb was in many churches
anciently sacrificed and eaten at Easter, and that when that usage
ceased a baked image of a lamb was substituted. <span
id="fr_677"></span>[3](#fn_677) And vestiges of both customs survive to
this day in the practice of the Catholics of Italy, wherein an actual
body of a lamb as well as a confectionery image is blessed by the
priest, with the Easter eggs, and sometimes bread. <span
id="fr_678"></span>[4](#fn_678)

There were in reality two ideals in the early Church: that set forth by
a number of the Fathers down to Augustine, according to which the ritual
of the Holy Supper is purely mystical; <span
id="fr_679"></span>[5](#fn_679) and another, resting on the natural
feeling that the ritual language was gratuitously fantastic if taken as
wholly mystical. This, the realistic view, founds on the whole
historical analogy of sacrifice, which always meant a communion with the
God in partaking of a common meal, <span id="fr_680"></span>[6](#fn_680)
and often, further, a partaking *of* the God <span
id="fr_681"></span>[7](#fn_681) under the form of his animal or human
representative—this after the principle of totemism, if ever present in
the particular cult, had been long overlaid by a later mysticism.

In short, if men ate the paschal sacrament of the Lamb by way of eating
the God, they were doing what was pleasing to the God; and if they
further regarded the God as incarnate in human shape, they were equally
entitled or committed to eating him in that form. But are we then to
suppose that in any Mediterranean population about the beginning of the
Christian era a religious sect could sacrifice a human being and
afterwards sacramentally eat of the flesh? In the records of the
man-sacrifice of the Babylonian Sacæa or Zakmuk, to which Dr. Frazer
looks for the original of a rite

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

copied by the Jews in their Purim feast and incidentally applied to the
execution of a historic Jesus, there is no trace of a subsequent
anthropophagous or other sacrament; any more than a rite of
resurrection. Yet such a sacrament would seem to be primordial; and the
idea of resurrection, developed as a doctrine of individual immortality
from the primary conception of the annual revival of vegetation, had
become part of the mystery rituals of Osiris and Dionysos, and of the
Eleusinia, long before the Christian era.

It is the same doctrine that we find in pro-Christian Mexico,
particularly in the worship of Huitzilopochtli, concerning which a
discerning mythologist of the last generation noted that the practice of
making from dough and seeds and children's blood small images of the
God, which were treated like human victims and eaten, signified his
death and the eating of his body:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Whereas the God dies, it must be religiously and as
a sacrifice; and whereas the anthropomorphic God dies, he dies as a
human sacrifice according to the established usages......his heart is
cut out and his body eaten as was done in every human sacrifice. Was the
thought thereby signified that the God, when his body was eaten, became
part thereof, and so communicated himself? Doubtless, but not
abstractly, metaphysically, or at all Christianly or morally, but simply
on his Nature side, which is the essence of the Feast-God. In seeds he
gives his body to nourish his worshippers......Broadly, the God
entertains the sacrificer at the sacrifice through the sacrificial meal;
and when the slave, as so often happens, represents the God to whom he
is sacrificed, the eating of his flesh is an eating of the God's. <span
id="fr_682"></span>[1](#fn_682)</span>

</div>

With the comparative "morality" of the heathen and Christian sacraments
we need not here concern ourselves. But it is to be noted that among the
early Christians the sacramental bread was treated as having medicinal
virtue; and that in the Middle Ages it became practically a
fetish. <span id="fr_683"></span>[2](#fn_683)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_663"></span>[140:3](pch33.htm#fr_663) Cp. Robertson Smith,
*Semites*, p. 339; Pausanias, iv, 9; vii, 38; viii, 2; ix, 34; Granger;
*The Worship of the Romans*, 1895, p. 300; Gibbon, ch. ii, Bohn ed. i,
41; ch. xxxiv (iii, 554): Boissier, *La Fin du Paganisme*, i, 31;
Mariner, *Tonga Islands*, 3rd ed. i, 190, 300; J. Williams, *Narrative
of Missionary Enterprise*s, 1837, p. 549; Rhys, *Celtic Britain*, 2nd
ed. p. 69; Murray, *Rise of the Greek Epic*, p. 15; and above, [p.
65](pch20.htm#page_65).

<span id="fn_664"></span>[141:1](pch33.htm#fr_664) Cp. K. O. Müller,
*Introd. to Mythology*, Eng. tr. pp. 169, 193-4; 2 Kings xvii, 26;
Herodotus, if, 171. Cp. *Short History of Freethought*, i, 43-5.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[141:2](pch33.htm#fr_665) Such a revival was
noted among upper-class people in England in connection with the
extensive volunteering for service in South Africa in 1899-1900; and
there are clear traces of it in every age.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[141:3](pch33.htm#fr_666) See Frazer, *G. B.*,
2nd ed. ii, 134, and refs., as to the priests of Attis at Pessinus and
Rome; and cp. Jevons, pp. 273-5. The usage was widespread, being found
among the Polynesians and the aboriginal magicians of California, and in
several of the cults of pre-Christian Mexico. See J. G. Müller,
*Amerikanische Urreligionen*, pp. 77, 493, 577; Mariner, *Tonga
Islands*, 1827, i, 101, 290; W. Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*, 2nd ed.
i, 373-5; iv, 309-10.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[141:4](pch33.htm#fr_667) John vi, 48-56.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[141:5](pch33.htm#fr_668) Cp. Sahagun,
*passim*.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[141:6](pch33.htm#fr_669) Burton, *A Mission to
Gelele*, 1864, ii, 143.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[142:1](pch33.htm#fr_670) Cp. Rev. ii, 9; iii,
9.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[142:2](pch33.htm#fr_671) Frazer, *G. B.*, ii,
167.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[142:3](pch33.htm#fr_672) See below, Part III,
*Mithraism*, §1 6, 9.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[142:4](pch33.htm#fr_673) *Book of the Dead*,
ch. lxv, Budge's tr. pp. 120, 156.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[142:5](pch33.htm#fr_674) *Id*. ch. cxxiv, tr.
p. 187.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[143:1](pch33.htm#fr_675) *Christianity and
Mythology*, 2nd ed. p. 360.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[143:2](pch33.htm#fr_676) Bingham, *Antiq. of
the Christian Church*, B. xv, ch. ii, §§ 5, 7.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[143:3](pch33.htm#fr_677) Hatch, Hibbert
Lectures, p. 300. The criticism of Dr. Cheatham on this passage (The
Mysteries, Pagan and Christian, 1897, p. 149) denies the sacrifice on
the altar (cp. Bingham, Bk. xv, ch. ii, § 3), but admits that a lamb,
blessed by the Pope, was eaten. But there is evidence that a lamb is
actually sacrificed on the altar in at least one place to this day. A
picture representing the practice was published some years ago in (I
think) the Daily Graphic.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[143:4](pch33.htm#fr_678) *Order of Divine
Service for Easter, according to the use of the Church of Rome* (Art and
Book Company: London), 1899, p. 99. "The offices of "Blessing of the
Houses—the Lamb—the Eggs" are *not* given in the official *Office of
Holy Week according to the Roman Rite*, published by Washbourne, London,
1896.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[143:5](pch33.htm#fr_679) Augustine, *De Doctr.
Chr.* iii, 16, § 24; Justin Martyr, *Dialogue with Trypho*, xli; Clemens
Alexandr. *Pædagogus*, i, 6; Tertullian, *Against Marcion*, iv, 40.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[143:6](pch33.htm#fr_680) Cp. Jevons, p. 288;
and *The Dynamics of Religion*, pp. 146-53. The blunder of Bentley,
sometimes recklessly backed up by Christian writers to this day, is
repudiated by all competent scholars. Cp. Newton, *Essays in Art and
Archæology*, 1880, p. 186.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[143:7](pch33.htm#fr_681) Cp. Lang, *Myth,
Ritual, and Religion*, 2nd ed. ii, 251, and Decharme, as there cited.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[144:1](pch33.htm#fr_682) J. G. Müller,
*Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen*, 2te Aufl. 1867, p. 606.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[144:2](pch33.htm#fr_683) Bingham, *Christian
Antiquities*, B. xv, iv, §1 7-20; v, §§ 5-9; Lea, *History of the
Inquisition*, i, 49.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 7. The Semitic Antecedents](pch34)
