[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch37) 
[Next](pch39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

#### § 11. Private Jewish Eucharists.

There arises thus the further presumption that such a cult as we are
tracing may have flourished in a Jewish community elsewhere than in
Jerusalem. Dr. Frazer, in surmising a celebration of Purim with a real
victim at Jerusalem, does not take account of the fact that the bulk of
the Jews deported to Babylon had remained and flourished there, many
remaining Yahwists; that there then began the institution of the
synagogue, permissible to any group of Jews in any place; and that
wherever in the East there was a Jewish synagogue outside of Judea there
was an opening for usages not recognised at Jerusalem. But the existence
of many such synagogues is clearly an important condition of the
problem; and precisely because there were no regular sacrificial rites,
apart from the Passover, for expatriated Jews, there is a likelihood
that among them in particular would revive rites of sacrifice and
sacrament which had a great tradition behind them, but were not latterly
practised at the temple. This craving for a sacrifice in which they
could participate is the special note of the Epistle to the Hebrews; and
indeed the habit and doctrine of sacrifice were far too deeply rooted to
permit of a contented submission of all the myriads of scattered Jews to
a complete deprivation of the practice. <span
id="fr_837"></span>[1](#fn_837)

Significantly enough, the most notable sacrificial survival among the
race in modern times is one that demonstrably preserves the principle of
human sacrifice—that, namely, of the Kapparoth ("atonements"), the
slaying of a white cock on the eve of *Yom Kippùr*, the Day of
Atonement. <span id="fr_838"></span>[2](#fn_838) One Jewish convert to
Christianity, Hyam Isaacs, puts it that "the more self-righteous Jews"
provide a cock, which is slain by an inferior Rabbi, whereafter the
sacrificers swing it nine times over their heads, praying to God that
the sins of the year may enter into the fowl. It is not strictly a
scapegoat, for it is given to the poor to eat. As to the
"self-righteousness" involved, Isaacs admitted that while he remained in
the old faith he set great store by the procedure, and "thought he was
justified." <span id="fr_839"></span>[3](#fn_839) Theologically he was.
It is not disputed that the Hebrew word *Gever* stands for both "a cock"
and "a man." <span id="fr_840"></span>[4](#fn_840) Another Jewish
convert, Hershon, describing the custom, and noting the eagerness with
which white cocks are bought by Jews on the eve of *Yom* 

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Kippùr*, declares
that it is "still in vogue amongst those who pride themselves upon their
orthodoxy," and decides that it is "one of many relics of Oriental
paganism which the Jews brought from the banks of the Euphrates, from
the land of their exile, the fatherland of Rabbinic faith and
worship." <span id="fr_841"></span>[1](#fn_841) It has been strictly
preserved in the interim. In an English account of the rite as practised
among the Jews of Barbary in the seventeenth century it is noted that
the sacrifice came after the reading of the ancient Confession held to
be made by the high-priest in sacrificing the scapegoat. The narrator
continues:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Since the destruction of their City, the Jews have
no place for a proper sacrifice; and therefore, instead thereof, when
they come from the Synagogue, every Father of a Family takes a cock (a
white one if possible) upon the ninth day of the Feast, and, calling his
Household about him, repeats several sentences of Scripture; among which
the principal are the 17 vers. of Psalm 107......and 23 vers. of Job 13
(33?)......After the repetition of these Scriptures, he waves the cock
three times <span id="fr_842"></span>[2](#fn_842) about his head, at
each of which he useth these or the like words: *Let this Cock be a
commutation for me: Let it be my substitute: Let it be an expiation for
me: Let the Bird die, but let life and happiness be to me and all
Israel. Amen*. Then he again swings the cock thrice about his head, once
for himself, once for his sons, and once for the strangers that are with
him. Then he kills the cock and saith, *I have deserved thus to die*.
The woman takes a hen, and does the like for those of her sex. In
Barbary, where the houses are flat-roofed, they cast the garbage
thereon, to be devoured by some ravenous birds, in token that their sins
are removed as the entrails they cast out. Now the reason why they chuse
a cock for the expiatory is drawn from the ambiguous word in the Talmud,
which may signifie either man or cock. So that they repute the death of
a cock as much as that of a man; and to this Domestick Bird the 53 of
Esay, <span id="fr_843"></span>[3](#fn_843) with many other Passages of
Holy Writ, are prophanely and ridiculously applied......When they have
done with the cock they repair to the sepulchres, where they
repeat......their prayers and confessions. They bestow the value of
their cocks upon the poor, to whom formerly they gave their carkasses,
which they now keep to furnish out their own tables. <span
id="fr_844"></span>[4](#fn_844)</span>

</div>

This differs from the recent accounts only in respect of the eating of
the sacrifice by the sacrificers in person—a closer adherence to the
fundamental principle. In no case, however, is there any obscurity as to
that. I have seen in recent years an illustrated postcard, made for the
use of German Jews, whereon is represented a Jew in hat and long coat,
holding a white cock, and

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

standing before a table with a book on it; while below is the Hebrew
text (Job xxxiii, 24), "Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have
found a ransom"; with the addition, "May you be inscribed for a
prosperous year," and afterwards, in German, the greeting, "Hearty Good
Wishes for the New Year." Two other details complete the identification.
(1) The sacrificer, holding with his right hand the tied legs of the
bird, "with his left hand on its head coaxes it to keep it quiet" <span
id="fr_845"></span>[1](#fn_845)—the old effort to secure the willing
victim. (2) The procedure includes a "ransom for the Kapparoth"—that is,
a ransom for the ransom, <span id="fr_846"></span>[2](#fn_846) a
principle familiar to the student of ancient sacrifice. <span
id="fr_847"></span>[3](#fn_847) Here the substitution of a lesser for a
human sacrifice is almost undisguised, after two thousand years.

A remarkable parallel to the Jewish practice is found at the present day
among many of the peoples of the Congo and other regions of Western
Africa.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Between Isangila and Manyanga \[writes Sir H. H.
Johnston\] there are many eunuchs in the large villages, who seemed to
be attached to a vague phallic worship with which is intricately
connected a reverence for the moon. When the new moon appears, dances
are performed by the eunuchs, who sacrifice a white fowl, which must
always be male, in its honour. The bird is thrown up into the air and
torn to pieces as it falls to the earth. I was told that in former days
a human victim was offered up on these occasions, but that in later
times a white fowl had been substituted. <span
id="fr_848"></span>[4](#fn_848)</span>

</div>

The question here arises why black races should make *white* fowls or
animals surrogates for men, and an Asiatic origin for the practice
suggests itself. That it is, however, also an ancient if not a primary
savage practice appears to follow from the frequency of sacrifices of
white fowls among the Nigerians <span id="fr_849"></span>[5](#fn_849)
and other tribes.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The Krus, Intas, Dahomians, Ibus, Eggarahs, and the
littoral inhabitants of Cameroons, Bonny, Calabar, Fernando Po, all mark
the season of planting their yams and grain by a religious ritual, and a
festive meeting of all the tribe. With the exception of the Ashantis,
and perhaps the Ibus and Eggarahs, the ceremony is untainted by human
blood; the offerings being goats, sheep, and *white* fowls, portions of
which, after being roasted, are laid together with palm wine as
oblations before the idols: this done, they continue the entertainment
for several days. <span id="fr_850"></span>[6](#fn_850)</span>

</div>

What is here inferential becomes quite explicit in the religious
folk-lore of the Malays, whose wizards invoke the ancestor-spirits to
inform them in a dream what sacrifices are required at a given juncture,

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

whereafter "Whatever sacrifice is asked for must of course be given,
*with the exception of a human sacrifice, which, as it is expressly
stated, may be compounded by the sacrifice of a fowl*." <span
id="fr_851"></span>[1](#fn_851) And there are several reasons for
supposing that the rite is eastern and not African in origin. A special
reason is its connection, as noted by Sir H. Johnston, with "a reverence
for the moon." As he and other writers also note, worship of the
heavenly bodies is very uncommon among the African tribes. "As a rule
the West African apparently pays no attention" to the sun, moon, and
stars, "though not uncommonly his principal deity is the general
controller of the firmament, a Jupiter or Sky-God in fact." <span
id="fr_852"></span>[2](#fn_852) "I have never encountered," says Sir
Harry, "a race of purely Negro blood that took much interest in the
stars"; <span id="fr_853"></span>[3](#fn_853) and again: "I have never
yet encountered a purely Negro race that attributed divinity to the
sun." <span id="fr_854"></span>[4](#fn_854) Now, the Hebrew and other
Semitic records go to show that sun-worship and moon-worship evolved
together among the Semites; and the inference from the data before us is
that it was from Semitic contacts that some of the negro races in
antiquity acquired those cults, and the correlative sacrifice of the
white fowl.

Other traces of the connection we find among the ancient Greeks. At
Methana in Troezen Pausanias saw two men tear a white cock in
halves <span id="fr_855"></span>[5](#fn_855) and run round the vines in
opposite directions, each carrying a half. When they met they buried the
parts together. The purpose was to avert the evil wind called Lips,
which dried up the young shoots of the vines. <span
id="fr_856"></span>[6](#fn_856) The Methanian cock, says Miss Harrison,
"is a typical σφάγιον \[thing slaughtered\]: it is carried round for
purification......It is really of the order of *pharmakos* ceremonies
rather than a sacrifice proper. For a σφάγιον we should expect the cock
to be black, but on the principle of sympathetic magic it is in this
case white. The normal sacrifice to a wind was a black animal.....Winds
were underworld Gods." <span id="fr_857"></span>[7](#fn_857) But they
were certainly sacrificed

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

to; and it has been argued that the sacrifice of Iphigeneia "was, in the
words of Æschylus, 'a sacrifice to stay the winds.'" <span
id="fr_858"></span>[1](#fn_858) In any case, "the word σφάγιον is always
used of human victims and of such animals as were in use as surrogates.
The term is applied to all the famous maiden sacrifices of mythology As
a σφάγιον Polyxena is slain on the tomb of Achilles." <span
id="fr_859"></span>[2](#fn_859) So that we come back once more to the
white cock as a substitute for a human victim; and as the winds were
either Gods or Genii, it was strictly a sacrifice.

Again, among the Dravidian Ghasiyas of Mirzapur, "the most degraded of
the Dravidian tribes," after a man's death his son sacrifices a white
fowl as the recipient of his father's spirit, or otherwise as placating
him, <span id="fr_860"></span>[3](#fn_860) and a white cock is a common
sacrifice to the Sun-God among other tribes of the same race. <span
id="fr_861"></span>[4](#fn_861) On that view, the surrogate cock
sacrifice is probably ancient among the Semites; <span
id="fr_862"></span>[5](#fn_862) and the late continuance of human
sacrifice was with the Hebrews as with other races a result of the
pressures of perturbing calamity on the one hand, and a ritual survival
on the other. On any view, it is not to be supposed that in the age of
sacrificial worship the dispersed Jews, craving for its usages, would
abstain from other private rituals of a sacrificial and eucharistic
kind. It is a Rabbinical doctrine that "so long as the Temple existed
the altar made atonement for Israel; but now it is a man's table that
makes atonement for him." <span id="fr_863"></span>[6](#fn_863) "Table"
is interpreted to mean "hospitality," an unplausible gloss. It would
certainly be understood by most Jews of the sacrificial age to mean
individual rites of a quasi-sacrificial kind; and the principle would
hold for exiled Jews before the fall of the Temple.

By reviving such mysteries, those of the Dispersion could in a measure
compensate themselves for their exclusion from the orthodox sacrifices,
which were a monopoly of the holy city. And when we find the later
Christists practising rites closely analogous to those of pagan deities
such as Mithra and Dionysos, we cannot well doubt that Jews in the large
eastern cities would be at

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

times inclined to resort to mysteries of sacrament sacrifice for which
they had a precedent in their own traditions. The story of the
"Karabbas" episode at Alexandria, in fact, is an item of positive
evidence not yet matched by any in regard to Jerusalem; unless it be the
story to the effect that Antiochus Epiphanes found in the temple at
Jerusalem a Greek captive who was to be sacrificed and sacramentally
eaten. <span id="fr_864"></span>[1](#fn_864) In view of all the clues,
notably that of the Rabbinical saying as to the lawfulness of slaying a
pagan rustic on the Day of Atonement, <span
id="fr_865"></span>[2](#fn_865) we cannot pronounce that story
incredible; and the retort of Josephus, that one victim could not supply
a meal to the multitude of worshippers, is at once disposed of by the
principle that "sin-offerings were too holy to be eaten except by the
priests." <span id="fr_866"></span>[3](#fn_866) Nor can we quite
confidently reject the theorem of Ghillany, that there was an element of
actual ritual cannibalism in the paschal meal of the Jews in the
pre-exilic period, though the proof is incomplete. <span
id="fr_867"></span>[4](#fn_867) It suffices, however, to note that when
revived rites of sacrament were seen to flourish among the Dispersion,
there would be a tendency at Jerusalem to recognise them for economic
reasons. The more we study the history of Judaism, the more clearly we
realise that it was never immune from change, never long a triumphant
fixed cult realising the ideal of its sacred books. Even in the
immediate sphere of the temple itself, then, revived or innovating rites
could make their way.

Such an acceptance would require only one condition—that the innovating
rites were professedly Yahwistic. In the exilic period there had been
many resorts to "unclean" sacraments, such as the mystical eating of
dogs, mice, and swine, <span id="fr_868"></span>[5](#fn_868) men
desperately seeking help from alien rites when their own God had wholly
failed to help them; and our ablest Hebraist, while noting that "the
causes which produced a *resuscitation of obsolete mysteries* among the
Jews were at work at the same period among all the northern Semites,"
decides that the rites in question "mark the *first* appearance in
Semitic history of the tendency to found religious societies on
voluntary association and mystic initiation, instead of natural kinship
and nationality." <span id="fr_869"></span>[6](#fn_869) Whatever may
have been the origins, it suffices that the alleged "first appearance"
was not the last. However the tendency may have been held in check at
Jerusalem, it cannot have been equally repressed among the dispersed
Jews, who saw all around them attractive mystical cults emanating from
their own

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Semitic kindred;
and who had in their own sacred books pretexts enough for "clean"
sacraments in honour of Yahweh. For in all the orthodox sacrifices, it
is to be remembered, an eating and drinking with the Deity, a sitting at
his table as his guest, even as one would sit at a great banquet, was
the essential notion, the ideal for the laity as well as the
priesthood. <span id="fr_870"></span>[1](#fn_870) It would be strange
indeed if the dispersed myriads wholly renounced such an experience.

The law permitted at the temple of Jerusalem private as well as public
sacrifices of all kinds; and in the case of the peace- or
thank-offerings "only the fat was burned on the altar, while the flesh
was used by the owner of the sacrifice himself as material for a jocund
sacrificial feast." <span id="fr_871"></span>[2](#fn_871) And "as was
only natural, it was the numerous private offerings of so many different
kinds that constituted the bulk of the sacrifices." Their number was in
fact "so vast as to be well-nigh inconceivable." <span
id="fr_872"></span>[3](#fn_872) That is to say, the private proclivity
to sacrifice was the predominant religious factor. At a time, then, when
movements of dissent and innovation and even of "anticlericalism" <span
id="fr_873"></span>[4](#fn_873) were being set up by a variety of
forces, new and old, it is not to be supposed that the multitudes of
Jews distributed through the Hellenistic world submitted passively to a
monopoly which deprived them of most of the normal sensations of
religion.

The obscurest side of the problem, perhaps, is that of the weekly
eucharist, the "Holy Supper" of bread and wine, which in the later
Jesuist cult we find in such close connection with the sacrifice of the
God, but in the earlier form of the "Teaching of the Twelve Apostles"
does not appear to be so connected. Yet the very phenomenon of the
Teaching points to what we have other reasons for surmising—a weekly
rite of old standing among the Jews of the Dispersion. The Passover came
but once a year; and any act of real or simulated human sacrifice would
be no more frequent. Would the dispersed Jews then forego all such
weekly rites as occurred among the Gentiles? If normally they abstained
from "drink offerings of blood" presented to other Gods, <span
id="fr_874"></span>[5](#fn_874) had they no permissible libation? That
there was a weekly eucharist among the Mithraists is practically
certain: the Fathers who mention the Mithraic bread-and-wine or
bread-and-water sacrament never speak of it as less frequent than the
Christian; <span id="fr_875"></span>[6](#fn_875) and the Pauline
allusion

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

to the "table of daimons," with its "cup," implies that that was as
habitual as the Christian rite, <span id="fr_876"></span>[1](#fn_876)
which was certainly solemnised weekly in the early Church. And that this
weekly rite, again, is not originally Mithraic, but one of the ancient
Asiatic usages which could reach the Jews either by way of Babylon or
before the Captivity, is to be inferred from the fact that the Brahmanic
*Upavasatha*, the fast-day previous to the sacrament of the Soma,
occurred four times in each lunar month; <span
id="fr_877"></span>[2](#fn_877) and was thus closely analogous to the
Sabbath, which was originally a lunar feast. <span
id="fr_878"></span>[3](#fn_878) As the Soma feast was connected with the
worship of the moon, it would be a "supper" on the night of the day
before moon-day—that is, on the night of the Sunday, which was clearly
"Lord's Day" long before the Christian era. That the Sumerians or
Akkadians, who had the seven-day week, were the source of the weekly
bread- and-wine supper for both the Hindus and the Persians, seems the
natural hypothesis. <span id="fr_879"></span>[4](#fn_879)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_837"></span>[168:1](pch38.htm#fr_837) As to the avowed
Jewish craving for sacrifices, cp. Hershon, *Genesis with a Talmudical
Commentary*, pp. 167, 285.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[168:2](pch38.htm#fr_838) See Buxtorf,
*Synagoga Judaica*, and other authorities cited by J. M. Wheeler.
*Footsteps of the Past*, 1895, pp. 141-2.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[168:3](pch38.htm#fr_839) *Ceremonies, Rites,
and Traditions of the Jews*, (n.d. *circa* 1820?), p. 54.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[168:4](pch38.htm#fr_840) Hershon, *Treasures
of the Talmud*, p. 105.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[169:1](pch38.htm#fr_841) *Id*. p. 113.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[169:2](pch38.htm#fr_842) Hershon's account
likewise says "three times," as against Isaacs’ "nine times"; and gives
the same texts, but Job 33 instead of 13.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[169:3](pch38.htm#fr_843) Note the support here
given to the thesis of Gunkel (above, [p. 167](pch37.htm#page_167). n.).

<span id="fn_844"></span>[169:4](pch38.htm#fr_844) *The Present State of
the Jews: More particularly relating to those in Barbary*, by L.
Addison, one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary. London, 1675, pp.
185-7.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[170:1](pch38.htm#fr_845) Hershon, p. 106.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[170:2](pch38.htm#fr_846) *Id*. p. 112.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[170:3](pch38.htm#fr_847) Frazer, *G. B.* 2nd
ed.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[170:4](pch38.htm#fr_848) *The River Congo*,
ed. 1895, p. 279.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[170:5](pch38.htm#fr_849) Above, [p.
151](pch35.htm#page_151), note.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[170:6](pch38.htm#fr_850) Allen and Thomson,
*Narrative of the British Expedition to the River Niger*, 1848, ii, 398.
Among the Andoni in Nigeria, again, we find the sacrifice of a white
ram. Major Glyn Leonard, *The Lower Niger and its Tribes*, 1906, p. 381.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[171:1](pch38.htm#fr_851) W. W. Skeat, *Malay
Magic*, 1900, p. 211. Cp. pp. 143-4, where Mr. Skeat infers a
progressive substitution of victims—buffalo, goat, fowl, and finally
egg, as symbol of the fowl—for the original human victim, sacrificed at
the founding of a house. Mr. Skeat does not mention whether the fowl is
white; but on p. 72 he says it must be a cock. He there notes also the
offering of dough models of human beings, called "the substitute."

<span id="fn_852"></span>[171:2](pch38.htm#fr_852) Major
Mockler-Ferryman, *British West Africa*, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 384.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[171:3](pch38.htm#fr_853) *The Uganda
Protectorate*, 1902, ii, 697.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[171:4](pch38.htm#fr_854) *Liberia*, 1906, ii,
1062, note. Cp. Sir A. B. Ellis, *Tshi-Speaking Peoples*, 1887, pp. 21,
117-8.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[171:5](pch38.htm#fr_855) Note in this
connection the Rabbinical saying about splitting the human victim in
two. Above, [p. 160](pch36.htm#page_160).

<span id="fn_856"></span>[171:6](pch38.htm#fr_856) Pausanias, ii, 34.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[171:7](pch38.htm#fr_857) *Prolegomena to the
Study of Greek Religion*, 2nd ed. p. 67, quoting Aristoph. *Frogs*, 847.
As it happens, when a Haida Indian wishes to obtain a fair wind he
fasts, shoots a raven, singes it in the fire, and then, going to the
edge of the sea, sweeps it over the surface of the water four times in
the direction in which he wishes the wind to blow" (Frazer, *Golden
Bough*, 2nd ed. i, 119)—a curious parallelism to the Jewish ritual above
described, although the purpose is entirely different. It would appear
that a sacrifice to the Wind-Gods became the type of another. (The
dreaded winds, it should be noted, were not merely of the underworld,
but demonic, though Boreas at times was pictured with a <span
id="page_172">p. 172</span> nimbus, as being αἰθρηγενὴς or αἰθρηγενέτης.
Preller, *Gr. Mythol.* ed. 1860, i, 370, note.) Of Chinese sailors,
again, it is told that in times of imminent peril they sacrifice a cock
to the spirit of the waters, wringing off its head, and sprinkling the
blood over deck, masts, etc. (Hershon, *Treasures*, p. 114).

<span id="fn_858"></span>[172:1](pch38.htm#fr_858) J. C. Lawson, *Modern
Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion*, 1910, p. 270, quoting the
*Agamemnon*, 214, 1418.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[172:2](pch38.htm#fr_859) Miss Harrison, as
cited, pp. 64-65, quoting Euripides, *Ion*, 277-8, and *Hecuba*, 121.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[172:3](pch38.htm#fr_860) W. Crooke, *Popular
Religion and Folklore in Northern India*, ed. 1896, i, 176.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[172:4](pch38.htm#fr_861) *Id*. i, 9-10.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[172:5](pch38.htm#fr_862) According to the
Rabbis, the Babylonian God Nergal, a Sun-God, was symbolised by a cock
(Hershon, p. 113), as was Apollo. Sun-worship may then be either an
early or a late basis for the sacrifice.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[172:6](pch38.htm#fr_863) Hershon, p. 102,
citing *Berachoth*, fol. 55 A.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[173:1](pch38.htm#fr_864) Josephus, *Against
Apion*, ii, 8.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[173:2](pch38.htm#fr_865) Above, p. 160.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[173:3](pch38.htm#fr_866) Smith, *Semites*, p.
369.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[173:4](pch38.htm#fr_867) *Menschenopfer*, pp.
518, 525, 533-4.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[173:5](pch38.htm#fr_868) Isa. lxv, 4-5; lxvi,
3, 17.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[173:6](pch38.htm#fr_869) Smith, *Semites*, p.
339.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[174:1](pch38.htm#fr_870) Cp. Spencer, *De
Legibus Hebræorum*, ed. 1686, ii, 76; Smith, *Semites*, p. 206 *sq*.;
Wellhausen, *Prolegom. to Hist. of Israel*, Eng. tr. p. 71 and refs.;
Bahr, *Symbolik des Mos. Cultus*, 1835, i, 433-4.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[174:2](pch38.htm#fr_871) Schürer, *Hist. of
Jewish People in time of J. C.* 2nd Div. Eng. tr. i, 279.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[174:3](pch38.htm#fr_872) *Id*. p. 299.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[174:4](pch38.htm#fr_873) Cp. Schürer, as
cited, pp. 222, 230.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[174:5](pch38.htm#fr_874) Ps. xvi, 4. Cp. verse
5. In Clemens Alexandrinus (*Pædagogus*, ii, 2) the grape is "the
Logos," and its juice is "His blood."

<span id="fn_875"></span>[174:6](pch38.htm#fr_875) See below, Part III,
§ 7.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[175:1](pch38.htm#fr_876) 1 Cor. x, 16, 21; xi,
26.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[175:2](pch38.htm#fr_877) Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, pp. 140-1; Koeppen, *Die Religion des Buddha*, 1854, i,
563-4 ii, 307.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[175:3](pch38.htm#fr_878) Wellhausen,
*Prolegomena*, Eng. tr. pp. 111-112.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[175:4](pch38.htm#fr_879) Cp. art. "The Sabbath
Day," by Chilperic, in the *Reformer*, July, 1904, p. 442.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 12. The Eucharist in Orthodox Judaism](pch39)
