[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch33) 
[Next](pch35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 7. The Semitic Antecedents.

In view of such an evolution, which may or may not have a historical
connection with the old Asiatic rite seen surviving among the Khonds and
Gonds, we may perhaps infer where we cannot trace the development that
preceded the reduction of the Jesus myth to its present form. An
important light is also thrown on the problem by the speculation of Dr.
Frazer, inasmuch as it indicates clues which are not affected by the
miscarriage of his actual theorem; and to these we may profitably turn.

Dr. Frazer's hypothesis is that the "mockeries" of the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

crucifixion represent the application to the case of Jesus of the usages
of the Perso-Babylonian festival of the Sacæa, <span
id="fr_684"></span>[1](#fn_684) which he is disposed to identify with
the very ancient New Year festival known as the Zakmuk or Zagmuku. <span
id="fr_685"></span>[2](#fn_685) From this he holds the Jews to have
derived their (certainly post-exilic) feast of Purim, of the origin of
which such a fictitious account is given in the book of Esther, whereof
the Esther and Mordecai strongly suggest the God-names Ishtar and
Merodach. Purim, in its main features, resembles alike the accounts
given of the Sacæa and those given of Zakmuk; and the suggestion is that
the Jews, in borrowing the festival, may have copied from the
Babylonians the Sacæa practice of putting to death at that date "a
malefactor, who, after masquerading as Mordecai, in a crown and royal
robe, was hanged or crucified in the character of Haman." This in itself
is not incredible; nor is it unlikely that the fast which precedes the
feasting of Purim was, in Babylon, a ceremonial mourning for a God or
demigod who died like Tammuz or Adonis, and like him rose again on the
third day. Then comes the suggestion that Jesus was crucified in the
character of Haman.

Now arises, however, the problem as to dates. Purim occurred in the
middle of the lunar month of Adar, the last of the Jewish sacred year,
which, says Dr. Frazer, "corresponds roughly to March." In Condor's
Handbook, as it happens, it is made to run from January 28th to February
25th, leaving (for us) an interval of eleven days unaccounted for
between the end of the year and the beginning of the next, which sets
out with 1st Nisan = 8th March. What the Jews did to round the cycle was
to insert a thirteenth lunar month seven times in nineteen years. This
intercalary month was presumptively placed at the end of the year, with
the effect of retarding the New Year and making Nisan (also called Abib
= ripe ears) run into our April. The practical point for us, then, is
that there were several weeks between Purim and the Babylonian Zakmuk,
which fell "early" in Nisan. Doubtless the Jews put Purim earlier to
prevent its clashing with their Passover, which was originally a spring
festival of the same order. But then the Sacæa, according to Berosus,
fell in the Babylonian month of Lous, which answers to July; <span
id="fr_686"></span>[3](#fn_686) and Jesus, again, is crucified at the
Passover, which occurs in the middle of Nisan, the lamb being set apart
on the 10th, while "unleavened bread" began on the 15th. Thus none of
the dates

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

fit, Jesus being crucified, according to the story, a month after the
Jewish festival in which Haman figures, and months before that of the
Sacæa in which a mock king was hanged or crucified.

Of these difficulties, which Dr. Frazer avows, Mr. Lang makes the
most. <span id="fr_687"></span>[1](#fn_687) Dr. Frazer's suggested
solutions are—(1) that Berosus may be wrong about the date of the Sacæa;
(2) that Jesus may really have been crucified in Adar, at the feast of
Purim, and not in Nisan, at the feast of the Passover—Christian
sentiment preferring the latter date, and making the change in
tradition; (3) that the Jews may sometimes (cp. Esther iii, 7) have put
Purim alongside of the Passover. For the rest, he suggests that Barabbas
was the Mordecai of the year; and cites from Philo the story of
Carabbas, who was made to play the part of a mock king at Alexandria, by
way of burlesquing King Agrippa. <span id="fr_688"></span>[2](#fn_688)
The name Carabbas, it is suggested, may be a copyist's error for
Barabbas, which, Dr. Frazer thinks, may have been the standing name for
a figure in a mock sacrifice, since it means "Son of the Father," and
points to the old Semitic cults in which king's sons were sacrificed by
or for their fathers.

Now, the mere difficulty about dates would not be fatal to Dr. Frazer's
very interesting and ingenious theory if that were otherwise on a sound
footing. That there were two calendar usages in regard to the Sacæa
becomes probable when we note (1) that the Jews, under Babylonian
influence, had separated their ecclesiastical from their civil
year—their ecclesiastical new year (the older) being in autumn, while
the civil year began in spring, <span id="fr_689"></span>[3](#fn_689)
and (2) that they had a second or little Passover, a month after the
first, for those who could not keep that. <span
id="fr_690"></span>[4](#fn_690) Under the changing dynasties of
Mesopotamia there might easily be such a duplicating of the Sacæa; and
as a matter of fact Zakmuk was a festival day in many Babylonian
cults. <span id="fr_691"></span>[5](#fn_691) On the other hand, the Jews
would readily antedate their Purim to separate it from the Passover; and
Christian tradition might very well falsify a date of which it had no
documentary record. But this last consideration calls up a far more
serious

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

objection to the form of Dr. Frazer's proposition—the above-noted
objection, namely, that he is accepting the historic actuality of the
crucifixion, the inscriptions on the cross, the "of Nazareth," the
mockery by the soldiers, the utterances of Pilate, the episode of
Barabbas, and all the rest of it. To a critic who accepts all this the
critical answer obviously is: If you thus take for granted the
genuineness of such a highly detailed narrative, how can you possibly
account for its absolute omission of any shadow of allusion to the
Haman-and-Mordecai show of which you suppose the crucifixion to have
accidentally become part? This objection Dr. Frazer does not try to
meet; and it is hard to see how he could meet it.

A thorough inquiry, surely, must take account of all aspects of the
gospel problem, not merely of ostensible parallels in pagan usage to one
aspect of the crucifixion story. The whole documentary problem, surely,
must be taken into account; and the historical criticism of the entire
legend reckoned with. We are not dealing with a generally credible and
corroborated narrative in which a single episode raises surmise of
extraneous factors not recognised in the text, but with one which begins
and ends in absolute and immemorial myth and is stamped with
supernaturalism in every sentence. By Dr. Frazer's own repeated avowal,
we ought not to look to the current narrative of the origin of a rite
for the historical fact, but to the rite for the origin of the
narrative. If this law does not hold of the Christian eucharist it holds
of nothing; and the eucharist is the keystone of the arch built over the
death of the God in the gospels.

Dr. Frazer obviously proceeds on the common assumption that the
teachings of the Gospel Jesus testify to an indubitable personality. But
that view, so natural at first sight, has reached its lowest degree of
credit among special students precisely at the moment of Dr. Frazer's
unquestioning acceptance of it. <span id="fr_692"></span>[1](#fn_692)
Anthropology and hierology cannot afford thus to ignore the special
historical problems of the very creed on which confessedly their results
must finally come to bear. Several of Dr. Frazer's remarks, however,
suggest that in the very act of bringing his invaluable research into
relation with the creeds of his contemporaries he had regarded as
outside his field of study some of the most significant and
best-established facts as to the doctrinal evolution of Christism among
the Jews. <span id="fr_693"></span>[2](#fn_693)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_684"></span>[145:1](pch34.htm#fr_684) Mentioned by Berosus,
as cited in Athenæus, xiv, 44 (p. 639 C.); and by Dio Chrysostom, Orat.
iv, p. 6 (ed. Dindorf, vol. i, p. 76).

<span id="fn_685"></span>[145:2](pch34.htm#fr_685) Mentioned in recently
recovered cuneiform inscriptions. See Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp.
64—68; and Jastrow, *Religions of Assyria and Babylonia*, Index, under
*Zagmuk*.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[145:3](pch34.htm#fr_686) Or may possibly be as
late as September. Lang, *Magic and Religion*, p. 145.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[146:1](pch34.htm#fr_687) Sometimes very
amusingly, but with unwonted diffuseness and repetition, in *Magic and
Religion*, pp. 123-204. As Mr. Lang shows (p. 138, etc.), Dr. Frazer has
left in his text (ii, 254, note; iii, 152-3) contradictory surmises as
to dates. The immense mass of details in his book may well excuse such
an oversight; but Mr. Lang undoubtedly shows his theory to be otherwise
inharmonious in detail.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[146:2](pch34.htm#fr_688) Dr. Frazer states
(iii, 193, *note*) that "the first to call attention to this passage" in
Philo was Mr. P. Wendland, in *Hermes*, in 1898. This, I may mention, is
a mistake. I myself discussed the Carabbas story in the *National
Reformer* so long ago as March 3rd, 1889, and certainly some previous
writer—I think Rabbi Wise—had called my attention to it.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[146:3](pch34.htm#fr_689) Wellhausen,
*Prolegomena*, Eng. tr. pp. 108-9; cp. Exodus xii, 2. Cp. Max Müller,
*Natural Religion*, pp. 529-530. Cp. Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 232.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[146:4](pch34.htm#fr_690) Num. ix, 10, 11.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[146:5](pch34.htm#fr_691) See Jastrow, Index,
under *Zagmuk*.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[147:1](pch34.htm#fr_692) See hereinafter, Pt.
II, ch. ii, §1 4-6; and *Christianity and Mythology*, Pt. III.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[147:2](pch34.htm#fr_693) *E.g.* his note (ii,
p. 3, *n*. 3) on the anticipations of the Christian doctrine of the
Trinity in Philo Judæus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 8. The Judaic Evolution](pch35)
