[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch45) 
[Next](pch47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE TEACHING GOD

#### § 1. Primary and Secondary Ideas.

<span class="smallcaps">Though</span> the secondary Gods are not always
sacrificed, they are nearly always in some measure teachers; and here,
of course, they are developed from earlier forms. A general conception
of the God as teacher belongs to early religion, inasmuch as he is held
to have given the moral laws which are associated with his cult; and
where his worship is specially bound up with rites of agriculture he is
conceived as having taught men that and other arts. Among the Narrinyeri
of South Australia, the Supreme God Nurundere "instituted all the rites
and ceremonies which are practised by the aborigines, whether connected
with life or death. On enquiring why they adhere to any custom, the
reply is, because Nurundere commanded it." <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1](#fn_1069) Among the ancient civilisations the
same doctrine is common. Thus Oannes the Fish-God (identified with
Ea) <span id="fr_1070"></span>[2](#fn_1070) taught the Babylonians
agriculture and the building of cities, writing, laws, cosmology,
religion, the sciences, and the arts, including the measurement of
lands—in a word, everything appertaining to civilisation; <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[3](#fn_1071) and Shamas dictates the laws of
Hammurabi. <span id="fr_1072"></span>[4](#fn_1072) On a less
comprehensive scale, in Egyptian myth, Thoth gave men language and
names, the art of writing, and the rules of worship and sacrifice; <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[5](#fn_1073) Osiris taught the Egyptians the art of
agriculture, and gave them laws, and guidance as to worship; <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[6](#fn_1074) Janus and Saturn did as much for the
Italians; <span id="fr_1075"></span>[7](#fn_1075) Huitzilopochtli no
less for the Aztecs; <span id="fr_1076"></span>[8](#fn_1076) and Apollo,
though in one myth he has to learn divination from Pan <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[9](#fn_1077) as he learns music from Hermes, in
another gives laws to the Hyperboreans <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[10](#fn_1078) and thereafter speaks oracles at
Delphi for the Greeks, teaching them a more civilised way of life. <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[11](#fn_1079) Dionysos similarly

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

had a teacher in Silenus, but himself taught men in particular the
culture of the vine; and Dêmêtêr, who must needs introduce some of the
arts of agriculture, <span id="fr_1080"></span>[1](#fn_1080) is also a
lawgiver <span id="fr_1081"></span>[2](#fn_1081) for both Greeks and
Romans. <span id="fr_1082"></span>[3](#fn_1082) Isis in turn divides
with Osiris the honours of agriculture, she having shown men how to make
use of wheat and barley; and she too gives men laws, and even
leechcraft. <span id="fr_1083"></span>[4](#fn_1083) The Goddesses,
indeed, are as commonly as the Gods credited with introducing culture.
Athênê teaches all crafts; <span id="fr_1084"></span>[5](#fn_1084)
Cybelê like Isis is a teacher of healing; <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[6](#fn_1085) and the Gallic Minerva (Belisama) was
reputed the giver of arts and crafts. <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[7](#fn_1086) Similarly the Gallic Apollo (Grannos
or Mahon) was held to drive away disease; <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[8](#fn_1087) as also the Teutonic Odin. <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[9](#fn_1088) This idea of the Gods as the givers of
healing is indeed common to the whole Aryan race; and in the religion of
India medicine was held to come immediately from them like the Veda
itself. <span id="fr_1089"></span>[10](#fn_1089) So in Hawaii there is
found a tradition that "many generations back a man called Koreamoku
obtained all their medicinal herbs from the gods, who also taught him
the use of them; that after his death he was deified, and a wooden image
of him placed in the large temple at Kairna, to which offerings of hogs,
fish, and cocoa nuts were frequently presented......Two friends and
disciples of Koreamoku continued to practise the art after the death of
their master, and were also deified after death." <span
id="fr_1090"></span>[11](#fn_1090) Elsewhere, again, "From the gods the
priests pretended to have received the knowledge of the healing
art"; <span id="fr_1091"></span>[12](#fn_1091) while in Tahiti there was
a God of physic and two of surgery, as well as the usual guild-Gods of
the different avocations. <span id="fr_1092"></span>[13](#fn_1092) In
Samoa, yet again, the War-God Tu was in time of peace a doctor. <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[14](#fn_1093)

The universality of the idea is best realised when we turn to the Gods
of the more primitive peoples. We have seen how the Dravidian Khonds
ascribe to Boora and Tari the raising of men from savagery and ignorance
to comfort by means of instruction, and to Boora a moralising purpose as
against the sacrificial cult. So, in the higher mythology of Peru, the
Sun sent Manco Capac and Mama Ocello to teach savage men true religion,
morality, agriculture, arts, and sciences; while on another view
Pachacamac, finding the first breed hopeless, turned them into tiger
cats or apes,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

and made a new set, whom he taught arts and handicrafts. This idea of
teaching or reformation pervades the whole cosmogony of the Incarial
period. <span id="fr_1094"></span>[1](#fn_1094) So with the Gods of
pre-Christian Mexico: the national deity of each tribe or nation is
nearly always specified as the giver of its laws, and at times as the
inventor of fire and clothing, <span id="fr_1095"></span>[2](#fn_1095)
and in at least one case he is the writer of the sacred books. <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[3](#fn_1096)

Where this conception is not prominent in a primitive religion, the
explanation appears to be that the enlightening power of the Gods
operates by way of inspiring the priests. Thus in the Tonga Islands,
where there seems to have been little trace of a general culture-myth,
inspiration of the priest by his God was held to be common; <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[4](#fn_1097) and even the God Tangaloa, "God of
artificers and the arts," appropriately had for his priests only
carpenters. <span id="fr_1098"></span>[5](#fn_1098) When inspired, the
priest as a matter of course spoke in the first person, as being the God
for the time being. <span id="fr_1099"></span>[6](#fn_1099) Similar
inspiration, however, was held to come from the divine spirits of
deceased nobles; <span id="fr_1100"></span>[7](#fn_1100) and it is thus
intelligible that the general development of this species of "trance
mediumship" should keep in the background the thought of any special
Teaching God.

With the growth of culture and literature and sacerdotalism, however,
the notion of a God who inspires priests or oracles is developed into or
superseded by that of a God who especially represents the principle of
counsel or wisdom or revelation; and in the polytheistic systems we have
accordingly such deities as the Assyrian Nabu or Nebo, <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[8](#fn_1101) the wise, the all-knowing, the wisdom
of the Gods, patron of writing and literature, and son and interpreter
of Merodach, who in turn is the interpreter of the will of his father
Ea, the earlier God of wisdom; the Indian Agni, in his secondary
character of messenger or "Mouth of the Gods"; <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[9](#fn_1102) and the Egyptian Thoth, who,
originally the Moon-God and therefore the *Measurer* becomes as such the
representative of the principle of instruction and the writer of the
sacred books. <span id="fr_1103"></span>[10](#fn_1103) In this latter
capacity he has an obvious advantage over Maat, the Goddess of Law and
Truth, and at once the daughter and the mother of Ra. <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[11](#fn_1104) Thus, while every

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egyptian God
proper is *neb maat*, "lord of law," Thoth is in particular the *Logos*,
Reason, or Word; and so becomes the sustainer of Osiris against his
enemies. <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1](#fn_1105)

This latter conception is seen entering Greek mythology at three stages,
first in the myth of (1) Hermes, who is Logos in the sense of being
either a Moon-God like Thoth <span id="fr_1106"></span>[2](#fn_1106) or
simply Wind-God and so the messenger of the Gods; <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[3](#fn_1107) later, in the ennobled worship of (2)
Apollo and Athênê, of whom the former is the mouth of Zeus and revealer
of his counsel, hence the typical God of oracles, and the latter,
grouped with her brother and father in a triad, <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[4](#fn_1108) is also her father's wisdom; <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[5](#fn_1109) and still later, in the period of
developing theosophy, in the myth of (3) Metis, essentially the
personified Reason and Intelligence of Zeus. <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[6](#fn_1110)

In a more sophisticated form, the idea of the God as lawgiver is met
with in the myth of Zeus and Minos, <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[7](#fn_1111) the Cretan institutor—himself a purely
mythical figure, like Moses, and, like him, presumably a deity of an
earlier age; <span id="fr_1112"></span>[8](#fn_1112) and again in the
legend of King Numa and his Egeria. <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[9](#fn_1113) Such myths may conceivably rise either
as an inference from the ordinary phenomenon of the seer or sorcerer or
priest who claims to have sought and to have been inspired by the God,
or as the attempts of a late theosophy to remove anthropomorphism from
the popular lore. On the latter view, they are paralleled by the
attempts of the Evemerists to explain the Teaching God as a myth set up
by the fame of a human teacher. Thus Ouranos is figured as a mortal who
first gathered men in cities, gave them laws and agriculture, and taught
them to observe the stars, the movements of the sun, and the division of
months and the year; whence his final deification; <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[10](#fn_1114) and similarly Orpheus becomes "sacer
interpreterque Deorum," who deterred savage men from slaughters and
foulness of life. <span id="fr_1115"></span>[11](#fn_1115) And, either
by way of spontaneous evolution or as a result of Semitic or other
eastern influence, we find among the Yorubas of Nigeria an Oracle-God
and Teaching God, If a, who utters moral maxims, and figures alternately
as a

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

demigod who mastered and taught medicine, divination, and prophecy, and
so was deified, and as the first-born son of the Creator and the Mother
Goddess, the Saviour-God being the second-born. <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1](#fn_1116)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[214:1](pch46.htm#fr_1069) Taplin, *The
Narrinyeri*, 2nd ed. p. 55.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[214:2](pch46.htm#fr_1070) Lenormant,
*Chaldean Magic*, p. 157; Sayce, *Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 133-4.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[214:3](pch46.htm#fr_1071) Berosus, *ap*.
Alex. Polyhistor. Cp. Sayce, pp. 368-370.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[214:4](pch46.htm#fr_1072) Oettli, *Das Gesetz
Hammurabis and die Thora Israels*, 1903, p. 84.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[214:5](pch46.htm#fr_1073) Diodorus, i, 16;
Erman, *Handbook of Eg. Rel.* Eng. tr. p. 11.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[214:6](pch46.htm#fr_1074) Plutarch, *Isis and
Osiris*, 13. Diodorus, i, 14, adds that he made an end of cannibalism.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[214:7](pch46.htm#fr_1075) Macrobius,
*Saturnalia*, i, 7; Tertullian, *Apol.* c. 10.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[214:8](pch46.htm#fr_1076) J. G. Müller,
*Amerikanische Urreligionen*, ed. 1867 p. 597.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[214:9](pch46.htm#fr_1077) Apollodorus, i, 4,
§ 1.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[214:10](pch46.htm#fr_1078) Pindar, *Ol*. iii,
24 *sq*., etc.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[214:11](pch46.htm#fr_1079) Strabo, citing
Ephorus, B. ix, ciii, § 11.

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[215:1](pch46.htm#fr_1080) Virgil, *Georg.* i,
147-8; Ovid, *Fasti*, iv, 401-2.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[215:2](pch46.htm#fr_1081) Callimachus, *Hymn
to Dêmêtêr*, 19-22; Diodorus, i, 14.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[215:3](pch46.htm#fr_1082) Virgil, *Aeneid*,
iv, 58.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[215:4](pch46.htm#fr_1083) Diodorus, i, 14,
25.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[215:5](pch46.htm#fr_1084) *Iliad*, xv, 412.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[215:6](pch46.htm#fr_1085) Diodorus, iii, 58.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[215:7](pch46.htm#fr_1086) Cæsar, *Bel.
Gallic.* vi, 17.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[215:8](pch46.htm#fr_1087) *Id*. *ib*.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[215:9](pch46.htm#fr_1088) Grimm, *Teutonic
Mythology*, Eng. tr. i, 149.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[215:10](pch46.htm#fr_1089) Weber, *History of
Indian Literature*, Eng. tr. p. 265.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[215:11](pch46.htm#fr_1090) Ellis, *Polynesian
Researches*, 2nd ed., 1831, iv, 335-6.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[215:12](pch46.htm#fr_1091) *Id*. iii, 36-37.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[215:13](pch46.htm#fr_1092) *Id*. i, 333.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[215:14](pch46.htm#fr_1093) Turner, *Samoa a
Hundred Years Ago*, p. 61.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[216:1](pch46.htm#fr_1094) J. G. Müller,
*Amerikanische Urreligionen*, pp. 304, 319, 330.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[216:2](pch46.htm#fr_1095) *Id*. pp. 394
*sq*., 587, 594-6-7.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[216:3](pch46.htm#fr_1096) *Id*. p. 587. The
God in question was Huemac, national deity of the Toltecs, latterly
known as Quetzalcoatl. Below, Part IV, § 7.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[216:4](pch46.htm#fr_1097) Mariner's *Account
of the Tonga Islands*, 3rd ed. 1827, i, 104, 190, 290; ii, 115, etc.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[216:5](pch46.htm#fr_1098) *Id*. ii, 108.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[216:6](pch46.htm#fr_1099) *Id*, ii, 87. So in
Polynesia generally. Cp. Ellis, i, 375, etc.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[216:7](pch46.htm#fr_1100) Mariner, ii, 108.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[216:8](pch46.htm#fr_1101) Jastrow, *Religions
of Babylonia and Assyria*, pp. 124, 129-30, 229, 344, 348, etc.; Sayce,
*Hibbert Lectures*, pp. 50, 98, 112-115, 120-1; Tiele, *Hist. comp. des
anc. relig.*, trad. fr. 1882, p. 202.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[216:9](pch46.htm#fr_1102) Max Müller,
*Physical Religion*, 1891, p. 168; below, Part III, § 4.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[216:10](pch46.htm#fr_1103) Tiele, *Egyptian
Religion*, pp. 62-3, 178; Le Page Renouf, *Hibbert Lectures*, 2nd ed. p.
116; *Book of the Dead*, ch. lxviii.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[216:11](pch46.htm#fr_1104) Renouf, pp.
119-122.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[217:1](pch46.htm#fr_1105) *Book of the Dead*,
cc. xviii, xx; Tiele, *Egyptian Religion*, p. 63.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[217:2](pch46.htm#fr_1106) Cp. Ernst Siecke,
*Hermes der Mond-Gott*, 1908.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[217:3](pch46.htm#fr_1107) According to Tiele
(*Outlines of the History of the Ancient Religions*, Eng. tr. p. 211),
it was as Wind-God that Hermes became God of music and (*horresco
referens*) of eloquence.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[217:4](pch46.htm#fr_1108) Athênê is possibly
in origin one with Tanith (Tiele, *Outlines*, p. 210), and with Anaitis
(*Id*. *Egyptian Religion*, pp. 135-6), who was bracketed with Mithra,
and so brought near to Ahura-Mazda. See below, Part III, § 5. But cp. E.
Meyer, who decides (*Gesch. des Alt.* ii, 115) that Athênê is simply the
place name Athenai = Athens.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[217:5](pch46.htm#fr_1109) *Iliad*, v, 875
*sq*. viii, 5 *sq*.; Hesiod, *Theog.* 896; *Odyssey*, xvi, 260.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[217:6](pch46.htm#fr_1110) Cp. Preller,
*Griechische Mythologie*, 2nd ed. i, 150 and refs.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[217:7](pch46.htm#fr_1111) Plato, *Minos;*
Strabo, x, 4, § 8; xvi, 2, § 38. Cp. Burrows, *The Discoveries in
Crete*, 1907, pp. 25, 43, 126-7; Murray, The *Rise of the Greek Epic*,
1907, pp. 32, 127.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[217:8](pch46.htm#fr_1112) Preller, as cited,
ii, 118 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[217:9](pch46.htm#fr_1113) Plutarch, *Numa*,
cc. 4, 13, 15.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[217:10](pch46.htm#fr_1114) Diodorus, iii, 56.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[217:11](pch46.htm#fr_1115) Horace, *Ars
poet.* 391-2.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[218:1](pch46.htm#fr_1116) Dennett, *Nigerian
Studies*, 1910, pp. 58, 63, 86-90. As to Semitic traces see pp. 11, 99.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 2. The Logos](pch47)
