[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch71) 
[Next](pch73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 11. The Vogue of Mithraism.

In view of this long series of signal parallels between the Mithraic and
the Christian cults, it is difficult to doubt that one has imitated the
other; and it may now be left to the candid reader to pass his own
judgment on the theory that it was Mithraism which copied Christism. The
Christian imitation took place, be it observed, because the features
imitated were found by experience to be religiously attractive;
Mithraism itself having, as we have seen, developed some of them on the
lines of other Oriental cults. Its history, as far as we can trace it,
is a series of adaptations to its environment. Mithraism in fact had
spread in the west with just such rapidity as Christians have been wont
to count miraculous in the case of their own creed. And we, looking back
on Christian and other religious history with sociological eyes, can
perfectly understand how such a cultus, with an elaborate ceremonial and
an impressive initiation, with the attraction of august and solemn
mysteries and the promise of immortal life, and with official
encouragement as regarded the army, could spread throughout the Roman
Empire in the age in which the primitive Roman religion crumbled away
before the advance of far more highly specialised and complicated
systems and a more philosophic thought. <span
id="fr_1686"></span>[3](#fn_1686) So special was the favour accorded to
it in Rome that a Mithræum was permitted to be dug in the Capitoline
Hill under the Capitol, the most venerated spot in the city. <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[4](#fn_1687) Above all was it popular in the

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

army, which, though the type of the social disease, really seems to have
been to some extent a school, albeit a savage one, of moral strength and
order at a time when an appalling abjection was overtaking the Roman
world, men reverencing rank as dogs reverence men. One of the first
stages in the initiation, for men, consisted in the devotee's receiving
a sword, and being called a soldier of Mithra. <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1](#fn_1688) Hence the association of Mithra with
Mars, and his virtual absorption of Janus, whose attributes he
duplicated. Thus Mithraism was specially the faith of the
soldiery; <span id="fr_1689"></span>[2](#fn_1689) and in doing honour to
the Invincible Sun-God Mithra—*Deo Soli Invicto Mithræ*, as the
monuments have it—the Emperor Constantine vied with the most loyal
Mithraists long after his so-called conversion to Christianity. <span
id="fr_1690"></span>[3](#fn_1690)

The explanation of this phase seems to be that it was through oriental
militarism that the cult reached the west. We have it from
Plutarch <span id="fr_1691"></span>[4](#fn_1691) that Mithraism was
first introduced to Rome through the Cilician pirates, whom Pompey put
down; and it is known that those pirates were a confederation of
soldiers and others formerly employed by Asian rulers (in particular by
Mithradates, in whose army Mithraism would be the natural cult) and
thrown on their own resources by the Roman conquest. <span
id="fr_1692"></span>[5](#fn_1692) As such piracy was not reckoned
discreditable, and Pompey took many of the defeated pirates under his
patronage, <span id="fr_1693"></span>[6](#fn_1693) their religion had a
good start with the Roman army, in which so many of them entered, and
which was for centuries afterwards so largely recruited from the East.
It is very likely that the Roman authorities from the first encouraged
the cult <span id="fr_1694"></span>[7](#fn_1694) as specially fitted for
the soldiery. But the cult was not confined to them.

Among the non-military congregations, we learn from the inscriptions,
there were both slaves and freedmen, <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[8](#fn_1695) so that the cult was on that side as
receptive as the Christian. But in one other respect it seems to have
been less so. Among all the hundreds of recovered inscriptions there is
no mention of a priestess or woman initiate, or even of a donatress;
though there are dedications *pro salute* of women, and one inscription
telling of a Mithræum erected by the priest and his family. <span
id="fr_1696"></span>[9](#fn_1696) It would seem then that, despite the

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

allusion of Tertullian to the "virgins" <span
id="fr_1697"></span>[1](#fn_1697) of Mithra, women held no recognised
place in the main body of the membership. <span
id="fr_1698"></span>[2](#fn_1698) It would seem, indeed, that inasmuch
as the cult was conjoined in the West with that of the Great Mother,
Cybelê, as in the East with that of Anaitis, women must have been thus
associated with it; <span id="fr_1699"></span>[3](#fn_1699) but if they
were apart from the Mithraists proper the latter would be to that extent
socially disadvantaged in their competition with Christianity, however
appropriate their worship may have been to the life of the army.

Such an attitude of exclusiveness is probably to be set down in part to
the spirit of asceticism which, on Tertullian's testimony, marked the
Mithraic cultus as it did the Manichæans <span
id="fr_1700"></span>[4](#fn_1700) and several of the Christian sects. Of
none of the ancients can sexual asceticism be predicated more certainly
than of Julian, the most distinguished Mithraist of all; and such facts
dispose of the Christian attempt to charge upon the rival religion a
cultus of sensuality. On a picture of the "banquet of the seven priests"
in the Mithraic catacomb <span id="fr_1701"></span>[5](#fn_1701) there
are found phrases of the "Eat and drink, for to-morrow we die"
order; <span id="fr_1702"></span>[6](#fn_1702) and these may stand for
an antinomian tendency such as was early associated with
Christism; <span id="fr_1703"></span>[7](#fn_1703) though it is not at
all unlikely that they were inscribed in a hostile spirit by the hands
of Christian invaders of the Mithraic retreat. However that may be,
there is absolutely no evidence that Mithraism ever developed such
disorders as ultimately compelled the abolition of the love-feast among
the Christians. The Mithraic standards, in fact, seem to have been the
higher; though both cults alike were sustained mainly by the common
people, apart from the special military vogue of the older system. A
Christian historian has even held it likely that "what won sympathy for
the worship of Mithra in Rome was the fundamental ethical thought that
the deity is set in constant strife with evil......The pure and chaste
God of light, of whom no myth related anything but virtue and strife
against evil, won many hearts from sin-stained Olympus Above.....all,
the most ideal characters in the history of imperial Rome gave their
protection to the Mithra-worship." <span
id="fr_1704"></span>[8](#fn_1704)

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

In all probability it was the poorer cult of the two, lacking as it did
the benefactions of rich women. It has been inferred, from the special
developments of Mithraism among the soldiers and the Syrian traders who
followed the camp, that it was primarily, in the West, a religion of the
humble, <span id="fr_1705"></span>[1](#fn_1705) like Christianity, and
that like Christianity it only slowly attained wealth. But inasmuch as
it never imitated the propagandist and financial methods which the
Church took over from the later Judaism of the Dispersion, and always
maintained a highly esoteric character, it escaped certain of the
lowering forces of the Christist movement. One of these was the practice
of systematic almsgiving, which attracted a motley mass of both sexes to
the Christian churches. Mutual aid there probably was among the
Mithraists, who in their capacity of organised groups or *sodalitia*
were able to own their congregational property; <span
id="fr_1706"></span>[2](#fn_1706) but their different religious outlook
and tradition excluded large financial developments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[324:3](pch72.htm#fr_1686) See Pliny, *Hist.
Nat.* ii, 4-5 (6-7) for a passage acclaiming the sun as the true
divinity, which is rightly connected by Mr. King with the religion of
Mithra.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[324:4](pch72.htm#fr_1687) Lajard,
*Recherches*, pp. 564-5. Cp. Beugnot, *La Destruction du Paganisme*. i,
159; Cumont, *Textes et Monuments*, ii, 193. It seems possible that the
cave utilised was an early *mundus*. Chapels of the Egyptian deities
also, however, had been set up in the temple of the Capitol, towards the
end of the Republic. Boissier, *Religion Romaine d’Auguste aux
Antonins*, 3e édit. i, 349, citing *Corp. inscr. lat.* i, 1034. Cumont
(i, 352-4) gives a list of identified Mithræums in Rome—30 in all.
"C’est la minorité."

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[325:1](pch72.htm#fr_1688) Tertullian, *De
Corona*, c. 15; Garucci, *Mystères du Syncrétisme Phrygien*, 1854, p.
34.

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[325:2](pch72.htm#fr_1689) Of old, as we have
seen, Mithra was a war-God. The institution of the great quadriennial
Mithraic games was the work of the soldierly Aurelian. Lajard notes that
the great majority of the monuments found seem to have been at military
forts (*Recherches*, p. 565); and this is amply borne out by Prof.
Cumont.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[325:3](pch72.htm#fr_1690) See his coins. Cp.
Gibbon, cc. xx, xxviii; and Beugnot, i, 92-6.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[325:4](pch72.htm#fr_1691) *Life of Pompey*,
c. 241.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[325:5](pch72.htm#fr_1692) Finlay, H*istory of
Greece*, Tozer's ed. i, 29.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[325:6](pch72.htm#fr_1693) *Id*. pp. 30, 31.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[325:7](pch72.htm#fr_1694) This is argued by
Canon (now Bishop) Hicks (*Mithras Worship*, as cited, p. 39), following
Sir William Ramsay (p. 41).

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[325:8](pch72.htm#fr_1695) Cumont, i, 327-8.

<span id="fn_1696"></span>[325:9](pch72.htm#fr_1696) *Id*. i, 330.

<span id="fn_1697"></span>[326:1](pch72.htm#fr_1697) M. Cumont
recognises this testimony, but does not attempt to meet it save by the
negative testimony of the monuments.

<span id="fn_1698"></span>[326:2](pch72.htm#fr_1698) Jerome's list of
the grades of initiates obscurely specifies one which has been variously
read as "hyenas" and "lionesses" (cp. De Sacy's note on Sainte-Croix,
it, 128); but the passage being corrupt, no inference can be drawn from
it.

<span id="fn_1699"></span>[326:3](pch72.htm#fr_1699) See Cumont, i, 334,
*note*, as to *matres sacrorum*.

<span id="fn_1700"></span>[326:4](pch72.htm#fr_1700) Baur (*Das manich.
Religionssystem*, p. 355, note) traces the Manichæan separation between
*electi* and *auditores* to the Mithraic example.

<span id="fn_1701"></span>[326:5](pch72.htm#fr_1701) See *Christianity
and Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 225.

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[326:6](pch72.htm#fr_1702) Garucci,
*Mystères*, *passim*.

<span id="fn_1703"></span>[326:7](pch72.htm#fr_1703) 1 Cor. v, 1-2; xi,
21. Cp. Jean Réville, *La Religion à Rome sous les Sévères*, p. 95.

<span id="fn_1704"></span>[326:8](pch72.htm#fr_1704) Hausrath, *History
of the New Testament Times: Times of the Apostles*, Eng. tr. 1895, <span
id="page_327">p. 327</span> i, 95-6—instancing Antoninus Pius,
Constantius Chlorus, and Julian, and citing Lampridius. *Commod*. 8;
Himerius, vii, 2. The former reference tells only of Commodus; and it is
but fair to add that Elagabalus also was *tauroboliatus* (Lamprid.
*Heliogab.* 7).

<span id="fn_1705"></span>[327:1](pch72.htm#fr_1705) Cumont, i, 327-8.

<span id="fn_1706"></span>[327:2](pch72.htm#fr_1706) Cumont, i, 326.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 12. Absorption in Christianity](pch73)
