[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch84) 
[Next](pch86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

### APPENDIX A

### THE EATING OF THE CRUCIFIED HUMAN SACRIFICE.

<span class="smallcaps">On</span> page [136](pch32.htm#page_136) I have
suggested that the cannibalism of the Bataks of Sumatra would seem to be
a survival of an anthropophagous sacrament; and on [p.
132](pch32.htm#page_132) I have put the original eating of the
"crucified" human sacrifice as an inference supported by other cases of
sacramental cannibalism, by the abundant evidence from Africa, and by
the special case of the Dravidian Gonds in India. I had overlooked a
decisive testimony, preserved by Pickering, <span
id="fr_2003"></span>[1](#fn_2003) which exhibits the Bataks as
practising human sacrifice under the aspect of crucifixion, in the way
of the Khonds, and as eating the fragments of the victim, as late as
1814. The testimony is that of Major Canning, <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2](#fn_2004) who in his residence among the Bataks
at Tappanooly in that year "omitted no opportunity of making the most
minute inquiries" on the subject of their cannibalism. It was previously
known that they ate criminals, prisoners of war, and aged relatives,
"not so much to gratify their appetite as to perform a pious ceremony."
Major Canning further elicited a native account of the manner of the
ritual sacrifice:—

"Three posts are fixed in the ground: to the middle one the body of the
prisoner or criminal is made fast, while his arms and legs are extended
to the two others. (The narrator and other chiefs present here
simultaneously made with their arms and legs the figure of St. Andrew's
cross.) On a signal being given everyone entitled to a share in the
feast rushes on him with hatchets and knives, and many with no other
instruments than their teeth and nails. He is thus in a few minutes
entirely cut or torn to pieces, and I have seen the guests so
keen.....as severely to wound each other's hands and fingers. A mixture
of lime-juice, salt, and chillies, prepared in the shell of a cocoanut,
is always at hand on these occasions, in which many dip the flesh
previous to eating it." Questioned further as to the mode of killing,
the native witness answers: "The first wounds he receives are from the
hatchets, knives, and teeth of his assailants, but these are so numerous
and simultaneous as to cause almost immediate death."

Major Canning's testimony is open to no doubt, for he here describes a
procedure closely similar to that of the Khonds, which when he wrote had
not been reduced to published narrative. His witness, a native chief, he
tells us, was frequently corroborated

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

by others present. We are left to speculate as to whether the beverage
"always at hand on these occasions" had ever had any analogy to the
stupefying potion of the Khonds, or was simply a thirst-quencher for the
victim before the hour of his slaying. It may be noted, however, that
the St. Andrew's cross seems a deviation from the Khond practice, and is
an approximation to that of Benin, and to the method observed in the
sacrifice of crucified victims of the Mexican God Xipe. (See figure in
*Encyc. Brit.* new ed. art. <span class="smallcaps">America</span>, Pl.
ii, p. 809.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[389:1](pch85.htm#fr_2003) *The Races of Man*,
by Charles Pickering, M.D., Bohn ed. 1863, pp. 303-4.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[389:2](pch85.htm#fr_2004) Published in the
*Malacca Observer*, 1827, and cited thence in Moore's *Papers on the
Indian Archipelago*, cited in turn by Pickering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix B. Dramatic and Ritual Survivals](pch86)
