[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [African](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](rsa02) [Next](rsa04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### UTIKXO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

U<span class="small">TIKXO</span>, the word adopted for God by the early
missionaries among the Kxosa or Frontier Kafirs, was not a word known to
the natives of these parts, but was introduced by missionaries and
others. And it is generally supposed that the word does not properly
belong to the Kxosa or any other of the alliterative dialects spoken in
South Africa;<span id="page_105_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_105_note_1) but
has been derived from the Hottentots. The word Utikxo has the nearest
resemblance to the Tikxwoa of the Cape Hottentot dialect.

 We cannot doubt that this is the word which Kolb means to express as
the Hottentot name for God.<span
id="page_105_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_105_note_2) Having declared his
undoubting conviction that the Hottentots generally "believe in a
supreme Being, the Creator of heaven and earth, and of every thing in
them; the arbiter of the world, through whose omnipotence all things
live and move and have their being. And that he is endowed with
unsearchable attributes and perfections," he goes on to say:—"The
Hottentots call him Gounja Gounja or Gounja Ticquoa; that is, the God of
all gods; and say he is a good man, who does nobody any hurt; and from
whom none need be apprehensive of any; and that he dwells far above the
moon."<span id="page_105_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_105_note_3)

 If the investigations of Moffat, Appleyard, Casalis, and others are
correct, Kolb very much exaggerated the Hottentot notion respecting God,
and substituted instead of what they really believed, the belief of a
Christian man. Nothing is more easy than to enquire of heathen savages
the character of their creed, and during the conversation to impart to
them great truths and ideas which they never heard before, and presently
<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> to have these come back again as
articles of their own original faith, when in reality they are but the
echoes of one's own thoughts. But even here in Kolb's statement we have
the idea, more clearly and distinctly enunciated by after investigators,
that great, and mighty and good, as, according to him, the Hottentots
might have regarded their Tikxwoa, they believed that he was but "a good
man."

 And further on Kolb tells us they also "worship an evil deity whom they
look upon as the father of mischief, and source of all plagues. They
call him Touquoa; and say he is a little, crabbed, inferior captain,
whose malice against the Hottentots will seldom let him rest; and who
never did, nor has it in his nature to do, any good to any body. They
worship him therefore, say they, in order to sweeten him and to avert
his malice."<span id="page_106_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_106_note_4)

 The two words—Ticquoa and Touquoa—here given for a good and evil deity,
are remarkably alike; and it is not improbable that Kolb mistook two
words, identical in meaning, and applied to one imaginary being, for the
name of two beings, a good and evil one. If not, then we must suppose
that since the time of Kolb a great corruption has taken place in the
original creed of the Hottentots, and that the good and evil, which were
formerly kept distinct and referred to different agents, have become
confused, and are indiscriminately ascribed to one being.

 Observing that Dr. Bleek speaks of Tikxwoa as being one with "Kolb's
Tikquoa or touquoa," I supposed he might have more ample reason for
thinking them identical than I had.<span
id="page_106_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_106_note_5) His reasons, however,
are simply philological. I quote from his letter on the subject:—"By
identifying this Toukquoa with Tikquoa, the name for God found in the
vocabulary (where Cham-ouna is that for the devil, who is called in Nama
Hottentot Kau-ap), I do not think I exceeded the probability. But it may
yet be that Kolb meant a different word. However, considering it fully,
I have not much doubt it is really the same word, identical with the
Nama Tsuikxoap, which contain both the vowels in the first syllable of
which the two renderings of Kolb give only each one."

 I may add that whilst recently on a visit amoug the Griquas I met with
several persons who were acquainted with the Hottentots, and understood
their language, They told me that the <span id="page_107">p. 107</span>
name they used for God was Tikqwa. They did not know any other name for
an evil principle resembling it, They also understood the language of
the Bushmen, and told me that their word fur God was Ikqum’n; and that
the meaning of the word was, "Father who is above."

 Moffitt quotes from Dr. Vanderkemp the following, which appears to
justify the surmise that Kolb was mistaken in supposing the two words
referred to two beings from not observing that he was dealing with a
merely tribal difference of pronunciation:<span
id="page_107_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_107_note_6)—"A decisive proof of
what I here say with respect to the national atheism of the Kafirs, is,
that they have no word in their language to express the idea of Deity;
the individuals just mentioned calling him ’Thiko, which is a corruption
of a name by which God is called in the language of the Hottentots,
literally signifying one *that induces pain*."<span
id="page_107_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_107_note_7)

 But Moffat is equally decisive that the Hottentots and Namaquas are
just as ignorant of God, and their language just as devoid of a word for
God, as Dr. Vanderkemp and others have represented the Kafirs. Whilst
pursuing his investigations among the inbabitants of Great Namaqualand,
he says:—"I met with an ancient sorcerer or doctor, who stated that he
had always understood that Tsui’kuap was a notable warrior, of great
physical strength; that in a desperate struggle with another chieftain,
he received a wound in the knee, but having vanquished his enemy, his
name was lost in the mighty combat which rendered the nation
independent; for no one could conquer the Tsui’kuap (wounded-knee). When
I referred to the import of the word, one who inflicts pain or a sore
knee, manifesting my surprise that they should give such a name to the
Creator and Benefactor, he replied in a way that induced the belief that
he applied the term to what we should call the devil, or to <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> death itself; adding that he thought death,
or the power causing death, was very sore indeed."<span
id="page_108_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_108_note_8)

 And then he asks:—"May not the Tsui’kuap of these people be like the
Thlanga of the Kafirs, an ancient hero; or represent some power which
they superstitiously dread, from its causing death or pain?"<span
id="page_108_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_108_note_9)

 We see, then, that Moffat comes to a conclusion somewhat similar to
that of Kolb, that there is an evil principle or being, feared by the
Hottentots, and which has received the name of Tsui’kuap, which is
equivalent to Utikxo. But he does not appear to have heard any thing of
the good principle or being, of which Kolb speaks.

 Again, Casalis expresses an equally decided opinion as to the
"endemical atheism" of the inhabitants of South Africa generally. He
says:—"The tribes had entirely lost the idea of a Creator. All the
natives whom we have questioned on the subject have assured us that it
never entered their heads that the earth and sky might be the work of an
invisible being."<span
id="page_108_fr_10"></span>[10](#page_108_note_10)

 Shaw also says:—"The Kafir nations cannot be said to possess any
religion."<span id="page_108_fr_11"></span>[11](#page_108_note_11) And
again:—"Before Missionaries and other Europeans had intercourse with the
Kafirs, they seem to have had extremely vague and indistinct notions of
God. The older Kafirs used to speak of Umdali, the Creator or Maker of
all things, and Uthlanga, which word seems to have been used to denote
the source or place from which all living things came forth."<span
id="page_108_fr_12"></span>[12](#page_108_note_12)

 A similar statement is made by Arbousset. He says:—"They have scarcely
retained the idea of a Supreme Being. The more enlightened admit that
there is a *Morena* in heaven, whom they call the *powerful master of
things*, but the multitude deny that there is, and even this name of
*morena* is the same as they give to the lowest of their chiefs. All the
blacks whom I have known are atheists, but it would not be difficult to
find amongst them some theists. Their atheism, however, does not prevent
<span id="page_109">p. 109</span> their being extremely superstitious,
or from rendering a kind of worship to their ancestors, whom they call
*barimos*, or in the singular *morimo*."<span
id="page_109_fr_13"></span>[13](#page_109_note_13)

 He says of the Mountain Bushmen's faith:—"They say that there is a
*Kaang* or *Chief* in the sky, called also *Kue-Akeng-teng, the Man*,
that is to say, the *Master of all things*. According to their
expression, 'one does not see him with the eyes, but knows him with the
heart.' He is to be worshipped in times of famine and before going to
war, and that throughout the whole night, performing the dance of the
*mokoma*."<span id="page_109_fr_14"></span>[14](#page_109_note_14)

 The same notion of malevolence is connected in the native mind among
the Bechuanas with the word Morimo, which the Missionaries have adopted
for God. The meaning of Morimo as given by Moffat,<span
id="page_109_fr_15"></span>[15](#page_109_note_15) and of Molimo as
given by Casalis,<span
id="page_109_fr_16"></span>[16](#page_109_note_16) is, like that given
to the Bushmen's Ikqum’n, "He that is in heaven." But, says Moffat,
"Morimo, to those who knew any thing about it, had been represented as a
malevolent *selo* or *thing*."<span
id="page_109_fr_17"></span>[17](#page_109_note_17) And again, "According
to native testimony Morimo, as well as man, with all the different
species of animals, came out of a cave or hole in the Bakone
country."<span id="page_109_fr_18"></span>[18](#page_109_note_18) "There
is," says Casalis, "an obvious contradiction between the language and
the received ideas."<span
id="page_109_fr_19"></span>[19](#page_109_note_19)—That is, I presume,
Casalis supposes that the word Morimo or Molimo,—a heavenly one,—is a
testimony preserved in the language of the people against their present
infidelity and corruption of faith. And Archbishop Trench, in his work
on "The Study of Words," has brought this word forward as a remarkabIe
instance of the disappearing of an important word from a language, and
with it "the disappearing as well of the great spiritual fact and truth
whereof that word was once the vehicle and the guardian."<span
id="page_109_fr_20"></span>[20](#page_109_note_20)

 But Dr. Bleek has made it more than probable that Moffat and Casalis
are mistaken in the derivation and meaning of this word; and that Molimo
has a sound by accident only similar to Moh‘olimo—"one who is in
heaven." He says:—"In other South African languages, different words are
found indicating the idea of a supreme being; but in Se-tshuana at <span
id="page_110">p. 110</span> least the word for 'God' has a similar
reference to their ancestor worship as the Zulu *Unkulunkulu*. Thus in
Se-suto *Mo-limo* means God, and *me-limo* gods, but *mo-limo*,
ancestral spirits, plur. ba-limo."<span
id="page_110_fr_21"></span>[21](#page_110_note_21)

 This is a far more probable derivation. And when we remember that
Morimo is supposed to have come out of the same hole that gave origin to
man and beasts, as Unkulunkulu came out of the same bed of reeds; and
that in the native mind there is no connection of thought between a
heavenly being and this Morimo, there can be little doubt of the
correctness of the view taken by Dr. Bleek.

 Further, it may be added in corroboration that although the Amazulu do
not say Unkulunkulu is an Itongo,—an ancestral spirit; they say he was
an Ukoko,—an ancestor: and not only does it appear that they suppose
that at one time he was regarded as an Itongo, and was worshipped among
other Amatongo by his own laud-giving names, but we find them
incidentally giving intimations of a belief in a great Itongo from whom
all things proceeded. Thus they are heard to say in explanation of the
superiority of the white man to the coloured that the former remained
longer with a great Itongo than the blacks, and therefore came into
being more perfect, with better habits and accoutrements.<span
id="page_110_fr_22"></span>[22](#page_110_note_22)

 This view brings the notions of different people of South Africa into a
certain similarity and consistency. Whilst on the other view they are
neither consistent with themselves nor with each other.

 Appleyard gives a somewhat similar account to that of Moffat as to the
meaning of Utikxo. He says:—"Tshoei’koap is the word from which the
Kafirs have probably derived their Utixo, a term which they have
invariably applied, like the Hottentots, to designate the Divine Being,
since the introduction of Christianity. Its derivation is curious. It
consists of two words which together mean 'the broken knee.' It is said
to have been originally applied to a doctor or sorcerer of considerable
notoriety and skill among the Hottentots or Namaquas, some generations
back, in consequence of his having received some injury of the knee.
Having been held in high repute for extraordinary powers during life, he
continued to be invoked, even after death, as one who could relieve and
protect;<span id="page_110_fr_23"></span>[23](#page_110_note_23) and
hence, in process of <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> time, he became
the nearest in idea to their first conceptions of God."<span
id="page_111_fr_24"></span>[24](#page_111_note_24)

 If this account be correct, and there appears no reason whatever for
doubting its accuracy, it is clear that the early Missionaries, in using
the word Utikxo for God, adopted an isibongo, or laud-giving name, of
some old brave.

 To my mind nothing here found conveys the idea that the notion of
divinity was ever in the uneducated native mind connected with Utikxo;
much less that Utikxo ever meant God: on the contrary that it meant
something very different from God; in some instances, at least, an evil
spirit, which was worshipped just on the same grounds as the Yezidis
worship Satan, "because he must be conciliated and reverenced; for as he
now has the means of doing evil to mankind, so will he hereafter have
the power of rewarding them."<span
id="page_111_fr_25"></span>[25](#page_111_note_25) And it appears to me
to have been unwisely and improperly adopted by the early Missionaries;
to be explained and excused only on the ground that at first the
teachers and taught were unable freely to communicate ideas one to the
other.

 The term Molimo or Morimo appears equally improper. How very
objectionable is it to use a word for God in teaching savages the
doctrines of Christianity, to which they have a natural or rather
educated repugnance, and of the Being whom it is meant to represent they
can speak as a native chief spoke to Mr. Moffat:—"When we assured him
that God (Morimo) was in the heavens, and that He did whatever He
pleased, they blamed us for giving Him a high position beyond their
reach; for they viewed their Morimo as a noxious reptile. 'Would that I
could catch it, I would transfix it with my spear,' exclaimed S., a
chief, whose judgment on other subjects would command attention."<span
id="page_111_fr_26"></span>[26](#page_111_note_26)

 At the same time it is quite possible that the confusion of ideas
between good and evil,—the association of the idea of evil with
God,—which we here meet with, is a confusion of comparatively recent
times; that originally there existed a defined belief in a good and an
evil Being; but that the common multiform natural phenomena, which are
constantly exhibiting the Creator's beneficence, were lost to these
afflicted populations amidst phenomena of an apparently <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> opposite character, and especially amidst
the sufferings and wants of their daily life; until created things spoke
to them only of suffering, and fixed their attention on a pain-creating
being, whom they feared more than reverenced, and whom if they
worshipped, it was to deprecate wrath, rather than to express their
faith in his love.

 And may not the legend,—so bizarre and bald,—given by Dr. Bleek in the
"Hottentot Tales"<span
id="page_112_fr_27"></span>[27](#page_112_note_27) of a contest between
Heitsi Eibip and Gqagqorip be a confused tradition of some old faith,
the fundamental principle of which was that of a contest between good
and evil in nature; but which in process of time has been lost, and the
good and the evil come to be confounded, and referred alike to one
fabulous being.

 According to Du Chaillu, we find even at the present time among the
inhabitants of the Western coast of Africa the worship of a good and
evil spirit. He says:—

 "Aniambia enjoys the protection of two spirits of very great power,
named Abambou and Mbuirri. The former is an evil spirit, the latter is
beneficent. They are both worshipped; and their accommodations, so far
as I was permitted to see, were exactly alike.

 "Abambou is the devil of the Camma. He is a wicked mischievous spirit,
who lives near graves and in burial grounds. He takes occasional walks
through the country; and if he is angry at any one, has the power to
cause sickness and death. In worshipping him they cry, 'Now are we well!
Now are we satisfied! Now be our friend, and do not hurt us!'

 "Mbuirri, whose house I next visited, is lodged and kept much as his
rival. He is a good spirit, but has powers much the same as Abambou, so
far as I could see. Being less wicked, he is less zealously
worshipped."<span id="page_112_fr_28"></span>[28](#page_112_note_28)

 This coincides remarkably with Kolb's statement; and leads to a
reasonable suspicion that his Touquoa,—probably only some local or
tribal variation of the word now come down to the Kafirs as Utikxo,—and
the Morimo of the Bechuanas and Basutos, is the same as the Abambou of
the people of Aniambia. Yet what missionary would choose Abambou as the
name for God, even though he should have ascribed to him, in addition to
his own, the only "less wicked" attributes of Mbuirri?

 Dr. Bleek's Hottentot legend just alluded to, begins with the <span
id="page_113">p. 113</span> significant words, "At first there were
two," And among the natives of these parts we have the two words
Unembeza and Ugovana to express the good and evil hearts which are
supposed to be contending within them. And they ascribe good and evil to
the Amatongo which they worship, and worship more sedulously to avert
evil than to acknowledge good.

 Be this as it may, the impression so generally existing among those who
have laboured long in South Africa of the "endemic atheism" of the
different peoples, and the difficulty universally confessed of being
able to determine whether the name, applied to some being to whom
certain supreme acts are referred, is in the native mind any thing more
than the name of their great forefather, or of some great
hero-benefactor of times gone by, to whom with perfect consistency an
ancestor-worshipping people would refer such acts, suggest that it would
be both more wise and reverent, and more likely to be effectual in
attempting to teach them a new faith, to introduce a new name,—a name
not really newer to them than the idea of the supreme Being itself. I am
myself persuaded that such a new name is very desirable, aye more, very
necessary. For there is no name, whether Utikxo, or Morimo, or
Unkulunkulu, which, without possessing any primary signification
referring to divinity, has not much, both etymologically and
traditionally, which is highly objectionable, and calculated to mislead
the young convert. Bishop Colenso felt this on his first introduction to
mission work. And I do not doubt that his impression was the result of
devout and intelligent thought, which is not at all invalidated by a
change of opinion, which led him to attempt to introduce an equally
objectionable word for God, and to which exception has been justly taken
by many on grounds similar to those which may be taken against Utikxo.

 In connection with the word Utikxo, "the broken knee," the following
interesting and curious corroboration of the idea that Utikxo is but the
isibongo or laud-giving name of some ancient brave, is well worth
considering. Among the Amazulu there is a word, clearly an isibongo,
*U-gukqa-ba-dele*, which means, He kneels and they get enough of it. And
the following explanations appear to show the character and
circumstances of the conflict from which he obtained the name:—

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

>  We apply the name U-gukqa-ba-dele to a man who has been surrounded by
> many others, who trust to their number, and expect to be able to
> confuse him by surrounding him, and so kill him before he can well see
> what to do; and perhaps they stab him, or without having stabbed him,
> they see him sink on his knee, and say, "He is falling; we have
> stabbed him." And they draw near to him, no longer now as when he was
> standing; they go quite close to him now he has fallen, saying, "Ah,
> now then, let us make an end of him," But a long time passes without
> their killing him; it is he alone who kills them, they not
> understanding in what way he is so difficult to kill; until at length
> they say, "Hau! are we then at length all killed by one man? Let us
> let him alone."
>
>  And so they leave him still in the same place where they first found
> him, so then when they have left, going away with their faces towards
> him, they go on looking back and see him still kneeling and watching
> them, for he thinks they may take heart and come back to him again.
> But when they do not return he arises and goes away.
>
>  They have had enough of it forsooth, that is, they are satisfied,
> <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> and do not go after him any more.
> Such a man, then, is called U-gu-kqa-ba-dele. It is not the name of a
> common person. It is a name which we heard from people when the Dutch
> first came from the Kxosa tribes; they brought some Kxosa people with
> them; when they took an oath, they said, "Tikxo who is above.
> Gukqa-ba-dele." But it is by no means clear whether the word "gukqa"
> (kneel) came at precisely the same time as the word Utikxo. We heard
> from the Amakxosa that Utikxo is the Lord who is above.<span
> id="page_115_fr_29"></span>[29](#page_115_note_29)
>
>  At first chiefs used to go out with the army, and invade other people
> with it; but it happened through their shrewdness that the enemy
> devised a plan, saying, "In order that we may conquer these people,
> let us kill their king, that they may be discouraged." And in fact
> they might kill the king and scatter the army; for the kings used to
> go out, saying, "Then my people will be brave, when they see me
> there."
>
>  So the custom of accompanying the army was given up; it is no longer
> usual; it may still be among some nations; it is no longer the custom
> among the Amazulu. <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> Among the Amazulu
> the chief is praised for the conduct of his people among the enemy;
> they conquer, and it is not said that the conquest was made by the
> king's people. For instance, if a powerful army appears on the high
> lands, and the other army is below, a wise officer says, "O, the place
> is bad; we shall be borne down; our position is bad; kneel, and stab
> them in the bowels." If they succeed by this stratagem, their chief
> may be called by the name U-gukqa-ba-dele, as though it was he who did
> it, when forsooth it was his people through the bravery which the
> recollection of their chief gave them. This is the manner, then, in
> which kings get names; as it is said when lauding the king of the
> Amazulu, "You who ate up So-and-so, the son of So-and-so; and it was
> nothing to you." So the chief is praised for the conduct of his army.
> The power which is exhibited by the army is the source from which the
> lauds of the chief are taken. So it is that it is not clear whether it
> was done by him in person or by his people.

 Hence it appears certain that the word Utikxo is the laud-giving name
of an ancient hero, and that it was given in consequence of some
conflict in which he repulsed enemies more powerful from numbers than
himself by the stratagem of kneeling, and so causing them to approach
him under the impression that they could make an easy prey of him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](rsa04)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_105">p. 105</span>

 <span id="page_105_note_1"></span>[1](#page_105_fr_1) Bleek.
Comparative Grammar, p. 92, sec. 397.—Moffat. Missionary Labours, pp.
257, 258.—Appleyard. Kafir Grammar, p. 13.

 <span id="page_105_note_2"></span>[2](#page_105_fr_2) The Present State
of the Cape of Good Hope, &c. Written originally in High German. By
Peter Kolben, A.M. Done into English from the original, by Mr. Medley.
Kolb's Work was published in German, Folio, 1729. I quote from the
translation by Medley, 2 Vols. 8vo., published 1731.

 <span id="page_105_note_3"></span>[3](#page_105_fr_3) Id., Vol. I, p.
93.

<span id="footnotes_page_106">p. 106</span>

 <span id="page_106_note_4"></span>[4](#page_106_fr_4) Id., p. l04.

 <span id="page_106_note_5"></span>[5](#page_106_fr_5) Comparative
Grammar, p. 92.

<span id="footnotes_page_107">p. 107</span>

 <span id="page_107_note_6"></span>[6](#page_107_fr_6) Dr. Bleek gives
the fonowing variations of the Hottentot name of God, which, not having
the requisite characters, I shall spell in accordance with the
principles laid down in the Preface to Vol. I. of *Zulu Nursery Tales*:—

 "I add here the Hottentot name for God, which is *Tsuikqwap*
(Schmelen's Tsoeikwap) or Tsuigxoap (Wallmann's Zuigxoap) in the Nama;
and Tshukxoap in the Kqora dialect; Thuikxwe (Van der Kemp's Thuickwe)
among the Eastern Hottentots; and Tikxwoa (Kolb's Tikqwoa or Toukqwoa)
near the Cape." (*Comp. Gram.*, p. 92.)

 It will be seen that most of these words differ from each other more
than the two words of Kolb.

 <span id="page_107_note_7"></span>[7](#page_107_fr_7) Moffat. Op. cit.,
p. 257.

<span id="footnotes_page_108">p. 108</span>

 <span id="page_108_note_8"></span>[8](#page_108_fr_8) Moffat. Op. cit.,
p. 259.

 <span id="page_108_note_9"></span>[9](#page_108_fr_9) Id., p. 259.

 <span id="page_108_note_10"></span>[10](#page_108_fr_10) Casalis. The
Basutos, p. 238.

 <span id="page_108_note_11"></span>[11](#page_108_fr_11) Story of My
Mission, p. 444.

 <span id="page_108_note_12"></span>[12](#page_108_fr_12) Id., p.
451.—My reasons for thinking that these views require very considerable
modification are given in another place.

<span id="footnotes_page_109">p. 109</span>

 <span id="page_109_note_13"></span>[13](#page_109_fr_13) Op. cit., p.
69.

 <span id="page_109_note_14"></span>[14](#page_109_fr_14) Op. cit., p.
363.

 <span id="page_109_note_15"></span>[15](#page_109_fr_15) Op. cit., p.
260.

 <span id="page_109_note_16"></span>[16](#page_109_fr_16) Op. cit., p.
248.

 <span id="page_109_note_17"></span>[17](#page_109_fr_17) Op. cit., p.
261.

 <span id="page_109_note_18"></span>[18](#page_109_fr_18) Id., p. 262.

 <span id="page_109_note_19"></span>[19](#page_109_fr_19) Op. cit., p.
248.

 <span id="page_109_note_20"></span>[20](#page_109_fr_20) P. 18.

<span id="footnotes_page_110">p. 110</span>

 <span id="page_110_note_21"></span>[21](#page_110_fr_21) Op. cit., p.
91.

 <span id="page_110_note_22"></span>[22](#page_110_fr_22) See [p.
80](rsa01.htm#page_80).

 <span id="page_110_note_23"></span>[23](#page_110_fr_23) That is,
strictly in accordance with the custom of an ancestor-worshipping
people.

<span id="footnotes_page_111">p. 111</span>

 <span id="page_111_note_24"></span>[24](#page_111_fr_24) Grammar, p.
13.

 <span id="page_111_note_25"></span>[25](#page_111_fr_25) Layard's
Nineveh. Vol I., p. 298.

 <span id="page_111_note_26"></span>[26](#page_111_fr_26) Op. cit., p.
265.

<span id="footnotes_page_112">p. 112</span>

 <span id="page_112_note_27"></span>[27](#page_112_fr_27) P. 77.

 <span id="page_112_note_28"></span>[28](#page_112_fr_28) Op. cit., pp.
202, 203.

<span id="footnotes_page_115">p. 115</span>

 <span id="page_115_note_29"></span>[29](#page_115_fr_29) Compare the
Bushman word, which is said to have a similar meaning, [p.
64](rsa01.htm#page_64); and the dispute between the two Kxosa natives as
to the use of Utikxo and Unkulunkulu, [p. 68](rsa01.htm#page_68).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
