[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tt03)  [Next](tt05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOK I

### Cosmogony

Our Master Lieh Tzu dwelt on a vegetable plot in the Chêng State for
forty years, and no man knew him for what he was. The Prince, his
Ministers, and all the State officials looked upon him as one of the
common herd. A time of dearth fell upon the State, and he was preparing
to migrate to Wei, when his disciples said to him: 'Now that our Master
is going away without any prospect of returning, we have ventured to
approach you, hoping for instruction. Are there no words from the lips
of Hu-Ch'iu Tzu-lin that you can impart to us? Lieh Tzu smiled and said:
'Do you suppose that Hu Tzu dealt in words? However, I will try to
repeat to you what my Master said on one occasion to Po-hun Mou-jên.

A fellow-disciple. Out of modesty, Lieh Tzu does not say that the
teaching was imparted directly to himself.

I was standing by and heard his words, which ran as, follows:--

"There is a Creative Principle which is itself uncreated; there is a
Principle of Change which is itself unchanging. The Uncreated is able to
create life; the Unchanging is

{p. 17}

able to effect change. That which is produced cannot but continue
producing; that which is evolved cannot but continue evolving. Hence
there is constant production and constant evolution. The law of constant
production and of constant evolution at no time ceases to operate.

The commentator says: 'That which is once involved in the destiny of
living things can never be annihilated.'

So is it with the Yin and the Yang, so is it with the Four Seasons.

The Yin and the Yang are the Positive and Negative Principles of Nature,
alternately predominating in day and night.

The Uncreated we may surmise to be Alone in itself.

'The Supreme, the Non-Engendered--how can its reality be proved? We can
only suppose that it is mysteriously One, without beginning and without
end.'

The Unchanging goes to and fro, and its range is illimitable. We may
surmise that it stands Alone, and that its Ways are inexhaustible."

'In the Book of the Yellow Emperor it is written: "The Spirit of the
Valley dies not; it may be called the Mysterious Feminine. The
issuing-point of the Mysterious Feminine must be regarded as the Root of
the Universe. Subsisting to all eternity, it uses its force without
effort."

The Book of the Yellow Emperor is no longer extant, but

{p. 18}

the above passage is now incorporated in the *Tao Tê Ching*, and
attributed to Lao Tzu.

'That, then, which engenders all things is itself unengendered; that by
which all things are evolved is itself untouched by evolution.
Self-engendered and self-evolved, it has in itself the elements of
substance, appearance, wisdom, strength, dispersion and cessation. Yet
it would be a mistake to call it by any one of these names.

\*         \*         \*

The Master Lieh Tzu said: 'The inspired men of old regarded the Yin and
the Yang as controlling the sum total of Heaven and Earth. But that
which has substance is engendered from that which is devoid of
substance; out of what then were Heaven and Earth engendered?

'They were engendered out of nothing, and came into existence of
themselves.'

'Hence we say, there is a great Principle of Change, a great Origin, a
great Beginning, a great Primordial Simplicity. In the great Change
substance is not yet main est. In the great Origin lies the beginning of
substance. In the great Beginning, lies the beginning of material form.

'After the separation of the Yin and the Yang, when classes of objects
assume their forms.'

In the great Simplicity lies the beginning of essential

{p. 18}

qualities. When substance, form and essential qualities are still
indistinguishably blended together it is called Chaos. Chaos means that
all things are chaotically intermixed and not yet separated from one
another. The purer and lighter elements, tending upwards, made the
Heavens; the grosser and heavier elements, tending downwards, made the
Earth. Substance, harmoniously proportioned, became Man; and, Heaven and
Earth containing thus a spiritual element, all things were evolved and
produced.'

\*         \*         \*

The Master Lieh Tzu said: 'The virtue of Heaven and Earth, the powers of
the Sage, and the uses of the myriad things in Creation, are not perfect
in every direction. It is Heaven's function to produce life and to
spread a canopy over it. It is Earth's function to form material bodies
and to support them. It is the Sage's function to teach others and to
influence them for good. It is the function of created things to conform
to their proper nature. That being so, there are things in which Earth
may excel, though they lie outside the scope of Heaven; matters in which
the Sage has no concern, though they afford free play to others. For it
is clear that that which imparts and broods over life cannot form and
support material bodies; that which forms and supports material bodies
cannot teach and influence for good; one who teaches and influences for
good cannot run counter to natural instincts;

{p. 20}

that which is fixed in suitable environment does not travel outside its
own sphere. Therefore the Way of Heaven and Earth will be either of the
Yin or of the Yang; the teaching of the Sage will be either of altruism
or of righteousness; the quality of created objects will be either soft
or hard. All these conform to their proper nature and cannot depart from
the province assigned to them.'

\*         \*         \*

On one hand, there is life, and on the other, there is that which
produces life; there is form, and there is that which imparts form;
there is sound, and there is that which causes sound; there is colour,
and there is that which causes colour; there is taste, and there is that
which causes taste.

Things that have been endowed with life die; but that which produces
life itself never comes to an end. The origin of form is matter; but
that which imparts form has no material existence. The genesis of sound
lies in the sense of hearing; but that which causes sound is never
audible to the ear. The source of colour is vision; but that which
produces colour never manifests itself to the eye. The origin of taste
lies in the palate; but that which causes taste is never perceived by
that sense. All these phenomena are functions of the principle of
Inaction.

Wu Wei, Inaction, here stands for the inert, unchanging Tao.

{p. 21}

To be at will either bright or obscure, soft or hard, short or long,
round or square, alive or dead, hot or cold, buoyant or sinking, treble
or bass, present or absent, black or white, sweet or bitter, fetid or
fragrant--this it is to be devoid of knowledge, yet all-knowing,
destitute of power, yet all-powerful.

Such is Tao.

\*         \*         \*

On his journey to Wei, the Master Lieh Tzu took a meal by the roadside.
His followers espied an old skull, and pulled aside the undergrowth to
show it to him. Turning to his disciple Po Fêng, the Master said: 'That
skull and I both know that there is no such thing as absolute life or
death.

'If we regard ourselves as passing along the road of evolution, then I
am alive and he is dead. But looked at from the standpoint of the
Absolute, since there is no such principle as life in itself, it follows
that there can be no such thing as death.'

This knowledge is better than all your methods of prolonging life, a
more potent source of happiness than any other.'

\*         \*         \*

In the Book of the Yellow Emperor it is written: 'When form becomes
active it produces not form but

{p. 22}

shadow; when sound becomes active it produces not sound but echo.'

See note on p. 17. This passage does not occur in the *Tao Tê Ching*.

When Not-Being becomes active, it does not produce Not-Being but Being.
Form is something that must come to an end. Heaven and Earth, then, have
an end, even as we all have an end. But whether the end is complete we
do not know.

'When there is conglomeration, form comes into being; when there is
dispersion, it comes to an end. That is what we mortals mean by
beginning and end. But although for us, in a state of conglomeration,
this condensation into form constitutes a beginning, and its dispersion
an end, from the standpoint of dispersion, it is void and calm that
constitute the beginning, and condensation into form the end. Hence
there is perpetual alternation in what constitutes be timing and end,
and the underlying Truth is that there is neither any beginning nor any
end at all.'

The course of evolution ends where it started, without a beginning; it
finishes up where it began, in Not-Being.

A paradoxical way of stating that there is no beginning and no end.

That which has life returns again into the Lifeless; that which has form
returns again into the formless. This, that {p. 23} I call the Lifeless,
is not the original Lifelessness. This, that I call the formless, is not
the original Formlessness.

'That, which is here termed the Lifeless has formerly possessed life,
and subsequently passed into the extinction of death, whereas the
original Lifelessness from the beginning knows neither life nor
extinction.' We have here again the distinction between the unchanging
life-giving Principle (Tao), which is itself without life, and the
living things themselves, which are in a perpetual flux between life and
death.

That which has life must by the law of its being come to an end; and the
end can no more be avoided than the living creature can help having been
born. So that he who hopes to perpetuate his life or to shut out death
is deceived as to his destiny.

The spiritual element in man is allotted to him by Heaven, his corporeal
frame by Earth. The part that belongs to Heaven 'is ethereal and
dispersive, the part that belongs to Earth is dense and tending to
conglomeration. When the spirit parts from the body, each of these
elements resumes its true nature. That is why disembodied spirits are
called *kuei*, which means 'returning', that is, returning to their true
dwelling-place.

'The region of the Great Void.'

The Yellow Emperor said: 'If my spirit returns through the gates whence
it came, and my bones go back

{p. 24}

to the source from which they sprang, where does the Ego continue to
exist?'

\*         \*         \*

Between his birth and his latter end, man passes through four chief
stages-infancy, adolescence, old age and death. In infancy, the vital
force is concentrated, the will is undivided, and the general harmony of
the system is perfect. External objects produce no injurious impression,
and to the moral nature nothing can be added. In adolescence, the animal
passions are wildly exuberant, the heart is filled with rising desires
and preoccupations. The man is open to attack by the objects of sense,
and thus his moral nature becomes enfeebled. In old age, his desires and
preoccupations have lost their keenness, and the bodily frame seeks for
repose. External objects no longer hold the first place in his regard.
In this state, though not attaining to the perfection of infancy, he is
already different from what he was in adolescence. In death, he comes to
his rest, and returns to the Absolute.

\*         \*         \*

Confucius was travelling once over Mount T'ai when he caught sight of an
aged man roaming in the wilds. He was clothed in a deerskin, girded with
a rope, and was singing as he played on a lute. 'My friend,' said
Confucius, 'what is it that makes you so happy?' The old man replied: 'I
have a great deal to make me happy. God

{p. 25}

created all things, and of all His creations man is the noblest. It has
fallen to my lot to be a man: that is my first ground for happiness.
Then, there is a distinction between male and female, the former being
rated more highly than the latter. Therefore it is better to be a male;
and since I am one, I have a second ground for happiness. Furthermore,
some are born who never behold the sun or the moon, and who never emerge
from their swaddling-clothes. But I have already walked the earth for
the space of ninety years. That is my third ground for happiness.
Poverty is the normal lot of the scholar, death the appointed end for
all human beings. Abiding in the normal state, and reaching at last the
appointed end, what is there that should make me unhappy? ;What an
excellent thing it is,' cried Confucius, 'to be able to find a source of
consolation in oneself!'

\*         \*         \*

Tzu Kung was tired of study, and confided his feelings to Confucius,
saying: 'I yearn for rest.' Confucius replied: 'In life there is no
rest.'

'To toil in anxious planning for the future, to slave in bolstering up
the bodily frame--these are the businesses of life.'

'Is rest, then, nowhere to be found? 'Oh yes!' replied Confucius; 'look
at all the graves in the wilds, all the vaults, all the tombs, all the
funeral urns, and you may

{p. 26}

know where rest is to be found.' 'Great, indeed, is Death!' exclaimed
Tzu Kung. 'It gives rest to the noble hearted, and causes the base to
cower.' 'You are right,' said Confucius. 'Men feel the joy of life, but
do not realize its bitterness. They feel the weariness of old age, but
not its peacefulness. They think of the evils of death, but not of the
repose which it confers.'

\*         \*         \*

Yen Tzu said: 'How excellent was the ancients' view of death!--bringing
rest to the good and subjection to the wicked. Death is the
boundary-line of Virtue.

That is, Death abolishes all artificial and temporary distinctions
between good and evil, which only hold good in this world of relativity.

'The ancients spoke of the dead as *kuei-jên* (men who have returned).
But if the dead are men who have returned, the living are men on a
journey. Those who are on a journey and think not of returning have cut
themselves off from their home. Should any one man cut himself off from
his home, he would incur universal reprobation. But all mankind being
homeless, there is none to see the error. Imagine one who leaves his
native village, separates himself from all his kith and kin, dissipates
his patrimony and wanders away to the four corners of the earth, never
to return:--what manner of man is this? The world will surely set him
down as a

{p. 27}

profligate and a vagabond. On the other hand, imagine one who clings to
respectability and the things of this life, holds cleverness and
capacity in high esteem, builds himself up a reputation, and plays the
braggart amongst his fellow men without knowing where to stop:--what
manner of man, once more, is this? The world will surely look upon him
as a gentleman of great wisdom and counsel. Both of these men have lost
their way, yet the world will consort with the one, and not with the
other. Only the Sage knows with whom to consort and from whom to hold
aloof.'

'He consorts with those who regard life and death merely as waking and
sleeping, and holds aloof from those who are steeped in forgetfulness of
their return.'

\*         \*         \*

Yü Hsiung said: 'Evolution is never-ending. But who can perceive the
secret processes of Heaven and Earth? Thus, things that are diminished
here are augmented there; things that are made whole in one place suffer
loss in another. Diminution and augmentation, fullness and decay are the
constant accompaniments of life and death. They alternate in continuous
succession, and we are not conscious of any interval. The whole body of
spiritual substance progresses without a pause; the whole body of
material substance suffers decay without intermission. But we do not
perceive the process of completion, nor do we perceive the process of
decay. Map, likewise, from

{p. 28}

birth to old age becomes something different every day in face and form,
in wisdom and in conduct. His skin, his nails and his hair are
continually growing and continually perishing. In infancy and childhood
there is no stopping nor respite from change. Though imperceptible while
it is going on, it may be verified afterwards if we wait.'

\*         \*         \*

There was once a man in the Ch'i State who was so afraid the universe
would collapse and fall to pieces, leaving his body without a lodgment,
that he could neither sleep nor eat. Another man, pitying his distress,
went to enlighten him. 'Heaven,' he said, 'is nothing more than an
accumulation of ether, and there is no place where ether is not.
Processes of contraction and expansion, inspiration and expiration are
continually taking place up in the heavens. Why then should you be
afraid of a collapse?' The man said: 'It is true that Heaven is an
accumulation of ether; but the sun, the moon, and the stars--will they
not fall down upon us? His informant replied: 'Sun, moon and stars are
likewise only bright lights Within this mass of ether. Even supposing
they were to fall, they could not possibly harm us by their impact.'
'But what if the earth should fall to pieces? 'The earth,' replied the
other, 'is merely an agglomeration of matter, which fills and blocks up
the four comers of space. There is no part of it where matter is not.
All

{p. 29}

day long there is constant treading and tramping on the surface of the
earth. Why then should you be afraid of its falling to pieces? Thereupon
the man was relieved of his fears and rejoiced exceedingly. And his
instructor was also joyful and easy in mind. But Ch'ang Lu Tzu laughed
at them both, saying: 'Rainbows, clouds and mist, wind and rain, the
four seasons--these are perfected forms of accumulated ether, and go to
make up the heavens. Mountains and cliffs, rivers and seas, metals and
rocks, fire and timber--these are perfected forms of agglomerated
matter, and constitute the earth. Knowing these facts, who can say that
they will never be destroyed? Heaven and earth form only a small speck
in the midst of the Void, but they are the greatest things in the sum of
Being. This much is certain: even as their nature is hard to fathom,
hard to understand, so they will be slow to pass away, slow to come to
an end. He who fears lest they should suddenly fall to pieces is
assuredly very far from the truth. He, on the other hand, who says that
they will never be destroyed has also not reached the right solution.
Heaven and earth must of necessity pass away, but neither will revert to
destruction apart from the other.

The speaker means that though there is no immediate danger of a
collapse, it is certain that our universe must obey the natural law of
disintegration, and at some distant date disappear altogether. But the
process of decay will be so gradual as to be imperceptible.

{p. 30}

Who, having to face the day of disruption, would not be alarmed?

The Master Lieh Tzu heard of the discussion, and smiling said: 'He who
maintains that Heaven and earth are destructible, and he who upholds the
contrary, are both equally at fault. Whether they are destructible or
not is something we can never know, though in both cases it will be the
same for all alike. The living and the dead, the going and the coming,
know nothing of each other's state. Whether destruction awaits the world
or no, why should I trouble my head about it?

\*         \*         \*

Mr Kuo of the Ch'i State was very rich, while Mr Hsiang of the Sung
State was very poor. The latter travelled from Sung to Ch'i and asked
the other for the secret of his prosperity. Mr Kuo told him. 'It is
because I am a good thief,' he said. 'The first year I began to be a
thief, I had just enough. The second year, I had ample. The third year,
I reaped a great harvest. And, in course of time, I found myself the
owner of whole villages and districts.' Mr Hsiang was overjoyed; he
understood the word 'thief' in its literal sense, but he did not
understand the true way of becoming a thief. Accordingly, he climbed
over walls and broke into houses, grabbing everything he could see or
lay hands upon. But before very long his thefts brought him into
trouble, and he was stripped even of what he had previously possessed.
Thinking

{p. 31}

that Mr Kuo had basely deceived him, Hsiang went to him with a bitter
complaint. 'Tell me,' said Mr Kuo, 'how did you set about being a
thief?' On learning from Mr Hsiang what had happened, he cried out:
'Alas and alack! You have been brought to this pass because you went the
wrong way to work. Now let me put you on the right track. We all know
that Heaven has its seasons, and that earth has its riches. Well, the
things that I steal are the riches of Heaven and earth, each in their
season--the fertilizing rain-water from the clouds, and the natural
products of mountain and meadow-land. Thus I grow my grain and ripen my
crops, build my walls and construct my tenements. From the dry land I
steal winged and four-footed game, from the rivers I steal fish and
turtles. There is nothing that I do not steal. For corn and grain, clay
and wood, birds and beasts, fishes and turtles are all products of
Nature. How can I claim them as mine?

It will be observed that Lieh Tzu anticipates here, in a somewhat
different sense, Proudhon's famous paradox: 'La propriété c'est le vol.'

'Yet, stealing in this way from Nature, I bring on myself no
retribution. But gold, jade, and precious stones, stores of grain, silk
stuffs, and other kinds of property, are things accumulated by men, not
bestowed upon us by Nature. So who can complain if he gets into trouble
by stealing them?

{p. 32}

Mr Hsiang, in a state of great perplexity, and fearing to be led astray
a second time by Mr Kuo, went off to consult Tung Kuo, a man of
learning. Tung Kuo said to him: 'Are you not already a thief in respect
of your own body? You are stealing the harmony of the Yin and the Yang
in order to keep alive and to maintain your bodily form. How much more,
then, are you a thief with regard to external possessions! Assuredly,
Heaven and earth cannot be dissociated from the myriad objects of
Nature. To claim any one of these as your own betokens confusion of
thought. Mr Kuo's thefts are carried out in a spirit of justice, and
therefore bring no retribution. But your thefts were carried out in a
spirit of self-seeking and therefore landed you in trouble. Those who
take possession of property, whether public or private, are thieves.

By 'taking possession of public property', as we have seen, Lieh Tzu
means utilizing the products of Nature open to all--rain and the like.

Those who abstain from taking property, public or private, are also
thieves.

'For no one can help possessing a body, and no one can help acquiring
some property or other which cannot be got rid of with the best will in
the world. Such thefts are unconscious thefts.'

The great principle of Heaven and earth is to treat public property as
such and private property as such. Knowing

{p. 33}

this principle, which of us is a thief, and at the same time which of us
is not a thief?'

The object of this anecdote is to impress us with the unreality of
mundane distinctions. Lieh Tzu is not much interested in the social
aspect of the question. He is not an advocate of communism, nor does he
rebel against the common-sense view that theft is a crime which must be
punished. With him, everything is intended to lead up to the
metaphysical standpoint.

{p. 34}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II: The Yellow Emperor](tt05.md)
