[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tt04)  [Next](tt06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOK II

### The Yellow Emperor

The Yellow Emperor sat for fifteen years on the throne, and rejoiced
that the Empire looked up to him as its head. He was careful of his
physical well-being, sought pleasures for his ears and eyes, and
gratified his senses of smell and taste. Nevertheless, he grew
melancholy in spirit, his complexion became sallow, and his sensations
became dull and confused. Then, for a further period of fifteen years,
he grieved that the Empire was in disorder; he summoned up all his
intelligence, exhausted his resources of wisdom and strength in trying
to rule the people. But, in spite of all, his face remained haggard and
pale, and his sensations dull and confused.

'The practice of enlightened virtue will not succeed in establishing
good government, but only disorganize the spiritual faculties!

Then the Yellow Emperor sighed heavily and said: 'My fault is want of
moderation. The misery I suffer comes from over-attention to my own
self, and the troubles of the Empire from over-regulation in
everything.' Thereupon, he threw up all his schemes, abandoned

{p. 35}

his ancestral palace, dismissed his attendants, removed all the hanging
bells, cut down the delicacies of his *cuisine*, and retired to live at
leisure in private apartments attached to the Court. There he fasted in
heart, and brought his body under control.

Fasting in heart means freeing oneself from earthly desires, after
which, says the commentator, the body will naturally be under control.
Actual abstention from food or other forms of bodily mortification are
not intended. See Musings of a *Chinese Mystic*, p. 71.

For three months he abstained from personal intervention in government.
Then he fell asleep in the daytime, and dreamed that he made a journey
to the kingdom of Hua-hsü, situated I know not how many tens of
thousands of miles distant from the Ch'i State. It was beyond the reach
of ship or vehicle or any mortal foot. Only the soul could travel so
far.

In sleep, the *hun* or spiritual part of the soul is supposed by the
Chinese, to quit the body.

This kingdom was without head or ruler; it simply went on of itself. Its
people were without desires or cravings; they simply followed their
natural instincts. They felt neither joy in life nor abhorrence of
death; thus they came to no untimely ends. They felt neither attachment
to self nor indifference to others; thus they were exempt from love and
hatred alike. They knew neither aversion from one course nor inclination
to another;

{p. 36}

hence profit and loss existed not among them. All were equally untouched
by the emotions of love and sympathy, of jealousy and fear. Water had no
power to drown them, nor fire to burn; cuts and blows caused them
neither injury nor pain, scratching or tickling could not make them
itch. They bestrode the air as though treading on solid earth; they were
cradled in space as though resting in a bed. Clouds and mist obstructed
not their vision, thunder-peals could not stun their ears, physical
beauty disturbed not their hearts, mountains and valleys hindered not
their steps. They moved about like gods.

When the Yellow Emperor awoke from his dream, he summoned his three
Ministers and told them what he had seen. 'For three months,' he said,
'I have been living a life of leisure, fasting in heart, subduing my
body, and casting about in my mind for the true method of nourishing my
own life and regulating the lives of others. But I failed to discover
the secret.

'It is wrong to nourish one's own life, wrong to regulate those of
others. No attempt to do this by the light of intelligence can be
successful.'

Worn out, I fell asleep and dreamed this dream. Now I know that the
Perfect Way is not to be sought through the senses. This Way I know and
hold within me, yet I cannot impart it to you.'

'If the Way cannot be sought through the senses, it cannot be
communicated through the senses.'

{p. 37}

For twenty-eight years after this, there was great orderliness in the
Empire, nearly equalling that in the kingdom of Hua-hsü. And when the
Emperor ascended on high, the people bewailed him for two hundred years
without intermission.

\*         \*         \*

Lieh Tzu had Lao Shang for his teacher, and Po Kao Tzu for his friend.
When he had fully mastered the system of these two philosophers, he rode
home again on the wings of the wind.

Cf. *Chuang Tzu*, ch. 1: 'There was Lieh Tzu again. He could ride upon
the wind, and travel whithersoever he wished, staying away as long as
fifteen days.'

Yin Sheng heard of this, and became his disciple. He dwelt with Lieh Tzu
for many months without Visiting his own home. While he was with him, he
begged to be Initiated into his secret arts. Ten times he asked, and
each time received no answer. Becoming impatient Yin Sheng announced his
departure, but Lieh Tzu still gave no sign. So Yin Sheng went away, but
after many months his mind was still unsettled, so he returned and
became his follower once more. Lieh Tzu said to him: 'Why this incessant
going and coming?' Yin Shêng replied: 'Some time ago, I sought
instruction from you, Sir, but you would not tell me anything. That made
me vexed with you. But now I have got rid of that feeling, and so I

{p. 38}

have come again.' Lieh Tzu said: 'Formerly, I used to think you were a
man of penetration, and have you now fallen so low? Sit down, and I will
tell you what I learned from my Master. After I had served him, and
enjoyed the friendship of Po Kao, for the space of three years, my mind
did not venture to reflect on right and my wrong, my lips did not
venture to speak of profit and loss. Then, for the first time, my Master
bestowed one glance upon me--and that was all.

'To be in reality entertaining the ideas of profit and loss, though
without venturing to utter them, is a case of hiding one's resentment
and harbouring secret passions; hence a mere glance was vouchsafed.'

'At the end of five years a change had taken place; my mind was
reflecting on right and wrong, and my lips were speaking of profit and
loss. Then, for the first time, my Master relaxed his countenance and
smiled.

'Right and wrong, profit and loss, are the fixed principles prevailing
in the world of sense. To let the mind reflect on what it will, to let
the lips utter what they please, and not grudgingly bottle it up in
one's breast, so that the internal and the external may become as one,
is still not so good as passing beyond the bounds of self and abstaining
from all manifestation. This first step, however, pleased the Master and
caused him to give a smile.'

'At the end of seven years, there was another change. I let my mind
reflect on what it would, but it no longer

{p. 39}

occupied itself with right and wrong. I let my lips utter whatsoever
they pleased, but they no longer spoke of profit and loss. Then, at
last, my Master led me in to sit on the mat beside him.

'The question is, how to bring the mind into a state of calm, in which
there is no thinking or mental activity; how to keep the lips silent,
with only natural inhalation and exhalation going on. If you give
yourself up to mental perfection, right and wrong will cease to exist;
if the lips follow their natural law they know not profit or loss. Their
ways agreeing, Master and friend sat side by side with him on the same
seat. That was only as it should be.'

'At the end of nine years my mind gave free rein to its reflections, my
mouth free passage to its speech. Of right and wrong, profit and loss, I
had no knowledge, either as touching myself or others. I knew neither
that the Master was my instructor, nor that the other man was my friend.
Internal and External were blended into Unity. After that, there was no
distinction between eye and ear, ear and nose, nose and mouth: all were
the same. My mind was frozen, my body in dissolution, my flesh and bones
all melted together. I was wholly unconscious of what my body was
resting on, or what was under my feet. I was borne this way and that on
the wind, like dry chaff or leaves falling from a tree. In fact, I knew
not whether the wind was riding on me or I on the wind. Now, you have
not spent one whole season in your teacher's house, and yet you have
lost patience two or three times already. {p. 40} Why, at this rate, the
atmosphere will never support an atom of your body, and even the earth
will be unequal to the weight of one of your limbs!

The only way to etherealize the body being to purge the mind of its
passions.

How can you expect to walk in the void or to be charioted on the wind?'

Hearing this, Yin Sheng was deeply ashamed. He could hardly trust
himself to breathe, and it was long ere he ventured to utter another
word.

\*         \*         \*

Mr Fan had a son named Tzu Hua, who succeeded in achieving great fame as
an exponent of the black art, and the whole kingdom bowed down before
him. He was in high favour with the Prince of Chin, taking no office but
standing on a par with the three Ministers of State. Any one on whom he
turned a partial eye was marked out for distinction; while those of whom
he spoke unfavourably were forthwith banished. People thronged his hall
in the same way as they went to Court. Tzu Hua used to encourage his
followers to contend amongst themselves, so that the clever ones were
always bullying the slowwitted, and the strong riding rough-shod over
the weak. Though this resulted in blows and wounds being dealt before
his eyes, he was not in the habit of troubling about it. Day and night,
this sort of thing served as an

{p. 41}

amusement, and practically became a custom in the State.

One day, Ho Shêng and Tzu Po, two of Fan's leading disciples, set off on
a journey and, after traversing a stretch of wild country, they put up
for the night in the hut of an old peasant named Shang Ch'iu Wai. During
the night, the two travellers conversed together, speaking of Tzu Hua's
reputation and influence, his power over life and death, and how he
could make the rich man poor and the poor man rich. Now, Shang Ch'iu Wai
was living on the border of starvation. He had crept round under the
window and overheard this conversation. Accordingly, he borrowed some
provisions and, shouldering his basket, set off for Tzu Hua's
establishment. This man's followers, however, were a worldly set, who
wore silken garments and rode in high carriages and stalked about with
their noses in the air. Seeing that Shang Ch'iu Wai was a weak old man,
with a weather-beaten face and clothes of no particular cut, they one
and all despised him. Soon he became a regular target for their insults
and ridicule, being hustled about and slapped on the back and what not.
Shang Ch'iu K'ai, however, never showed the least annoyance, and at last
the disciples, having exhausted their wit on him in this way, grew tired
of the fun. So, by way of a jest, they took the old man with them to the
top of a cliff, and the word was passed round that whosoever dared to
throw himself over would be rewarded with a hundred ounces of silver.
There was an eager

{p. 42}

response, and Shang Ch'iu K'ai, in perfect good faith, was the first to
leap over the edge. And lo! he was wafted down to earth like a bird on
the wing, not a bone or muscle of his body being hurt. Mr Fan's
disciples, regarding this as a lucky chance, were merely surprised, but
not yet moved to great wonder. Then they pointed to a bend in the
foaming river below, saying: 'There is a precious pearl at the bottom of
that river, which can be had for the diving.' Ch'iu K'ai again acted on
their suggestion and plunged in. And when he came out, sure enough he
held a pearl in his hand.

Then, at last, the whole company began to suspect the truth, and Tzu Hua
gave orders that an array of costly viands and silken raiment should be
prepared; then suddenly a great fire was kindled round the pile. 'If you
can walk through the midst of these flames,' he said, 'you are welcome
to keep what you can get of these embroidered stuffs, be it much or
little, as a reward.' Without moving a muscle of his face, Shang Ch'iu
K'ai walked straight into the fire, and came back again with his
garments unsoiled and his body unsinged.

Mr Fan and his disciples now realized that he was in possession of Tao,
and all began to make their apologies, saying: 'We did not know, Sir,
that you had Tao, and were only playing a trick on you. We insulted you,
not knowing that you were a divine man. You have exposed our stupidity,
our deafness and out blindness. May we venture to ask what the Great
Secret is?' 'Secret I have

{p. 43}

none,' replied Shang Ch'iu K'ai. 'Even in my own mind I have no clue as
to the real cause. Nevertheless, there is one point in it all which I
must try to explain to you. A short time ago, Sir, two disciples of
yours came and put up for the night in my hut. I heard them extolling Mr
Fan's powers--how he could dispense life and death at his will, and how
he was able to make the rich man poor and the poor man rich. I believed
this implicitly, and as the distance was not very great I came hither.
Having arrived, I unreservedly accepted as true all the statements made
by your disciples, and was only afraid lest the opportunity might never
come of putting them triumphantly to the proof I knew not what part of
space my body occupied, nor yet where danger lurked. My mind was simply
One, and material objects thus offered no resistance. That is all. But
now, having discovered that your disciples were deceiving me, my inner
man is thrown into a state of doubt and perplexity, while outwardly my
senses of sight and hearing re-assert themselves. When I reflect that I
have just had a providential escape from being drowned and burned to
death, my heart within me freezes with horror, and my limbs tremble with
fear. I shall never again have the courage to go near water or fire.'

From that time forth, when Mr Fan's disciples happened to meet a beggar
or a poor horse-doctor on the road, so far from jeering at him, they
would actually dismount and offer him a humble salute.

Tsai Wo heard this story, and told it to Confucius. 'Is

{p. 44}

this so strange to you? was the reply. 'The man of perfect faith can
extend his influence to inanimate things and disembodied spirits; he can
move heaven and earth, and fly to the six cardinal points without
encountering any hindrance.

Compare the familiar passage in the Bible (Matt. xvii. 20).

His powers are not confined to walking in perilous places and passing
through water and fire. If Shang Ch'iu K'ai, who put his faith in
falsehoods, found no obstacle in external matter, how much more
certainly will that be so when both parties are equally sincere! Young
man, bear this in mind.'

In Shang Ch'iu K'ai's case, though he himself was sincere, his Master
Fan Tzu Hua was merely an impostor.

\*         \*         \*

The Keeper of Animals under King Hsüan, of the Chou dynasty, had an
assistant named Liang Yang, who was skilled in the management of wild
birds and beasts. When he fed them in their park-enclosure, all the
animals showed themselves tame and tractable, although they comprised
tigers, wolves, eagles and ospreys. Male and female freely propagated
their kind, and their numbers multiplied.

The difficulty of getting wild animals to breed in captivity is well
known to naturalists.

{p. 45} The different species lived promiscuously together, yet they
never clawed nor bit one another.

The King was afraid lest this man's secret should die with him, and
commanded him to impart it to the Keeper. So Liang Yang appeared before
the Keeper and said: 'I am only a humble servant, and have really
nothing to impart. I fear his Majesty thinks I am hiding something from
you. With regard to my method of feeding tigers, all I have to say is
this: when yielded to, they are pleased; when opposed, they are angry.
Such is the natural disposition of all living creatures. But neither
their pleasure nor their anger is manifested without a cause. Both are
really excited by opposition.

Anger directly, pleasure indirectly, owing to the natural reaction when
the opposition is overcome.

'In feeding tigers, then, I avoid giving them either live animals or
whole carcases, lest in the former case the act of killing, in the
latter the act of tearing them to pieces, should excite them to fury.
Again, I time their periods of hunger and repletion, and I gain a full
understanding of the causes of their anger. Tigers are of a different
species from man, but, like him, they respond to those who coax them
with food, and consequently the act of killing their victims tends to
provoke them. This being so, I should not think of opposing them and
thus provoking their anger; neither do I humour them and thus cause them
to feel pleased. For this feeling of pleasure will in

{p. 46}

time be succeeded by anger, just as anger must invariably be succeeded
by pleasure. Neither of these states hits the proper mean. Hence it is
my aim to be neither antagonistic nor compliant, so that the animals
regard me as one of themselves. Thus it happens that they walk about the
park without regretting the tall forests and the broad marshes, and rest
in the enclosure without yearning for the lonely mountains and the dark
valleys. Such are the principles which have led to the results you see.'

\*         \*         \*

There was once a man, a sailor by profession, who was very fond of
sea-gulls. Every morning he went into the sea and swam about in their
midst, at which times a hundred gulls and more would constantly flock
about him.

'Creatures are not shy of those whom they feel to be in mental and
bodily harmony with themselves.'

One day his father said to him: 'I am told that sea-gulls swim about
with you in the water. I wish you would catch one or two for me to make
pets of' On the following day, the sailor went down to the sea as usual,
but lo! the gulls only wheeled about in the air and would not alight.

'There was disturbance in his mind, accompanied by a change in his
outward demeanour; thus the birds became

{p. 47}

conscious of the fact that he was a human being. How could their
instinct be deceived?'

\*         \*         \*

Chao Hsiang Tzu led out a company of a hundred thousand men to hunt in
the Central Mountains. Lighting the dry undergrowth, they set fire to
the whole forest, and the glow of the flames was visible for a hundred
miles around. Suddenly a man appeared, emerging from a rocky cliff,

That is to say, passing miraculously out of the actual stone itself.

and was seen to hover in the air amidst the flames and the smoke.
Everybody took him for a disembodied spirit. When the fire had passed,
he walked quietly out, and showed no trace of having been through the
ordeal. Hsiang Tzu marvelled thereat, and detained him for the purpose
of careful examination. In bodily form he was undoubtedly a man,
possessing the seven channels of sense, besides which his breathing and
his voice also proclaimed him a man. So the prince inquired what secret
power it was that enabled him to dwell in rock and to walk through fire.
'What do you mean by rock? replied the man; 'what do you mean by fire?
Hsiang Tzu said: 'What you just now came out of is rock; what you just
how walked through is fire.' 'I know nothing of them,' replied the man.

{p. 48}

'It was this extreme feat of unconsciousness that enabled him to perform
the above feats.'

The incident came to the ears of Marquis Wên of the Wei State, who spoke
to Tzu Hsia about it, saying: 'What an extraordinary man this must be!'
'From what I have heard the Master say,' replied Tzu Hsia, 'the man who
achieves harmony with Tao enters into close unison with external
objects, and none of them has the power to harm or hinder him. Passing
through solid metal or stone, walking in the midst of fire or on the
surface of water--all these things become possible to him.' 'Why, my
friend,' asked the Marquis, 'cannot you do all this? 'I have not yet
succeeded,' said Tzu Hsia, 'in cleansing my heart of impurities and
discarding Wisdom. I can only find leisure to discuss the matter in
tentative fashion.' 'And why,' pursued the Marquis, 'does not the Master
himself perform these feats? 'The Master,' replied Tzu' Hsia, 'is is
able to do these things, but he is also able to refrain from doing
them.' Which answer hugely delighted the Marquis.

There may be similarity in understanding without similarity in outward
form. There may also be similarity in form without similarity in
understanding. The Sage embraces similarity of understanding and pays no
regard to similarity of form. The world in general is attracted by
similarity of form, but remains indifferent to similarity

{p. 49}

of understanding. Those creatures that resemble them in shape they love
and consort with; those that differ from them in shape they fear and
keep at a distance. The creature that has a skeleton seven feet long,

The Chinese foot at that time being considerably shorter than ours.

hands differently shaped from the feet, hair on its head, and an even
set of teeth in its jaws, and walks erect, is called a man. But it does
not follow that a man may not have the mind of a brute. Even though this
be the case, other men will still recognize him as one of their own
species in virtue of his outward form. Creatures which have wings on the
back or horns on the head, serrated teeth or extensile talons, which fly
overhead or run on all fours, are called birds and beasts. But it does
not follow that a bird or a beast may not have the mind of a man. Yet,
even if this be so, it is nevertheless assigned to another species
because of the difference in form.

P'ao Hsi, Nü Kua, Shên Nung and Hsia Hou had serpents' bodies, human
faces, ox-heads and tigers' snouts. Thus, their forms were not human,
yet their virtue was of the saintliest. Chieh of the Hsia dynasty, Chou
of the Yin, Huan of the Lu State, and Mu of the Ch'u State, were in all
external respects, as facial appearance and Possession of the seven
channels of sense, like unto other men; yet they had the minds of savage
brutes. Howbeit, in seeking perfect understanding, men attend to the

{p. 50}

outward form alone, which will not bring them near to it.

When the Yellow Emperor fought with Yen Ti on the field of P'an-ch'üan,
his vanguard was composed of bears, wolves, panthers, lynxes and tigers,
while his ensign-bearers were eagles, ospreys, falcons and kites. This
was forcible impressment of animals into the service of man. The Emperor
Yao entrusted K'uei with the regulation of music.

K'uei was a composite being, half beast, half man, of irreproachable
virtue. His son, on the other hand, is said to have had 'the heart of a
pig'. He was insatiably gluttonous, covetous and quarrelsome.

When the latter tapped the musical stone in varying cadence, all the
animals danced to the sound of the music. When the *Shao* in its nine
variations was heard on the flute, the phœnix itself flew down to
assist. This was the attraction of animals by the power of music. In
what, then, do the minds of birds and beasts differ from the minds of
men? Their shapes and the sounds they utter are different from ours, and
they know no way of communicating with us. But the wisdom and
penetration of the Sage are unlimited: that is why he is able to lead
then, to do his bidding. The intelligence of animals is innate, even as
that of man. Their common desire is for self-preservation, but they do
not borrow their knowledge from men. There is pairing between the male
and the

{p. 51}

female, and mutual attachment between the mother and her young. They
shun the open plain and keep to the mountainous parts; they flee the
cold and make for warmth; when they settle, they gather in flocks; when
they travel, they preserve a fixed order. The young ones are stationed
in the middle, the stronger ones place themselves on the outside. They
show one another the way to the drinking-places, and call to their
fellows when there is food. In the earliest ages, they dwelt and moved
about in company with man. It was not until the age of emperors and
kings that they began to be afraid and broke away into scattered bands.
And now, in this final period, they habitually hide and keep out of
man's way so as to avoid injury at his hands. At the present day, in the
country of the Chieh clan to the east, the people can often interpret
the language of the six domestic animals, although they have probably
but an imperfect understanding of it.

In remote antiquity, there were men of divine enlightenment who were
perfectly acquainted with the feelings and habits of all living things,
and thoroughly understood the languages of the various species. They
brought them together, trained them, and admitted them to their society,
exactly like human beings....These sages declared that, in mind and
understanding, there was no wide gulf between any of the living species
endowed with blood and breath. And therefore, knowing that this was so,
they omitted nothing from their course of training and instruction.

\*         \*         \*

{p. 52}

Hui Yang went to visit Prince K'ang of the Sung State. The Prince,
however, stamped his foot, rasped his throat, and said angrily: 'The
things I like are courage and strength. I am not fond of your good and
virtuous people. What can a stranger like you have to teach me? 'I have
a secret,' replied Hui Yang, 'whereby my opponent, however brave or
strong, can be prevented from harming me either by thrust or by blow.
Would not your Highness care to know that secret? 'Capital!' exclaimed
K'ang; 'that is certainly something I should like to hear about.' Hui
Yang went on: 'To render ineffectual the stabs and blows of one's
opponent is indeed to cover him with shame. But my secret is one which
will make your opponent, however brave or strong, afraid to stab or to
strike at all! His being afraid, however, does not always imply that he
has not the will to do so. Now, my secret method operates so that even
the will is absent. Not having the will to harm, however, does not
necessarily connote the desire to love and to do good. But my secret is
one whereby every man, woman and child in the Empire shall be inspired
with the friendly desire to love and do good to one another! This is
something that transcends all social distinctions, and is much better
than the mere possession of courage and strength. Has your Highness no
mind to acquire such a secret as this?' 'Nay,' said the Prince, 'I am
anxious to learn it. What is the secret, pray?' 'Nothing else,' replied
Hui Yang, 'than the teachings of Confucius and Mo Tzu.

{p. 53}

A famous philosopher who flourished about 400 B.C. and propounded,
chiefly on utilitarian grounds, the doctrine of 'universal love'.

Neither of these two men possessed any land, and yet they were princes;
they held no official rank, and yet they were leaders. All the
inhabitants of the Empire, old and young, used to crane their necks and
stand on tiptoe to catch a glimpse of them. For it was their object to
bring peace and happiness to all. Now, your Highness is lord of ten
thousand chariots.

A conventional way of saying that Swig was a feudal State of the first
class.

If you are sincere in your purpose, all the people within the four
borders of your realm will reap the benefit, and the fame of your virtue
will far exceed that of Confucius or of Mo Tzu.'

They not having enjoyed the advantage of ruling over a large State.

The Prince of Sung found himself at loss for an answer, and Hui Yang
quickly withdrew. Then the Prince turned to his courtiers and said: 'A
forcible argument! This stranger has carried me away by his eloquence.'

{p. 54}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III: Dreams](tt06)
