[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tt08)  [Next](tt10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# BOOK VI

### Effort and Destiny

Effort said to Destiny:

I have purposely avoided the familiar modern terms, Fate and Free will,
which might seem to furnish the best equivalent to *li* and *ming*. *Li*
is the ordinary word for 'strength' or 'force,' and here indicates human
effort exerted in some definite direction (the German 'streben') as
opposed to the blind and unconscious workings of Nature or Tao.

'Your achievements are not equal to mine.' 'Pray what do you achieve in
the working of things,' replied Destiny, 'that you would compare
yourself With me? 'Why,' said Effort, 'the length of man's life, his
measure of success, his rank, and his wealth, are all things which I
have the power to determine.' To this, Destiny made reply: 'P'êng Tsu's
wisdom did not exceed that of Yao and Shun, yet he lived to the age of
eight hundred. Yen Yüan's ability was not inferior to that of the
average man, yet he died at the early age of thirty-two. The virtue of
Confucius was not less than that of the feudal princes, yet he was
reduced to sore straits between Ch'ên and Ts'ai.

See *The Sayings of Confucius*, p. 115.

{p. 91}

The conduct of Chou, of the Yin dynasty, did not surpass that of the
Three Men of Virtue, yet he occupied a kingly throne.

Wei Tzu, Chi Tzu and Pi Kan were all relatives of Chou Hsin, by whose
orders the last-named was disembowelled.

Chi Cha would not accept the overlordship of Wu, while T'ien Hêng
usurped sole power in Ch'i. Po I and Shu. Ch'i starved to death at
Shou-yang, while Chi Shih waxed rich at Chan-ch'in. If these results
were compassed by your efforts, how is it that you allotted long life to
P'êng Tsu and an untimely death to Yen Yüan; that you awarded
discomfiture to the sage and success to the impious, humiliation to the
wise man and high honours to the fool, poverty to the good and wealth to
the wicked? 'If, as you say,' rejoined Effort, 'I have really no control
over events, is it not, then, owing to your management that things turn
out as they do? Destiny replied: 'The very name "Destiny"

Something already immutably fixed.

shows that there can be no question of management in the case. When the
way is straight, I push on; when it is crooked, I put up with it. Old
age and early death, failure and success, high rank and humble station,
riches and poverty--all these come naturally and of themselves. How can
I know anything about them?

'Being what it is, without knowing why--that is the

{p. 91}

meaning of Destiny. What room is there for management here?

\*         \*         \*

Yang Chu had a friend called Chi Liang, who fell ill. In seven days'
time his illness had become very grave; medical aid was summoned, and
his sons stood weeping round his bed. Chi Liang said to Yang Chu: 'Such
excess of emotion shows my children to be degenerate. Will you kindly
sing them something which will enlighten their minds? Yang Chu then
chanted the following words:

'How can men be aware of things outside God's ken? Over misfortune man
has no control, and can look for no help from God. Have doctors and
wizards this knowledge that you and I have not?

The sons, however, did not understand, and finally called in three
physicians, Dr Chiao, Dr Yü and Dr Lu. They all diagnosed his complaint;
and Dr Chiao delivered his opinion first: 'The hot and cold elements of
your body,' he said to Chi Liang, 'are not in harmonious accord, and the
impermeable and infundibular parts are mutually disproportionate. The
origin of your malady is traceable to disordered appetites, and to the
dissipation of your vital essence through worry and care. Neither God
nor devil is to blame. Although the illness is grave, it is amenable to
treatment.' Chi Liang said: 'You are only one of the common ruck,' and
speedily got rid of him. {p. 93} Then Dr Yü came forward and said: 'You
were born with too little nervous force, and were too freely fed with
mother's milk. Your illness is not one that has developed in a matter of
twenty-four hours; the causes which have led up to it are of gradual
growth. It is incurable.' Chi Liang replied: 'You are a good doctor,'
and told them to give him some food. Lastly, Dr Lu said: 'Your illness
is attributable neither to God, nor to man, nor to the agency of
spirits. It was already fore-ordained in the mind of Providence when you
were endowed with this bodily form at birth. What possible good can
herbs and drugs do you? 'You are a heaven-born physician indeed!' cried
Chi Liang; and he sent him away laden with presents.

Not long after, his illness disappeared of itself.

\*         \*         \*

Duke Ching of Ch'i was travelling across the northern flank of the
Ox-mountain in the direction of the capital. Gazing at the view before
him, he burst into a flood of tears, exclaiming: 'What a lovely scene!
How verdant and luxuriantly wooded! To think that some day I must die
and leave my kingdom, passing away like running water! If only there
were no such things as death, nothing should induce me to stir from this
spot.' Two of the Ministers in attendance on the Duke, taking their cue
from him, also began to weep, saying: 'We, who are dependent on your
Highness's bounty, whose food is of

{p. 94}

an inferior sort, who have to ride on broken-down hacks or in creaking
carts--even we do not want to die. How much less our sovereign liege!'

Yen Tzu, meanwhile, was standing by, with a broad smile on his face. The
Duke wiped away his tears and, looking at him, said: 'To-day I am
stricken with grief on my journey, and both K'ung and Chü mingle their
tears with mine. How is it that you alone can smile? Yen Tzu replied:
'If the worthy ruler were to remain in perpetual possession of his
realm, Duke T'ai and Duke Huan would still be exercising their sway. If
the bold ruler were to remain in perpetual possession, Duke Chuang and
Duke Ling would still be ruling the land. But if all these rulers were
now in possession, where would your Highness be? Why, standing in the
furrowed fields, clad in coir cape and hat!

The ordinary garb of a Chinese peasant in wet weather.

Condemned to a hard life on earth, you would have had no time, I
warrant, for brooding over death. Again, how did you yourself come to
occupy this throne? By a series of successive reigns and removals, until
at last your turn came. And are you alone going to weep and lament over
this order of things? That is pure selfishness. it was the sight of
these two objects--a self-centred prince and his fawning
attendants--that set me quietly laughing to myself just now.'

Duke Ching felt much ashamed. Raising his goblet,

{p. 95}

he fined himself one cup, and his obsequious courtiers two cups of wine
apiece.

\*         \*         \*

There was once a man, Tung-mên Wu of Wei, who when his son died
testified no grief. His house-steward said to him: 'The love you bore
your son could hardly be equalled by that of any other parent. Why,
then, do you not mourn for him now that he is dead? 'There was a time,'
replied Tung-mên Wu, 'when I had no son, yet I never had occasion to
grieve on that account. Now that my son is dead, I am only in the same
condition as I was before my son was born. What reason have I, then, to
mourn?

There is a story of Plutarch consoling his wife in exactly similar terms
after the death of their daughter.

The husbandman takes his measures according to the season, the trader
occupies himself with gain, the craftsman strives to master his art, the
official pursues power. Here we have the operation of human forces.

Or 'effort'. See p. 97.

But the husbandman has seasons of rain and seasons of drought, the
trader meets with gains and losses, the craftsman experiences both
failure and success, the official finds opportunities or the reverse.
Here we see the working of Destiny.

{p. 96}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII: Causality](tt10)
