[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl09)  [Next](isl11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

#### CHAPTER TWO

# The *Ḥadīth*: The News of God's Messenger

Next to the Qur’ān itself, the most important Islamic textual material
is the *Ḥadīth*: the body of transmitted actions and sayings of the
Prophet and his Companions.

Professor Wilfred C. Smith has made a most perceptive analogy: the
Qur’ān is in Islam what Christ is in Christianity, and Muhammad stands
in relation to it as the Twelve Apostles to the Logos. The *Ḥadīth*, the
record of how the Revelation occurred, and the Acts of the Apostle, or
Messenger, is to Islam then roughly what the New Testament is to
Christianity. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

But here one must understand something which seems at first paradoxical;
there are vast numbers of *ḥadīths* which are admitted by Muslim
scholars to be spurious. Even among those accepted by the medieval
scholars, there are many which the modernists would reject. No absolute
canon of *Ḥadīth* has ever been established; certain compilers are
recognized as more trustworthy than others, and some sects and schools
accept *ḥadīths* not accepted by others. For example, the eponym of the
Ḥanbalī law-school, Ahmad ibn Ḥanbal, was a great collector of *Ḥadīth*,
but his standards of criticism were not considered sufficiently
rigorous, so his collection has never won full acceptance from the other
law-schools.

This situation stems in part from the fact that each

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

*ḥadīth* is a separate story handed down with the backing (*isnād*) of a
chain (*sanad*) of narrators. To be fully sound the *ḥadīth* must
include the name of each human link in the chain between the man who
wrote it down and the Prophet.

One of the chief religious sciences of Islam rose to sift the stories
thus transmitted and to investigate the veracity of each transmitter. To
be sure, a man accepted as trust-worthy by one school might not be
accepted by another, and no way could be devised to keep men from
manufacturing a "chain"--since all its links were dead men--along with
the tradition they transmitted. The number of *ḥadīths* which could be
demonstrated to be above suspicion would thus no doubt prove to be
relatively small.

Nevertheless, the *Ḥadīth* conveys precious information: almost all the
early history of Islam and many of the moral precepts of the Prophet. It
is indeed precisely the preciousness of the material which led to its
being counterfeited.

Moreover, traditions which are themselves false may have a certain
historical and moral value for later generations, if they are accepted
in the early collections; they reflect the religious opinions of the
first generations of pious Muslim scholars, the "Consensus" which has
been so vital in the formulation of law and doctrine. Thus they relay
values which earlier generations of experts pronounced "Islamic,"
whether or not they relate a historical event. It follows then that not
even *ḥadīths* of dubious authenticity may be rejected out of hand, much
less the *Ḥadīth* as a whole, as some modernist extremists have wished
to do.

It remains to be seen whether a new orthodox school of *Ḥadīth*
criticism can rise in modern times. Certainly the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

first condition for it would be a general agreement by responsible
people that this is desirable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[59:1](isl10.htm#fr_7) Wilfred Cantwell Smith,
"Some Similarities and Differences Between Christianity and Islam," in
Kritzeck and Winder, *The World of Islam* (New York, 1959).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Muhammad the Messenger](isl11)
