[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl14)  [Next](isl16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

### 5. *The Preservation of the Prophetic Practice* (*Sunna*)

We have indicated that the *Ḥadīth* transmits the *sunna*, the tradition
or practice of the Prophet, and even if a *ḥadīth* is not in itself
true, it may still transmit *sunna*; it may illustrate what the Prophet
would approve of, or what he might have said had he been asked.

The preservation of the *sunna* has been Islam's way of maintaining its
historical continuity, its link with the Apostolic period. One of the
important ways this has been done is by the study and criticism of the
*Ḥadīth*.

The following essay is by the fourteenth-century savant and historian
‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn Khaldūn (died A.H. 808/A.D. 1406), a Spanish Arab of
Tunis, who was a professor of *Ḥadīth* and jurisprudence as well as a
historian, statesman and diplomat. It serves to illustrate the
categories within which the religious scholars have operated, and the
way in which they have conceived their task.

 

The sciences concerned with Prophetic traditions (*ḥadīth*) are numerous
and varied. One of them concerns abrogating. The permission to abrogate
previous statements and the occurrence of abrogation have been
established. . . . God said: "Whenever We abrogate a verse or consign it
to oblivion, We bring one that is better, or as good." (Sūra 2:100)

Two traditions may be mutually exclusive, and it may be difficult to
reconcile them. . . . If in such a case it is known that one is earlier
than the other, it is definite that the later abrogates (it).

This is one of the most important and difficult of the sciences of
tradition. Al-Zuhrī said: "It has been a baffling and impossible task
for the jurists to distinguish traditions of the Messenger of God
abrogating others from those that were abrogated by them."

Another of the sciences of tradition is the knowledge of

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the norms that leading *Ḥadīth*-scholars have invented in order to know
the chains of transmitters, the (individual) transmitters, their names,
how the transmission took place. . . . (The student may verify the
tradition) by scrutinizing the chains of transmitters. For that purpose
one may use such knowledge of the probity, accuracy, thoroughness and
lack of . . . negligence as the most reliable Muslims describe a
transmitter as possessing. . . .

The highest grade of transmitted material is called "sound" (*ṡaḥīḥ*) by
the scholars. Next comes "good" (*ḥasan*). The lowest (acceptable) grade
is "weak" (*ḍa‘īf*). The classification includes also "skipping the
first transmitter's name" (*mursal*), "omitting one link" (munqaṭi‘),
"omitting two links" (*mu‘ḍal*), "affected by some infirmity"
(*mu‘allal*), "singular" (*shādhdh*), "unusual" (*gharīb*) and "singular
and suspect" (*munkar*). In some cases there is a difference of opinion
as to whether (traditions so described) should be rejected. In other
cases there is general agreement that (they should be rejected). The
same is the case with (traditions with) sound chains. In some cases,
there is general agreement as to their acceptability and soundness,
whereas in other cases, there is difference of opinion. *Ḥadīth*
scholars differ greatly in their explanations of these terms.

Then there follows the discussion of terms applying to the texts of the
traditions. A text may be "unusual" (*gharīb*), ambiguous (*mushkil*),
"affected by misspelling or misreading," "containing homonyms"
(*muftariq*) or "containing homographs." . . .

The purpose of the discipline is a noble one. It is concerned with the
knowledge of how to preserve the traditions (*sunna*) . . . until it is
definite which are to be accepted and which are to be rejected.

The Companions of the Prophet and the men of the second generation who
transmitted the *Sunna* were well known in the cities of Islam. There
were transmitters in the *Hijāz*, in al-Baṡra and al-Kūfa, and then in
Syria and Egypt. They were famous in their time. The transmitters of the
*Hijāz* had fewer links in their chains of transmitters (than others)
and were sounder because they were reluctant to accept (as reliable

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

transmitters) those who were obscure and whose conditions were not
known.

At the beginning, knowledge of the religious Law was entirely based on
(oral) tradition. It involved no speculation, no use of opinion, and no
intricate reasoning. . . . Mālik wrote the *Muwaṭṭa’* according to
*Ḥijāzī* tradition, in which he laid down the principal laws on the
basis of sound, generally agreed upon (material). He arranged the work
according to juridical categories.

There was Muhammad ibn Ismā'īl al-Bukhārī, the leading *Ḥadīth* scholar
of his time. In his *Musnad al-Ṡaḥīḥ* . . . he published the orthodox
traditions according to subject. He combined all the different ways of
the Ḥijāzis, Iraqīs and Syrians, accepting the material on which they
were all agreed but excluding material concerning which there were
differences of opinion. . . . His work thus comprised 7,200 traditions
of which 3,000 are repeated. In each chapter, he kept separate the
rescensions with the different chains of interpreters belonging to them.

Then came the *imām* Muslim b. al-Hajjāj al-Qushayrī. He composed his
Musnad al-Sahib in which he followed al-Bukhārī in that he transmitted
the material that was generally agreed upon. . . .

Scholars have corrected the two (authors), noting the cases of the sound
traditions not included in their works.

Abū Dawūd al-Sijistānī, Abū ‘Isa al-Tirmidhī, and Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmān
al-Nasal wrote works that included more than merely "sound" traditions.
Their intent was to include all traditions that fulfilled amply the
conditions making them actionable traditions . . . to serve as a guide
to orthodox practice.

These are the collections of traditions that are used as reference works
in Islam. They are the chief orthodox works on traditions. \[Ibn Khaldūn
does not mention the *Sunan* of Ibn Mājā (died A.H. 271/A.D. 886),
usually considered the sixth orthodox work.--ED.\] Other collections
have been added to these five. At this time traditions are no longer
published nor are (the publications of) traditions of former scholars
corrected. Common experience attests that these numerous religious

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

men, close to each other in time, were too capable and too firmly
possessed of independent judgment to have neglected or omitted any
tradition, so it is impossible that some later scholar might discover
one. At this time one is concerned with correcting the principal written
works and fixing the accuracy of their transmission. . . .

Al-Bukhārī s Ṡaḥīḥ occupies the chief place among them <span
id="fr_48"></span>[42](#fn_48)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[91:42](isl15.htm#fr_48) Ibn Khaldūn, *The
Muqaddimah* (New York, 1958), translated by Franz Rosenthal, Vol. II,
pp. 447-457, *passim*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](isl16)
