[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl22)  [Next](isl24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

#### CHAPTER FOUR

# Ṡūfism: The Interior Religion of the Community

Despite the claims of the Law, another aspect of Islam has been almost
equally important for the rank and file of the faithful--this is Ṡūfism:
mysticism, as it is usually translated.

The Ṡūfīs are those Muslims who have most sought for direct personal
experience of the Divine. While some of them have been legalists of the
most fundamentalist stamp, their emphasis on direct religious experience
has more often led the Ṡūfīs into tension with the legalists, and their
attitude toward the Law has ranged from patronizing irony to outright
hostility.

The discredit brought upon Ṡūfism by its more extravagant adherents has
led in most areas of the modern Muslim world to the disrepute and
neglect of mysticism, and at times, even to its persecution. It is quite
possible that this aspect of Islam is doomed today. But one may doubt
it. Proteuslike, Ṡūfism has assumed many forms and guises in the past,
and as long as there are lovers of God among the Muslims, there will be
those who will respond to the moving testimony of the Ṡūfī saints.

The Sūfīs have been the great missionaries of Islam. Their
interpretation of what Muhammad brought has proved the most winning to
members of alien religious traditions, in India, Anatolia, Africa and
Indonesia; and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

even in those parts of the world longest Muslim, the Ṡūfīs made
themselves responsible for the spiritual care of the masses. One eminent
scholar even maintains, "It is thanks to its mysticism that Islam is an
international and universal religion." <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[137:1](isl23.htm#fr_80) Louis Massignon,
*Lexique Technique de la Mystique Musulman* (2nd ed.; Paris, 1954), p.
15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Ascetics](isl24)
