[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl24)  [Next](isl26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. *The Ecstatics*

In so far as they believe in the *via purgativa*, the purgation of the
soul by asceticism, all the Ṡūfīs have been ascetics. But it was early
discovered that the mystic underwent emotional transports in which he
attained to a heightened awareness of God. These states were in effect a
condition of private, personal revelation--the illuminative life. The
Ṡūfīs had begun among the Ahl al-Ḥadīth, the early pietists to whom the
legalists and religious scholars also trace their origins. But with the
third and fourth Islamic centuries, there began a fateful separation.
Ṡūfīs of heightened sensitivity fell into ecstatic trances, or were so
preoccupied

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

with the contemplation of the Divine Perfection that they felt they had
even lost awareness of their own selfhood, and were conscious only of
the existence of God. Here their experience, to judge by their accounts,
was the "unitive state" attested to by mystics of many religions--the
stage of religious experience where *atman* becomes *brahman*, where the
soul feels that it is merged with ultimate reality.

For some Ṡūfīs, the intoxication of the illuminative stage itself became
the object of ardent seeking. It was found that the coming of this
religious state could be assisted with chanting of the Qur’ān, or music,
or the recitation of poetry in which God is addressed as the Eternal
Beloved. Al-Muḥāsibī's disciple, Junayd of Baghdad (died A.H. 298/A.D.
910), while he insisted that the goal of the mystic must be God Himself,
and not the titillation of the emotions in self-induced ecstacy,
nevertheless attests to ecstatic experiences of a high order, as in
these verses where he describes his sense of union and separation with
God.

Now I have known, O Lord,  
What lies within my heart;  
In secret, from the world apart  
My tongue hath talked with my Adored.

So in a manner we  
United are, and one;  
Yet otherwise disunion  
Is our estate eternally.

Though from my gaze profound  
Deep awe hath hid Thy Face,  
In wondrous and ecstatic Grace  
I feel Thee touch my inmost ground. <span id="fr_96"></span>[17](#fn_96.md)

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Junayd was also one of the first Ṡūfīs to develop a mystical system, a
theosophy. Original, sincere and penetrating, he is one of the great
"sober" Ṡūfīs of the conservative type, whose doctrines have proved
least offensive to the *‘ulamā’*.

 

The journey from this world to the next \[*i.e.* to give up worldly
things for spiritual things\] is easy for the believer: the journey from
the creatures \[*i.e.* separation from them and from dependence on
them\] to the Creator is hard: the journey from the self to God is very
hard: and to be able to abide in God is still harder.

Ṡūfism means that God makes you to die to yourself and makes you alive
in Him. It is to purify the heart from the recurrence of creaturely
temptations, to say farewell to all the natural inclinations, to subdue
the qualities which belong to human nature, to keep far from the claims
of the senses, to adhere to spiritual qualities, to ascend by means of
Divine knowledge, to be occupied with that which is eternally the best,
to give wise counsel to all people, faithfully to observe the truth, and
to follow the Prophet in respect of the religious law. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[18](#fn_97.md)

Love means that the attributes of the lover are changed into those of
the Beloved. Now he lives in accordance with the saying of God: "When I
love him, I will be his eye by which he sees and his hearing by which he
hears and his hand by which he reaches out." <span
id="fr_98"></span>[19](#fn_98.md)

 

The characteristic play between the imagery of divine and earthly love,
divine and earthly intoxication, begins early in Ṡūfism.

 

It is told that Abū al-Ḥusayn al-Nūrī came once to Junayd and said, "It
has reached me that you talk about everything, so talk about anything
you like, and I shall discuss it with you."

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

Junayd said, "What shall I talk about?" And he said, "About love." Then
Junayd said, "I shall tell you an allegory. Once a group of my
companions and I were in a walled orchard, and the one who was to come
bringing with him some things we needed was detained, so we began to
climb the wall, when we became aware of a blind man who had with him a
beautiful youth, and the blind man was saying to him, 'You have ordered
me to do thus and so, and I have done it. And you have forbidden me such
and such, and I have abandoned it, nor do I oppose you in anything you
desire; so what more do you wish of me?'

"The youth said, 'I want you to die.' Then the blind man said, 'Why,
then, here I die,' and he lay down and covered his face and closed his
eyes. I said to my companions, 'This blind man has tried everything--he
even makes it appear that he is dead! But death in reality will hardly
be possible for him.' Then we climbed down and went out to where he lay
and moved him, and lo! He was dead."

Then Nūrī rose and went his way. <span id="fr_99"></span>[20](#fn_99.md)

 

Abū Muḥammad al-Jarīrī said: "We once met at Abū Ja‘far al-Ḥaffār's,
near the Damascus Gate in Baghdad--Junayd and Abū Ṡāliḥ al-Malāmatī and
Abū al-‘Abbās ibn Masrūq were with us. There was a cantor (*qawwāl*)
present, and when the chant began, Abū Ṡāliḥ rose and went into an
ecstacy until his knees buckled, whereupon he fell down. Then Ibn Masrūq
rose and went into an ecstacy, and then walked off barefoot \[compare
Exodus 3:5\] so Junayd and I remained. I said to him, "Sir, do you feel
nothing similar to what happened to them?" He replied, "Thou shalt see
the mountains, that thou supposest fixed, passing by like clouds" (Sūra
27:88). Then he said to me, "And you--do you feel nothing at the
*samā‘*?" I replied, "Oh yes--sometimes I am present with someone I
respect and honor, so I control myself, but when I am alone, I release
the ecstacy upon my in-most heart, and become ecstatic." <span
id="fr_100"></span>[21](#fn_100.md)

 

The crisis threatening between the Ṡūfīs and the legalists came with the
death of the popular ecstatic Ḥusayn

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

ibn Manṡūr al-Ḥallāj, in A.H. 309/A.D. 922. A younger contemporary of
Junayd, and probably his student, Ḥallāj was charged with blasphemy. He
chose Jesus as his model among the prophets and (perhaps on the basis of
his acquaintance with the Christian scriptures) claimed, "I am the Truth
(*Ana al-Ḥaqq*)" (cf. John 14:6). Since *al-Ḥaqq*, the Truth, is one of
the names of God, he was accused of claiming divinity. This accusation
was apparently supported by his doctrine of the "unitive life,"
according to which God manifests Himself on earth in His saints, and in
the supreme mystical experience permits them a temporary union with
Him. <span id="fr_101"></span>[22](#fn_101.md) These teachings scandalized
the conventional, but he refused to recant. He was publicly scourged and
crucified, and a wave of persecution of the Ṡūfīs of Baghdad ensued. His
image among the later Ṡūfīs is that of a holy martyr, whose only fault
was that he could not conceal the secret of existence. In so far as the
historical figure is perceptible through the cloud of polemic and
legend, he appears as a tragic and misunderstood lover of God, in whom
private insight conflicted with the Law. His poems and sayings appear to
exonerate him of the charge of self-divinization or pantheism.

 

Betwixt me and Thee there lingers an "it is I" that torments me.  
Ah, of Thy grace, take this "I" from between us!

I am He whom I love, and He whom I love is I,  
We are two spirits dwelling in one body.  
If thou seest me, thou seest Him,  
And if thou seest Him, thou seest us both. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[23](#fn_102.md)

Ibrāhīm ibn Fātik, his servant, said: "When al-Ḥallāj was brought to be
crucified and saw the cross and the nails . . .

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

he prayed a prayer of two inclinations, and I was standing near him. He
recited in the first the Opening of the Qur’ān and the verse 'And we
shall try you with something of fear and of hunger.' (Sūra 21:35). In
the second he recited the Opening and the verse beginning 'Every soul
shall taste of death' (Sūra 29:57). When he was finished he said some
words I do not remember, but of what I remember was: '. . . Oh my God,
who art revealed in every place and who art not in any place, I beseech
Thee by the truth of Thy Divine word which declares that I am, and by
the truth of my weak human word which declares that Thou art, sustain me
in gratitude for this Thy grace, that Thou didst hide from others what
Thou didst reveal to me of the glory of Thy countenance, and didst
forbid to them what thou didst permit to me: the sight of things hidden
by Thy mystery.

"'And these Thy servants, who are gathered together to slay me in zeal
for Thy religion, seeking Thy favor, forgive them. For if Thou hadst
revealed to them that which Thou hast revealed to me, they would not
have done that which they have done; hadst Thou withheld from me what
Thou hast withheld from them, I should never have been tried with this
tribulation. To Thee be praise in all Thou doest; to Thee be praise in
whatsoever Thou willest.'

"Then he was silent. The Headsman stepped up and dealt him a smashing
blow which broke his nose, and the blood ran onto his white robe. The
mystic al-Shiblī, who was in the crowd, cried aloud and rent his
garment, and Abū Ḥusayn al-Wasiṭī fell fainting, and so did other famous
Ṡūfīs who were there, so that a riot nearly broke out. Then the
executioners did their work." <span id="fr_103"></span>[24](#fn_103.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[149:17](isl25.htm#fr_96.md) Arberry, *op. cit.*,
p. 50.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[149:18](isl25.htm#fr_97.md) Quoted by al-Ghazālī
in Margaret Smith, trans., *Readings from the Mystics of Islam*, p. 35.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[149:19](isl25.htm#fr_98.md) *Ibid*., p. 36. This
is not a quote from the Qur’ān, but a so-called *Ḥadīth Qudsī*,
attributed to one of the prophets.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[149:20](isl25.htm#fr_99.md) Ibn Yazdānyār, *op.
cit.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[149:21](isl25.htm#fr_100.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[149:22](isl25.htm#fr_101.md) Al-Hallāj has been
carefully studied in a series of works by Professor Louis Massignon.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[149:23](isl25.htm#fr_102.md) R. A. Nicholson,
trans., *The Legacy of Islam* (London, 1939), p. 218.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[149:24](isl25.htm#fr_103.md) Massignon and Kraus,
eds., *Akhbār al-Hallāj* (Paris, 1936), pp. 7, 8, Arabic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Antinomians](isl26.md)
