[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl38)  [Next](isl40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. *The Twelvers*

The Twelver Shī‘a, or *Ithna-‘asharīya*, are numerically the largest of
the Shī‘ī sects, and exhibit most of the doctrines which became
classical with the Shī‘a.

Theologically, they are Mu‘tazilī rationalists, believing that the
Qur’ān is created, and that since God is *essentially* good, He *cannot*
do evil. He has created man with free will in order to know Him, and
desires man's welfare. It follows that He would not leave man without
guidance; thus the books of the prophets have been sent down. Even so,
as the sects of Islam attest, confusion arises, so it follows that God
has given man in addition to the Prophet an infallible guide in
religious matters. This guide is the *Imām*. It is also clear then that
the selection of the *Imāms* is a matter which could not be left to
human error; they were Divinely appointed from birth. The true Imāms are
the direct line of ‘Alī through al-Ḥusayn. A younger brother of the Zayd
ibn ‘Alī claimed by the Zaydīs is their fifth *Imām*, since Zayd was a
concubine's son.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

In common with earlier, now extinct Shī‘ī sects, they believe in the
doctrines of occultation (*ghayba*) and return (*raj‘a*). The twelfth of
the line of Imāms did not die, as his enemies assert, but like the
Qur’ānic Jesus, he was taken by God from human sight, and is in
occultation. He will return to earth as the *Mahdī*, the awaited
messianic figure who (according to certain *ḥadīths* questioned by many
Sunnī scholars) will bring the triumph of religion and herald the last
judgment.

They hold that ‘Alī was announced by Muhammad as his successor and
[plenipotentiary](errata.htm#2) (*waṡī*.md), but that Abū Bakr, ‘Umar and
‘Uthmān deliberately deprived him of his rights. Repeatedly sinful men
defrauded the Imāms of the "holy family," who foresaw and accepted their
glorious but tragic destiny as the repositories of truth despised.

In law, the Twelvers do not accept *ḥadīths* transmitted by enemies of
the *Imāms* such as ‘A’isha, and make use also of the saying of the
*Imāms*. In addition to the Shī‘ī regulations for the prayer call and
ablutions, they admit the doctrine of *taqīya* or *katmān*, the
propriety or even necessity of hiding one's true beliefs among
non-Shī‘īs--a legacy from times when they were a persecuted
minority--and they retain the peculiar institution of legal temporary
marriage between a free man and woman for *mut‘a* (pleasure).

Historically, they have been hostile on the whole to Ṡūfism, but they
believe in the intercession of the members of the "holy family" and make
pilgrimages to their tombs, especially those of the *Imāms*.

The Twelvers were encouraged in Persia under the Mongols, since they had
no objection to the destruction of the *Sunnī* Caliphate, and in A.D.
1502 Twelverism was

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

made the state religion of Persia under the Ṡafavī Shahs. It has become
an element in Persian nationalism. Outside Persia, there are large Shī‘ī
communities among the Arabs of Iraq and Southern Lebanon and in India.

The following selection is from a creed of Ḥasan ibn Yūsuf, ‘Allāma
al-Ḥillī (died A.H. 726/A.D. 1326), an eminent Twelver theologian who
flourished under the Mongols in Iraq.

 

1\. Our doctors all agree in considering (obligatory) knowledge of God .
. . and what is proper for Him and impossible for Him and Prophecy and
the Imāmate and the Return.

72\. The Most High is a Speaker (*mutakallim*) by the agreement of all.
By speech (*kalām*) is intended letters and sounds which are audible and
orderly. The meaning of his being a Speaker is that He brings Speech
into existence in some sort of body (*jism*). And the explanation of the
Ash‘arīya is contrary to reason.

76\. . . . The Ash‘arīya say that God's speech inheres in the (Divine)
essence. Those who say that it is letters and sounds have differed among
themselves. The Ḥanbalīs and Karrāmīya say it inheres in His essence. .
. . The Mu‘tazila and the Imāmīya say (and this is reality) that it is
inherent in something else, not in his essence (like the burning bush of
Moses). The meaning of His being a Speaker is that He makes Speech, not
that He is one in whom Speech inheres. . . .

79\. . . . As to the priority or origin of His Speech, the Ash'arīya
have said the idea was prior, and the Ḥanbalīs said that the letters
were prior. The Mu‘tazila said that Speech was an originated thing, and
that is the reality, for several reasons. . . .

81\. . . . The Most High is veracious, for a lie is necessarily evil,
and God is far removed from evil, because it is impossible for Him to
have any imperfections.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

100\. Ocular vision of the Most High is impossible, because everything
which can be seen possesses direction. Then He would be a body, and that
is impossible. And there is the word of the Most High to Moses: "Thou
shalt never see Me" (7:139) . . . Yet on the Day of Resurrection perfect
knowledge will become necessary (though without ocular vision).

118\. We are free agents (*bi-al-ikhtiyār*), and reason requires this .
. . otherwise our responsibility for a thing would be impossible, and
then there would be no sin; and because of the evil in His creating an
act in us and punishing us for it, and because of tradition.

123\. (Evil is impossible for Him) because He has what deters Him from
it; knowledge of evil; and He has no motive, for the motive would be
either the need (or the wisdom) of evil, both of which are excluded.

125\. . . . The will to do evil is impossible for Him, for that will is
evil.

144\. Kindness (*luṭf*) is incumbent on the Most High. . . . *Luṭf* is
that which brings the creature near to obedience and keeps him far from
disobedience. . . . For whenever He who wills an act of another (as when
God wills that man perform the Law) knows that he cannot do it without
the aid of an act which the Willer can perform without any trouble, then
if He does not perform it He would contradict His own aim (for God has
an aim, contrary to the Ash‘arīya), and reason pronounces that evil. And
God is far above that.

176\. . . . Men have disagreed on whether the Imāmate is incumbent or
not . . . the Imāmīya (Shī‘a) say it is incumbent on God by reason; the
proof is that it is kindness, and all kindness is incumbent on God. . .
. That is the major premise; the minor premise is that it brings men to
obedience. Whoever has known dark experiences and examined political
principles knows that whenever men have a chief and a guide whom they
obey, who restrains the oppressor from his oppression . . . and leads
men to rational principles and religious duties and restrains them from
corruption . . . then they will,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

because of this, draw near to soundness and depart from corruptness . .
. this idea is realized by the Imāmate. . . . <span
id="fr_159"></span>[6](#fn_159.md)

 

These selections on the *imāmate* are from the creed of Ibn Babūya
al-Sadūq, one of the greatest early Twelver doctors, who collected
traditions and elaborated the doctrine in the Buwayhī period. He died in
A.D. 381/A.H. 991.

 

35\. Our belief concerning the number of the prophets is that there have
been one hundred and twenty-four thousand prophets and a like number of
plenipotentiaries (*awṡīyā’*). Each prophet had a plenipotentiary to
whom he gave instructions by the command of God. And concerning them we
believe that they brought the truth from God and their word is the word
of God, their command God's command, and obedience to them obedience to
God. . . .

The leaders of the prophets are five (on whom all depends): Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad. Muhammad is their leader . . . he
confirmed the (other) apostles.

It is necessary to believe that God did not create anything more
excellent than Muhammad and the Imāms. . . . After His prophet, the
proofs of God for the people are the Twelve Imāms. . . .

We believe that the Proof of Allah in His earth and His viceregent
(*khalīfa*) among His slaves in this age of ours is the Upholder
(*al-Qā’im*) (of the laws of God), the Expected One, Muhammad ibn
al-Ḥasan al-‘Askarī (*i.e.*, the Twelfth *Imām*). He it is concerning
whose name and descent the Prophet was informed by God, and he it is who
WILL FILL THE EARTH WITH JUSTICE AND EQUITY JUST AS IT IS NOW FULL OF
OPPRESSION AND WRONG. He it is whom God will make victorious over the
whole world until from every place the call to prayer is heard and
religion will belong entirely to God, exalted be He. He is the rightly
guided *Mahdī* about whom the prophet gave information that when he
appears,

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jesus, son of
Mary, will descend upon the earth and pray behind him. We believe there
can be no other *Qā’im* than him; he may live in the state of
occultation (*ghayba*) (as long as he likes); were it the space of the
existence of this world, there would be no *Qā’im* other than him.

36\. Our belief concerning prophets, apostles, Imāms \[in the special
Shī‘ī sense\] and angels is that they are infallible (*ma‘ṡūm*); . . .
and do not commit any sin, minor or major . . . he who denies
infallibility to them in any matter . . . is a *kāfir*, an infidel.

37\. Our belief concerning those who exceed the bounds of belief, the
*ghūlat* \[such as those who ascribe divinity to ‘Alī or the other
*imāms*.--ED.\] and those who believe in delegation \[*mufawwiḍa*: the
belief that after creating Muhammad and ‘Alī, God rested and delegated
all the administration of His creation to their hands.--ED.\], is that
they are *kuffār*, deniers of God. They are more wicked than the Jews,
the Christians, the Fire Worshippers . . . or any heretics; none have
belittled God more. . . .

Our belief concerning the Prophet is that he was poisoned (by Jews)
during the expedition to Khaybar. The poison continued to be noxious and
(shortening his life) until he died of its effects.

I. Imām: And the Prince of Believers (‘Alī), on whom be peace, was
murdered by . . . Ibn Muljam al-Murādī, may God curse him, and was
buried in Ghārī.

II\. Imām: Ḥasan ibn ‘Alī, on whom be peace, was poisoned by his wife
Ja‘da bint Ash’ath of Kinda, may God curse (her and her father).

III\. Imām: Ḥusayn ibn ‘Alī was slain at Karbala. His murderer was Sinān
ibn-Anas al-Nakhā‘ī, may God curse him and his father.

IV\. Imām: ‘Alī ibn Ḥusayn, the Sayyid Zayn al-‘Abidīn, was poisoned by
al-Walīd ibn ‘Abd al-Mālik, God curse him.

V. Imām: Muhammad Bāqir ibn ‘Alī was poisoned by Ibrahīm ibn al-Walīd,
God curse him.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

VI\. Imām: Ja‘far al-Sāḍiq was poisoned by Abū Ja‘far al-Manṡūr
al-Dawanīqī, may God curse him.

VII\. Imām: Mūsa al-Kāzim ibn Ja‘far was poisoned by Harūn al-Rashīd,
may God curse him.

VIII\. Imām: ‘Alī al-Riḍā ibn Mūsa was poisoned by Ma’mūn ibn Harūn
al-Rashīd, may God curse him.

IX\. Imām: Abū Ja‘far Muhammad al-Tāqī ibn ‘Alī was poisoned by
al-Mu‘tasim, may God curse him.

X. Imām: ‘Alī al-Naqī ibn Muhammad was poisoned by Mutawakkil, may God
curse him.

XI\. Imām: Ḥasan al-‘Askarī was poisoned by al-Mu‘tamid, may God curse
him. . . . And verily the Prophets and Imāms, on whom be peace, had
informed (people) that they would be murdered. He who says that they
were not has given them the lie and has imputed falsehood to God the
Mighty and Glorious.

39\. Our belief concerning *taqīya* (permissible dissimulation of one's
true beliefs) is that it is obligatory, and he who forsakes it is in the
same position as he who forsakes prayer. . . . Now until the time when
the Imām al-Qā’im appears, *taqīya* is obligatory and it is not
permissible to dispense with it. He who does . . . has verily gone out
of the religion of God. And God has described the showing of friendship
to unbelievers as being (possible only) in the state of *taqīya*.

And the Imām Ja‘far said, "Mix with enemies openly but oppose them
inwardly, so long as the authority is a matter of question." He also
said, "Diplomacy (al-ri’ā’) with a true believer is a form of
polytheism, but with a (hypocrite) in his own house, it is worship." And
he said "He who prays with hypocrites (*i.e.*, Sunnīs), standing in the
first row, it is as though he prayed with the Prophet standing in the
first row." And he said, "Visit their sick and attend their funerals and
pray in their mosques."

40\. Our belief concerning the (ancestors of the Prophet, contrary to
the Sunnīs) is that they were Muslims from Adam down to ‘Abdallah,
father of the Prophet. . . .

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

41\. Our belief concerning the ‘Alawīya (descendants of ‘Alī) is that
they are the progeny of the Messenger of God and devotion to them is
obligatory (in) requital of his apostleship. . . <span
id="fr_160"></span>[7](#fn_160.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[231:6](isl39.htm#fr_159.md) *Al-Bābu-l-Hādī
‘Ashar*, trans. by W. E. Miller (London, 1958).

<span id="fn_160"></span>[231:7](isl39.htm#fr_160.md) A. A. A. Fyzec, ed.
and trans., *A Shi‘ite Creed* (London, 1942).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Seveners](isl40.md)
