[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl36)  [Next](isl38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. *The Khārijīs*

The Khārijīs soon divided into several sects; from the first they were
men who would not and could not compromise. Since their principles
frequently led them to fight to the last against overwhelming odds, only
the most

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

moderate of these sects, the Ibāḍīs, has survived into modern times.

Khārijī holy wars against other Muslims were always terrifying; even the
women and children of their opponents were put to death with religious
thoroughness. At the same time, their just dealings with the People of
the Book made them many friends among the subject peoples. They were
nothing if not sincere men, and in their devotion to the Qur’ān and the
Divine Imperative as they understood it, one must admire, even if
grudgingly, the harsh, uncompromising righteousness of the Semitic
prophets whose followers they were.

While they found followers in the Arabian peninsula, it was North Africa
which became "the Scotland of these Puritans of Islam." Here, the
warlike Berbers proved willing to accept Islam, but not the dominance or
the taxation of the Arab Caliphs. From A.D. 761 to 908, the Berber
Ibāḍīs maintained a separate state under their own *Imāms* at Tiaret in
Central Algeria. This state was destroyed by the rising Shī‘ī Fāṭimī
Caliphate, based in Tunisia.

Their descendants fled to the Saharan oases of the Mzab, in Algeria,
where they maintain a theocratic community under the *Ṭolba*, the
Council of Elders. In addition, there are Ibāḍīs in the Jabal Nafusa of
Libya and the isle of Jerba off Tunisia. In South Arabia, the more
conservative Ibāḍīs of ‘Uman under their *Imām* maintain a running war
with the moderates under the Sulṭān of Muscat. The ruling clique of
Zanzibar are also Khārijīs.

In all, there are probably no more than half a million Khārijīs in the
world today. They look upon themselves as the only Muslims, and have
their own legal system and collections of *Ḥadīth*. They are exceedingly
puritanical,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

and forbid tobacco, games, music, Ṡūfism, luxury, celibacy and anger.
Concubinage is permitted only with the consent of the wives.
Intermarriage with other Muslims is rare, and heavily frowned upon. They
maintain the classical Khārijī doctrines, as follows:

The Qur’ān is created, and must be literally interpreted. There will be
no beatific vision of God in the hereafter. The *Imāmate* is not
obligatory, but if there is an *Imām*, he may be any pious believer,
"even an Abyssinian slave." If he commits a major sin he must be
deposed. The commission of any major sin by a believer is apostacy, and
exposes him to ostracism or death, unless he performs a thorough
admission of guilt and public penance.

The following selection is the *khuṭba*, or Friday sermon, of an early
Ibāḍī rebel who in A.H. 129/A.D. 747 briefly took Mecca and Medina. It
has been preserved in several early collections of rhetoric as an
example of Arab eloquence and moral fervor. It was intended to persuade
other Muslims to make common cause with the Ibāḍīs, and one finds
clearly expressed the Khārijīs' view of Islamic history, and their pious
hatred of their opponents.

 

*The Sermon of Abū Hamza the Khārijī*

Abū Hamza the Khārijī entered Medina; <span
id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154.md) he was one of the Khārijī pietists and
preachers. He mounted the pulpit leaning on his Arab bow. Mālik ibn Anas
said, "Abū Hamza preached us a sermon which would have thrown doubt into
the most perspicacious and refuted a skeptic." He said:

"I counsel you in fear of God and obedience to Him; to act according to
His Book and the Sunna of His prophet--His blessing and peace be on
him--and to observe the ties of blood, and magnify the truth of God
which tyrants have diminished, and to diminish the falsehood they have
magnified;

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

to put to death the injustice they have brought to life, and to revivify
the just laws they have let die; to obey God--and those who obey Him
disobey others in obedience to Him, for there is no obeying a creature
which disobeys its Creator.

"We call you to the Book of God and the Sunna of His prophet, and to
equal sharing, and to justice for the subject peoples, and to putting
the fifths of the booty in the places God ordained for them.

"As for us, we have not taken up arms lightly or frivolously, for play
or amusement, or for a change of government in which we hope to immerse
ourselves, or for the revenge that was taken from us; but we did it when
we saw the earth had grown wicked, and proofs of tyranny had appeared,
and religious propagandists increased, but men did as they pleased, and
laws were neglected, and the just were put to death, and speakers of
truth treated violently, and we heard a herald calling us to Truth and
the Straight Path, so we answered the summoner of God . . . and by His
grace we became brethren. . . .

"Oh people of Medina! Your beginning was the best of beginnings--and
your end is the worst of endings, for you have hearkened to your readers
and your lawyers, and they cut you away from the Book which has no
crookedness, cut you away with the exegesis of the ignorant and the
pretensions of triflers, so that you strayed from the Truth, and became
dead and unfeeling.

"O people of Medina! Children of the *Muhājirīn* and the *Anṡār*! How
sound were your roots, and how rotten are your branches! Your fathers
were men of certainty and religious knowledge--and you are people of
error and ignorance. . . . For God opened the door of religion for you,
and you (let it grow choked with rubbish); He locked the door of this
world for you, and you forced it open; hasters to temptation and
laggards in the way of the Prophet; blind to the demonstrations of Truth
and deaf to knowledge; slaves of greed and allies of affliction! How
excellent was the legacy your fathers left, had you preserved it, and
how miserable will be that of your children if you hold on to it! Them
He aided to the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Truth--you He
deserts in your error. Your ancestors were few and pious, and you are
many and malicious. . . . The preachers of the Qur’ān cry out to you,
and you are not chidden; they warn you, and you do not ponder. . .
. <span id="fr_155"></span>[2](#fn_155.md)

"Oh ye people, the blessing of God and peace be on our Prophet, who
never delayed or hastened save by God's leave, and command, and
revelation. God sent down on him a book, in which He showed him what was
to come and what was to be feared, and there was no doubt about His
religion, and no ambiguity about His command. Then God took him, when he
had taught the Muslims the landmarks of religion, and Abū Bakr led them
in their prayers. The Muslims entrusted Abū Bakr with the matters of the
lower world, since God's messenger had entrusted him with the matter of
his religion. He fought the people of apostacy, and acted in accord with
the Book and the Sunna, and he passed his way; God have mercy on him!

"Then ruled ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, God's mercy on him, and he went in the
way of his friend and acted in accord with the Book and the Sunna. He
collected the tribute and distributed the shares and . . . gave eighty
lashes for drinking wine, and passed his way. God have mercy on him!

"Then came ‘Uthmān ibn ‘Affān. For six years he walked in the path of
his two friends, but he was less than they. And in his last six years he
rendered to no avail what he had done in the first six, and then he
passed his way.

"Then ‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib ruled, and he did not attain the goal in truth,
and no beacon was given him for guidance, and he passed his way.

"Then ruled Mu‘āwiya son of Abū Sufyan, accursed of God's messenger, and
son of one accursed. He made farmers of God's servants and possessions
of God's property, and a briarpatch of God's religion, so curse him with
God's curse!

"Then came Yazid the son of Mu‘āwiya--Yazīd of the wine, Yazīd of the
apes and the hunting panthers! Yazīd of the lustful belly and the
effeminate arse--and God and His angels curse him!"

And one by one he related the doings of the Caliphs, until

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

he reached ‘Umar the Pious, son of ‘Abd al-‘Azīz, and passed over him
without mentioning him. He went on:

"There came Yazid ibn ‘Abd al-Mālik, a libertine in religion and unmanly
in behavior, in whom was never perceived right guidance. God has said
about the wealth of orphans: 'If you perceive in them right guidance,
deliver them their property' (4:6), and the matter of Muhammad's
Community was more than any property! He would eat forbidden food, and
drink wine, and wear a robe worth a thousand dinars, through which you
could see his flesh so that the veil of modesty was rent; an
unpardonable disrobe. And Habāba the singing-girl on his right, and
Salāma the singing-girl on his left, both singing--if you had taken
drink away from him, he would have rent his garments! And he would turn
to one of them and say, 'Shall I fly? Shall I fly?' Aye, he flew. To
God's damnation, and the burning Fire, and a painful torment!

"The sons of Umayya are a party of error, and their strength is the
strength of tyrants. They take conjecture for their guide, and judge as
they please, and put men to death in anger, and govern by mediation, and
take the law out of context, and distribute the public moneys to those
not entitled to them--for God has revealed those who are entitled, and
they are eight classes of men, for He says: 'The freewill offerings are
for the poor and the needy, those who work to collect them, those whose
hearts are to be reconciled, and slaves and debtors, and those in the
"Way of God," and travellers' (9:60). They make themselves the ninth,
and take it all! Such are those who rule by what God has not sent down.

"As for these factions \[of ‘Alī\], they are a faction which has
repudiated the Book of God to promulgate lies about Him. They have not
left the people (of the Community) because of their insight into
religion (as we have), or their deep knowledge of the Qur’ān; they
punish crime in those who commit it and commit it themselves when they
get the chance. They have determined upon tumult and know not the way
out of it. Crude in (their knowledge of) the Qur’ān, following
soothsayers; teaching people to hope for the Resurrection

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

of the Dead, and then expecting the return (of their *imāms*) to this
world; entrusting their religion to a man who cannot see them! God smite
them! How perverse they are!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[219:1](isl37.htm#fr_154.md) According to Isfahānī
and Ibn ‘Abd Rabbihi; but al-Jāhiz places the khutba in Mecca. Very
likely there was more than one, and they have been confused.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[219:2](isl37.htm#fr_155.md) Thus far translated
from *al-‘Iqd al-Farīd* of Ibn ‘Abd Rabbihi (Cairo, 1944), Vol. IV, pp.
144-146. The section following is taken from the account by al-Jāhiz in
*al-Bayān wa al-Tabyīn* (Cairo, 1948-1950), Vol. III, p. 95.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Zaydīs](isl38.md)
