[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl29)  [Next](isl31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### 1. *Abū Ḥanīfa*

We have mentioned earlier that the study of the Law is more important in
Islam than the study of theology. This is true, yet it would appear to
be contradicted by the statement below, attributed to Abū Ḥanīfa, that
insight in matters of religion is "better" than insight in matters of
knowledge. This is to be explained, however, by Abū Ḥanīfa's *murji’ī*
tendency, his reluctance to condemn any professed Muslim--a tendency
which led necessarily to a separation of faith and works.

Indeed, such a separation was demanded by the history of early Islam.
The Community had had to meet bitter attacks by dissidents, and had also
to take cognizance of the fact that within its own ranks there remained
self-professed Muslims whose behavior was no credit to it, the
Muhammadan Community.

Abū Ḥanīfa was of the party which maintained that if a man called
himself a Muslim yet did not behave in an orthoprax or devout fashion,
so long as there was any reasonable doubt that he had apostacized he
should be left to the judgment of God. (The more extreme proponents of
this view (*murji’ism*) went so far as to hold that anyone who called
himself a Muslim was saved.) Thus faith and works are in a sense
separable, and faith is prior. Abū Ḥanīfa defends this moderate
*murji’ism* in the epistle to ‘Uthman al-Battī; it is perhaps his only
genuine surviving writing. But it is most likely that the creedal
statement known as the *Fiqh Akbar I*, the "Greater *Fiqh*," is also
his. It is in the plural "we," indicating that it is a statement on
which he and his school agree, and is intended for the guidance of other
believers.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It affirms
predestination (in Article 3) and disavows the position of the Partisans
(*Shī‘a*) of ‘Alī (in Articles 4 and 5), as well as that of the Khārijīs
(in Article 1), who held that those who committed a grave sin had
apostacized and ceased to be Muslims; it rejects certain other
positions. Such a creed, by a revered religious scholar and teacher, had
powerful moral authority but nothing, for example, of the power to loose
and to bind claimed by the general Councils which formulated the early
Christian creeds.

 

*The Fiqh Akbar I*

Article 1. We do not consider anyone to be an infidel on account of sin;
nor do we deny his faith.

Article 2. We enjoin what is just and prohibit what is evil.

Article 3. What reaches you could not possibly have missed you; and what
misses you could not possibly have reached you.

Article 4. We disavow none of the Companions of the Apostle of Allah;
nor do we adhere to any of them exclusively.

Article 5. We leave the question of ‘Uthmān and ‘Alī to Allah, who
knoweth the secret and hidden things.

Article 6. Insight in matters of religion is better than in-sight in
matters of knowledge and law.

Article 7. Difference of opinion in the Community is a token of divine
mercy.

Article 8. Whoso believeth all that he is bound to believe, except that
he says, I do not know whether Moses and Jesus (peace be upon them) do
or do not belong to the Apostles, is an infidel.

Article 9. Whoso sayeth, I do not know whether Allah is in Heaven or on
the earth, is an infidel.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

Article 10. Whoso sayeth, I do not know (about) the punishment in the
tomb, belongeth to the sect of the Jahmites, which goeth to
perdition. <span id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_136)

*The Epistle of Abū Hanifa to ‘Uthmān al-Battī*

From Abū Ḥanīfa to ‘Uthmān al-Battī. Peace be unto you. I extol to you
God, than whom there is no other god. As for what follows, I counsel the
fear of God and obedience to Him; God suffices as reckoner and
compensator. Your letter has reached me, and I have understood your
advice in it. You say that you were moved to write it by what I had
written to preserve you in the good and to advise you. You mention that
it has reached you that I am of the Murji’a, and that I hold a True
Believer may err, and that this distresses you, and that there is really
no excuse among friends of God for a thing which keeps one apart from
God; that there is nothing by which one may be guided in what mere men
create and innovate; that moral imperatives (*al-amr*) are only in what
the Qur’ān brought and in what Muhammad, on whom be peace and God's
blessing, preached and his Companions agreed upon until the people
became divided; and that anything beyond this is human innovation and
human creation.

Now understand what I am writing to you. Be prudent in your opinion, and
take care lest Satan enter upon you; God preserve us both in obedience
to Him--we ask the assistance of His mercy for us both. I would inform
you that the people were idolators before God, be He Exalted, sent
Muhammad, on whom be blessing and peace. Then He sent Muhammad to call
them to Islam, and he called them to testify that there is no god but
God, the Unique without associate, and to profess what he brought them
from God.

He who entered Islam was a Believer, freed of idolatry, and his
possessions and blood inviolate, while he was entitled to the rights of
a Muslim and the protection of Muslims. One who neglected Islam when
called to it became an infidel, free of faith, his possessions and blood
lawful to Muslims, from whom nothing could be accepted except his entry

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

into Islam or his death, except for the People of the Book whom God
explicitly exempted, who paid tribute-money.

Then the laws (*al-farā’iḍ*) were revealed after this for people who had
believed (*ahl al-taṡdīq*), and adoption of them became a work of faith.
Thus God says, "Those who have believed and do the good," and "He who
believes in God and does good works," and similar expressions in the
Qur’ān. Therefore a loss as to works does not involve a loss as to
belief, and belief may be attained without any acts. If a loss as to
works involved a loss as to belief, one would be taken by a loss in
works from the name of faith and its preservation, just as people who
lose belief are taken by its loss from the name of faith and its
preservation and truth, and revert to their former state of idolatry.
One of the ways by which this may be known is the disagreement between
act and belief. People do not disagree in belief, and do not excel each
other, but they excel each other in acts, and their laws (*farā’iḍ*)
differ as well; yet the religion of the People of heaven and the
religion of the prophets does not differ. Thus God says, "We have laid
down for you as religion what was prescribed for Noah, and what We have
revealed to thee, and what We prescribed for Abraham, and Moses, and
Jesus." (Sūra 12:13)

Know that guidance in belief in God and His prophet is not like guidance
in what is legislated as to acts. And how does this disturb you? You
call a man a True Believer for what he believes, and God calls him so in
His Book; and you call a man ignorant for what he does not know of the
laws. He needs only to learn that of which he is ignorant. Shall one who
errs in knowledge of God and His prophets be as one who errs about what
people learn when they are already True Believers?

God has said in His teaching about the Law: "God explains it unto you
for you may err. And God is the Knower of all things." (4:176) And: "If
one of you errs, then another one of you will remember. (2:282) And: "I
(Moses) did it then, when I was of those who err," (26:20) *i.e.*, among
the ignorant. The proof from the Book of God and the *Sunna* for
believing this is a thing too clear and too obvious to pose

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

any problem for a man like yourself. Do you not say "a wicked believer,"
"a sinful believer," "a trespassing believer," "an uncouth believer," "a
cruel believer"? Shall one be rightly guided in wickedness or trespass
as he is rightly guided in faith?

Or take the speech of the sons of Jacob to our prophet their father,
"Lo, thou art in thy old error." (12:95)--Do you think they meant "You
are in your old *infidelity*"? God forbid that you should so understand
it, who are learned in the Qur’ān. . . .

‘Alī was called "Commander of the True Believers," and ‘Umar as
well--"Commander of the True Believers." Or would you say that means
"Commander of those who obey all of the laws"? Again, ‘Alī referred to
the Muslims of Syria with whom he was at war as "True Believers," in
writings on the subject. Or were they rightly guided while he fought
them? The Companions of the Messenger of God fought each other (in the
civil wars) so both parties could not have been rightly guided in their
acts. Who were the oppressors, according to you? By God, I know no sin
People of the *Qibla* \[those who face Mecca in prayer: Muslims\] could
commit greater than fighting and shedding the blood of the Companions of
Muhammad, on whom be peace and blessing--so what do you call the two
factions? They were not both rightly guided: if you assert that, you are
guilty of an innovation \[heresy\]. If you assert they were both in
error, you have innovated. If you say one was rightly guided, then what
was the other? But if you say "God knows best," you have hit the mark.
Understand well what I have written, and know that I say: The People of
the *Qibla* are True Believers, and no loss as to act can remove them
from Faith.

He who obeys God in all the laws, according to us, is of the People of
Paradise. He who leaves both faith and works is an infidel, of the
People of the Fire. But one who believes but is guilty of some breach of
the laws is a believing sinner, and God will do as He wishes about him:
punish him if He wills, and forgive him if He wills.

Also, I say about the disagreements of the Companions of the Messenger
of God: God knows best. And I do not think

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

that this is any different from your own opinion about the People of the
*Qibla*, for their affair is that of the Companions of the Messenger of
God, a matter decided by *Sunna* and *Fiqh*. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_137)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[179:1](isl30.htm#fr_136) Wensinck, trans.,
*The Muslim Creed* (Cambridge, 1932), pp 103, 104.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[179:2](isl30.htm#fr_137) *Kitāb al-’Alim wa
al-Muta’allim* (Cairo, 1949).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Al-Māturīdī](isl31)
