[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl31)  [Next](isl33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

### 3. *Al-Ash‘arī*

Among the Shāfi‘ī School of Baghdad, Māturīdī's con-temporary al-Ash‘arī
(died A.H. 324/A.D. 935) played the same role Māturīdī had among the
Ḥanafīs of Samarqand, and of the two men al-Ash‘arī has become the
better known. While there were certain disputed questions between the
two schools they founded, their aims were basically the same: to refute
Mu‘tazilī theology and reaffirm the doctrines of the Old Believer Sunnīs
with the aid of logical demonstration and philosophic concepts.

Neither Ash‘arī nor Māturīdī was the first to thus seek a medial
position in the quarrel of the traditionalists and the rationalists:
al-Muḥāsibī the mystic had attempted it in the second century A.H. and
had been roundly denounced for it by his contemporary Ibn Ḥanbal. But
while Muḥāsibī's attempt had been abortive, by the fourth century long
debates had helped to prepare a party who would accept a middle way. The
core of the fundamentalists, the Ḥanbalīs, remained hostile to this new
rationalism and cursed al-Ash‘arī, not for his conclusions but for his
innovating method.

Nevertheless, with time and official patronage, *kalām* (dialectic
theology) became an accepted formulation of Islamic doctrine.

Al-Ash‘arī had himself been a Mu‘tazilī, the pupil of al-Jubbā'ī, chief
of the Baṡra Mu‘tazila. In A.H. 300/A.D. 913, it is said, Ash‘arī became
convinced that Mu‘tazilism could not be reconciled with the sayings of
the Prophet, and left the Mu‘tazila for the fundamentalists.

Where the Mu‘tazila had denied the eternal attributes of God, and had
explained as metaphors the references

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

to His face, hands and eyes, and where the Old Believers had insisted
that these be taken literally, Ash‘arī insisted that God has all these
things, but not as men have them; the Qur’ānic references must be
accepted, but not in a crudely anthropomorphic sense. The Qur’ān for him
is God's uncreated Word, but the writing or sounds by which men have
access to it are created things. Man's acts, too, are created by
God--but man "acquires" them, by moral responsibility.

In popular legend, al-Ash‘arī is usually given credit for "defeating the
Mu‘tazila." Far from it; the next century was to see gains for them, due
to the sympathy of the dictators of the House of Buwayh, who themselves
were Shī‘īs. Still, al-Ash‘arī had founded a school and a method, and
with the Saljūq restoration, his school triumphed. The *Mu‘tazila*
passed from the scene and their books were burned, but their doctrines
have been preserved to a considerable degree among the Shī‘ī sects.

 

To begin with, there are many deviators from the truth among the
*Mu‘tazila* and the *ahl al-qadar* \[exponents of free will, who believe
that men have "power" (*qadr*), to act\], whose straying desires have
inclined them to the acceptance of the principles (*taqlīd*) of their
leaders and their departed forebears; so that they interpret the Qur’ān
according to their opinions with an interpretation for which God has
neither revealed authority nor shown proof, and which they have not
derived from the Apostle of the Lord of the Worlds or from the ancients
of the past; and, as a result, they oppose the traditions of the
Companions, related on the authority of the Prophet of God, concerning
God's visibility to sight, although with regard to it the traditions
come from various sources, and the *ḥadīth* upon it have been
continuous, and (information) has come down in steady succession.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (1) They deny the
intercession of the Apostle of God for sinners, and reject the
traditions concerning it that are related on the authority of the
ancients of the past. (2) They gainsay the punishment of the grave and
the doctrine that the infidels are punished in their graves although the
Companions and the Successors have agreed upon this matter unanimously.
(3) They maintain the createdness of the Qur’ān; thereby approximating
the belief of their brethren among the polytheists, who said, "It is
merely the word of a mortal"; and so they think that the Qur’ān is like
the word of a mortal. (4) They assert and are convinced that human
beings create evil; thereby approximating the belief of the Magians, who
assert that there are two creators, one of them creating good and the
other creating evil (for the Qadarīya think that God creates good and
that Satan creates evil). (5) They think that God may wish what is not,
and what He does not wish may be; in disagreement with that upon which
the Muslims have unanimously agreed, namely, that what God wishes is,
and what He does not wish is not; and contrarily to the words of God
"But ye shall not wish except God wish"--He says that we shall not wish
a thing unless God has wished that we wish it--and to His words, "If God
had wished, they would not have wrangled," and His words, "Had We
wished, We had certainly given to every soul its guidance," and His
words, "Doer of what He wills," and His statement with reference to
Shū‘ayb, that he said, "Nor can we return it, except God our Lord wish;
our Lord embraceth all things in His ken." Therefore the Apostle of God
called them "the Magians \[Zoroastrians\] of this Community" \[according
to a spurious *ḥadīth*--ED.\] because they have adopted the religion of
the Magians and copied their tenets, and think that there are two
creators, the one for good and the other for evil, just as the Magians
think, and that there are evils God does not wish, as the Magians
believe. (6) They think that they, and not God, have control over what
is hurtful and what is helpful to them, contrarily to the words of God
to His Prophet, "Say: I have no control over what may be helpful or
hurtful to me, but as God wisheth," and in opposition to the Qur’ān and
to that upon which the people of Islam

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

have unanimously agreed. (7) They think that they alone, and not their
Lord, have power over their works, and assert that they are independent
of God, and attribute to themselves power over that over which they do
not attribute power to God, just as the Magians assert that Satan has
power over evil that they do not assert God has. Hence they are "the
Magians of this Community," since they have adopted the religion of the
Magians, hold fast to their beliefs, incline to their errors, cause men
to despair of God's mercy and lose their hope of His spirit, and have
condemned the disobedient to Hell forever, in disagreement with God's
words, "But other than this will He forgive to whom He wishes." (8) They
think that he who enters Hell will not come forth from it, in
disagreement with the tradition, related on the authority of the Apostle
of God, that God will bring forth people out of Hell after they have
burned in it and become ashes. (9) They deny that God has a face,
notwithstanding His words, "But the face of thy Lord shall abide
resplendent with majesty and glory." They deny that He has two hands,
notwithstanding His words, "Before him whom I have created with My two
hands." They deny that God has an eye, notwithstanding His words, "Under
Our eyes it floated on," and His words "That thou mightest be reared in
Mine eye." They deny that God has knowledge, notwithstanding His words,
"In His knowledge He sent it down." They deny that God has power,
notwithstanding His words, "Possessed of might, the Unshaken." (10) They
reject the tradition, related on the authority of the Prophet, that God
descends each night to the lower heaven, and other traditions among
those that the trustworthy have handed down on the authority of God's
Apostle. Of like fashion are all the innovators--the Jahmīya, the
Murji’a--deviators in their innovations, who dissent from the Book and
the *Sunna*, and that upon which the Prophet and his Companions take
their stand and the Community have unanimously agreed, as do the
Qadarīya, Mu‘tazila. . . . <span id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_139)

 

The rational proof of the creation of men's acts is our experience that
unbelief is bad, false, vain, inconsistent, and

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

of a certain contrariness, whereas faith is good, toilsome, and painful.

Such being the case, unbelief must have a producer who intentionally
produces it as unbelief, vain and bad. And its producer can never be the
unbeliever, who desires that unbelief be good, right, and true, whereas
it is the contrary of that. Likewise faith must have a producer who
produces it as it really is, toilsome, painful, and vexatious, and who
is not the believer, who, though he strive that faith be contrary to its
actual painfulness, toilsomeness, and vexatiousness, has no way to
effect that. So if the one who produces unbelief as it really is cannot
be the unbeliever, and if the one who produces faith as it really is
cannot be the believer, then the intentional producer of both must be
God Most High, Lord of the Worlds. For no body can produce them, since
bodies can effect nothing in things distinct from themselves.

 

*Question*: Why is it that the occurrence of the act which is an
acquisition does not prove that it has no agent save God, just as it
proves that it has no creator save God?

*Answer*: That is exactly what we say.

 

*Question*: Then why does it not prove that there is no one with power
over it save God?

*Answer*: It has no agent who makes it as it really is save God, and no
one with power over it so that it will be as it really is, in the sense
that he creates it, save God. <span id="fr_140"></span>[5](#fn_140)

 

*Question*: Is God free to inflict pain on infants in the next life?

*Answer*: God is free to do that, and in doing it He would be just.
Likewise, whenever He inflicts an infinite punishment for a finite sin,
and subordinates some living beings to others, God is gracious to some
and not to others, and creates men knowing well that they will
disbelieve--all that is justice on His part. And it would not be evil on
the part of God to create them in the painful punishment and to make it
perpetual. Nor would it be evil on His part to punish the believers and
to introduce the unbelievers into the Gardens. Our only reason for
saying that He will not do that is that

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He has informed us
that He will punish the unbelievers--and He cannot lie when He gives
information.

 

The proof that He is free to do whatever He does is that He is the
Supreme Monarch, subject to no one, with no superior over Him who can
permit, or command, or chide, or forbid, or prescribe what He shall do
and fix bounds for Him. This being so, nothing can be evil on the part
of God. For a thing is evil on our part only because we transgress the
limit and bound set for us and do what we have no right to do. But since
the Creator is subject to no one and bound by no command, nothing can be
evil on His part.

 

*Objection*: Then lying is evil only because God has declared it to be
evil.

*Answer*: Certainly. And if He declared it to be good, it would be good;
and if He commanded it, no one could gainsay Him. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[6](#fn_141)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[193:4](isl32.htm#fr_139) <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> W. Klein, trans., *Kitāb al-Ibāna ‘an Usul
al-Diyāna* (New Haven, 1940), pp. 47-49.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[193:5](isl32.htm#fr_140) R. J. McCarthy S.J.,
trans., *Kitāb al-Luma‘* (Beirut, 1953), pp. 55, 56.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[193:6](isl32.htm#fr_141) *Ibid*., pp. 99, 100.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Al-Juwaynī](isl33)
