[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl32)  [Next](isl34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. *Al-Juwaynī*

In the first part of the fifth/A.H. eleventh/A.D. century, the Islamic
orthodoxy of the ‘Abbāsī Empire was everywhere on the defensive, as was
the empire itself. There now occurred mass migrations of Central Asiatic
Turks into Islamic territory. Fortunately for the settled Muslims, who
were unable to effectively resist this virile nomadic people, many of
the Turks had already been converted to Islam by Ṡūfīs from Eastern Han,
so that some of them were ready to defend the culture of the settled
people against their own tribesmen.

The ‘Abbāsī Caliph invited one family of Turkish chiefs, The Saljūqs, to
replace the dictatorship of the House of Buwayh, and in 1058 awarded its
head the new titles *Sulṭan* (authority) and "King of the East and
West." The Sunnīsm of the Saljūqs recommended them to the imperial
orthodoxy; they honored the Caliph and kept the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

nomads in check. Their more troublesome tribesmen they sent to the
Northwest Marches, where they made rapid conquests at the expense of the
East Christian Byzantine Empire, in what is now Turkey.

Sunnīs, and hospitable to Ṡūfī influence, the Saljūqs at first
persecuted as rationalist innovators the followers of al-Ash‘arī along
with the Mu‘tazila. Being themselves illiterate, the Saljūqs were forced
to rely heavily on their Persian ministers (*wazīrs*). The greatest of
these was the master-statesman Niẓām al-Mulk (died A.H. 485/A.D. 1092)
who as regent helped reorganize the crumbling empire politically,
militarily, socially and economically. A Shāfi‘ī, he supported the
Ash‘arīya, to enlist their aid in the ideological struggle against the
Sunnī Empire's most dangerous foes, the Ismā‘īlī Shī‘a. The *madrasas*
or religious academies he founded also gave the rulers an important
method of controlling the religious leaders.

In Nīsāpūr he endowed the Niẓāmīya madrasa for the renowned Ash‘arī
*mutakallim* Abū Ma‘ālī ‘Abd al-Mālik al-Juwaynī, best known by his
title *Imām al-Ḥaramayn* (*Imām* of the Two Holy Places), earned by four
years spent teaching with distinction in Mecca and Medina (A.D.
1058-1062) during the early wave of Saljūq persecution of the Ash‘arīya
in Iran. A very prolific writer of *kalām* and Shāfi'ī *fiqh*,
al-Juwaynī died in A.H. 478/A.D. 1085. The following selection is from a
creed of his last years, a work dedicated to his patron, the Niẓam
al-Mulk.

 

*Prophecy*: A group known as the Brahmans believe in the Creator, but
deny prophethood. We shall indicate the way in which they delude
themselves and answer them briefly and clearly.

Among the things they mention is, that if prophets brought things
contrary to reason, they would have to be discarded,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

and that if they brought what agrees with reason and satisfied it,
sending them would be an absurd thing.

We reply: They bring both what reason cannot deny and would not be
guided to (independently); provisions of the Law, the Divine promises
and threats, on which depend judgments and which reason would not
perceive, even though it concurs with all virtuous things. But reason
would not concur on all the particulars which the Laws expound.

Thus there is no obstacle in what the prophets bring to what reason
makes clear, so that they confirm the data of reason and assist it.
(Besides) when one speaks according to the propositions of reason, his
words may not be counted as nonsense, even if reason has led to what he
is saying. There are (to be sure) in some of the things God has created
satisfying proofs as to the existence of the Creator, and none of the
wonders of creation may be counted an absurd thing.

Among things the Brahmans say is this: "We find in the laws of your
prophets matters permitted and even made obligatory which reason finds
hideous, (such as) the sacrificing of animals who have done no harm, and
instructions of positions for prostration (in prayer), and running
between Safā and Marwa, the fast pace and the pointless throwing of
stones."

We shall mention briefly what will cut off this whole argument. We say
to the Brahmans: You assert that you have knowledge of the Creator, who
acts as He chooses, and then you reject prophethood according to what
reason approves and disapproves. All that you call hideous is what He
has commanded, and we shall show you the like about the other things God
does. As for the sacrifice of animals, God lets them die, occasioning
their death, and permits whatever (natural) pains He will. What He does
Himself (in nature) is not considered hideous, and it may not be
considered hideous when He commands it. As to their disapproving the
aspect of a man in the ritual prayers, we say: (Even) if God were to
create a man in the attitude of prostration and never enable him to find
a rag with which to cover himself, and leave him with his pudenda
exposed, God's action could (still) not be disapproved.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

Whoever has come this far with us can refute such things as we have
mentioned among all the objections they raise, for they have based their
whole position on criticizing the acts of God, and as we have said
before, one can only criticize the acts of those who are harmed or
benefitted thereby--and God is exalted far above that.

So, since we have stated our position and dealt with it in satisfactory
terms, if anyone raises objections (to prophethood) which depend on a
position similar to theirs, we shall pay no attention to him.

Further, we say that prophethood means that God causes one of His
servants to know His order to communicate His message to His servants.
This is not a matter which reason finds absurd, so it may be reaffirmed
that prophethood is not an absurdity.

We shall now discuss the certification of prophethood and its
occurrence, and prophetic wonders and the conditions for them, and then
how wonders indicate the truthfulness of the messengers of God, and how
a wonder is to be established, and how we may certify the prophethood of
our master and lord Muhammad--the benediction of God and peace be upon
him <span id="fr_142"></span>[7](#fn_142)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[196:7](isl33.htm#fr_142) *al-‘Aqīda
al-Nizāmīya* (Cairo, 1948), pp. 47, 48. Also in German translation by H.
Klopfer as *Das Dogma des Imam al-Haramain al-Djūwainī* (Cairo, 1958).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Al-Ghazālī](isl34)
