[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl39)  [Next](isl41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. *The Seveners*

A most interesting and historically important sect of Islam has been the
division of the Shī‘a known as the Seveners. Although they have been
divided by many schisms, and given rise to at least one separate
religion, they all trace their spiritual parentage of Ismā‘īl, eldest
son of the sixth *Imām* of the Twelvers, Ja‘far al-Sāḍiq. Ismā‘īl is
said by some Twelvers to have died before his father, by others to have
been disowned for a fault ranging from drinking wine to participating in
religious activist and revolutionary activities. The Twelvers make his
younger brother their seventh *Imām*; the Seveners followed the
descendants of Ismā‘īl and are often called Ismā‘īls.

The explication of their doctrine was profoundly in accord with old
Hellenistic-Oriental gnostic ideas which still flourished in many
isolated parts of the Islamic Empire. It was skillfully and secretly
taught as an esoteric system by *dā‘īs*, or missionaries, while the
whereabouts of the *Imāms* was carefully concealed. In some areas, such
as the Syrian mountains, Kurdistan and Central Asia, the doctrine was
grafted on to earlier gnostic communities.

In the late third century, the Ismā‘īls led a series of religious
political revolts patterned on that of the ‘Abbāsīs, which culminated in
the establishment of an Ismā‘īlī Caliphate "of the Children of Fāṭima"
under their own *Imām* in Tunisia in 909. In 969 these Fāṭimī Caliphs
took Egypt and built Cairo as their capital, while trying to expand
eastward at ‘Abbāsī expense. A curious episode

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

of the Cairene period is that of the Caliph al-Ḥākim, who proclaimed his
own divinity and in 1021 disappeared during a palace coup. The Druzes of
the Lebanese Mountains accepted his claim, severed their connection with
Muslims and hold that he was God Incarnate, now in ghayba. With the
death of al-Ḥākim's grandson, al-Mustanṡir (A.H. 487/A.D. 1094), the
Ismā‘īlīs divided. The younger son, al-Musta‘lī, became Caliph, and the
elder son, al-Nizār, was imprisoned. The followers of the sect in
‘Abbāsī territory refused to accept this, and took Nizār's son to one of
their mountain fortresses, Alamūt. The Nizārīs, as they became known,
were accused of immoderate use of Indian hemp (marijuana) or *hashīsh*,
hence the name *hashshāshīn*. Their well-known practice of the carefully
planned murder of enemies of the sect was justifiable by their doctrine
that opponents of the *Imām* were manifestations of the material world
of non-being, and had no "real" existence. (This has given us the word
"assassinate.")

The Mongols destroyed the Nizārī strongholds, and for many years the
sect was in another period of *taqīya* or concealment. At times they
have concealed themselves in the guise of Ṡūfī orders; Seveners have
always had a close affinity with some Ṡūfīs, and influenced the teachers
of Ibn al-Arabī. In 1817 the Qajar Shah of Persia gave their *Imām* the
title "Aghā Khān." Nizārī *dā‘īs* had had considerable success in
converting Hindus to their doctrines, and the *Imām* moved to India in
the nineteenth century.

The visible line of Musta‘lī *Imāms* ended in A.H. 524/ A.D. 1130, when
Musta‘lī's son al-Āmir died. He is said by the sect to have left a son,
the infant al-Ṭayyib, who went into occultation; the Musta‘lī Imāmate is
therefore

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

invisible. The Fāṭimī Caliphs who succeeded, not being in the direct
line of succession, were not Imāms. Even this limited Caliphate was
brought to an end by Ṡalāḥ al-Dīn al-Ayyūbī in 1171; the leadership of
the sect passed to the *dā‘īs* in Yemen, who converted numbers of Hindus
in Gujerat in West India, the so-called Bohras. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[8](#fn_161) The Musta‘līs have split several times.

A good deal of Sevener literature has been published: it appears to be
self-contradictory and confusing. This is because all explication of
their doctrine was conducted on the sound principle that Truth, while
absolute, is necessarily apprehended in a relative way by each
individual--that one man's deepest spiritual verity may be another's
scandal. Thus there might be many approaches in their propaganda,
depending on who was involved, and where, and when. What really
mattered, after all, was that one be devoted to the sinless *Imām*, and
ready to serve him. There were degrees of knowledge within the sect
according to the amount of truth the individual was judged able to bear,
though this aspect was much over-emphasized by their opponents.

To be sure, the doctrine changed in the forms in which it was presented,
and varied from one time or area to another. In India, it might be
convenient to explain the avatars of the gods as former prophets, or
vice versa. But in all its known forms, the Ismā‘īlī doctrine comes from
the world of late Hellenistic thought--the metaphysics of Neoplatonism
and the physics of Ptolemaeus. God is seen as pure Unity, the One,
without attributes, incomprehensible to human thought. He is only to be
approached by His emanations. He manifests Himself through prime or
spiritual matter; here the Universal Intellect, or *Nous*, is emanated.
To it is imparted the Divine knowledge. It

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

then passes this knowledge on to the Universal Soul, or *Pneuma*. At the
bottom of the scale of emanations is the physical, material world, but
even it bears the stamp of the Divine. The emanation of the Universal
Intellect in the world of nature is the *Nāṭiqs*, or greatest prophets,
in cycles of seven. The current cycle runs from Adam to Muhammad, the
sixth. The emanation of the Universal Spirit is the *Waṡī*, who
accompanies each *Nāṭiq*. He is the *Imām*, and may be incarnated in
many bodies.

As a religious synthesis of all the science and philosophy available to
medieval Islam, Ismā‘īlism had an immense intellectual appeal; it was a
"scientific" religion. The mystical number seven and the science of the
celestial spheres also figure in Ismā‘īlī literature.

The following selection is attributed (perhaps wrongly) to Ibn Ḥawshab
al-Kūfī, a famous *dā‘ī* active in the Yemen in A.D. 266/A.H. 880. In
any case, it is a very early [Ismā‘īlī](errata.htm#3) treatise, and
shows admirably the system of esoteric interpretation of the Qur’ān
(*ta’wīl al-bāṭin*) for which the Seveners were famous. The outcome of
its Messianic promise was the Fāṭimī Caliphate.

 

. . . The first words of the Qur’ān are: "In the name of God, the
Merciful, the Compassionate." "In the name of God" is written with seven
\[Arabic\] letters, from which twelve others can be derived, and then
the twelve letters of "The Merciful, the Compassionate" follow. This
sūra is "The Sūra of Praise" (ḥamd), and is seven verses. The seven
letters of "In the name of God" refer to the seven Nāṭīqs \[spokesmen:
for the Universal Reason; used of the greatest prophets.--ED.\] and the
twelve derived letters indicate the fact that every Nāṭīq has twelve
intendants (*naqībs*).

Then from the twelve of "The Compassionate, the Merciful" are derived
nineteen letters, referring to the fact that

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

from each *Nāṭiq* is derived seven Imāms and twelve *ḥujjats*, making
nineteen altogether.

The seven verses of the *sūra* symbolize the seven degrees of religion.
The Sūra of Praise opens the Book of God, and similarly the degrees of
religion open the door of knowledge in God's religion. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[9](#fn_162)

 

. . . The letter "yā’" (in *Mahdī*) has the numerical value of ten, and
the seventh *Nāṭiq* will be the tenth after Muhammad and ‘Alī and the
seven Imāms of their line. He is the tenth, and he is the seventh
*Nāṭiq*, and he is the Eighth after the seven Imāms. . . .

God says, glory be to Him: "We have cleft the earth in fissures" (80:26)
(And the earth is the *Waṡī*: ‘Alī). And then: "And caused to grow
therein grain and the grape, and reeds, and olives, and palms, and
dense-tree’d gardens, and fruits, and pasture; and enjoyment for you and
your flocks." The meaning of "pasture" (*i.e.*, *āb*: *i.e.*, "father")
is ‘Alī, and (referred to here) are his descendants the seven Imāms and
the Eighth, who is the *Mahdī*, the Seventh *Nāṭiq*. <span
id="fr_163"></span>[10](#fn_163)

 

The *ḥujjat* (literally: "proof"; a high-ranking Ismā‘īlī *dā‘ī*,
somewhat on a par with archbishop) who organized the Nizārīs of Alamūt
(and of chapter strongholds as far west as Syria, where they came in
contact with the Crusaders) was Ḥasan ibn al-Ṡabbāḥ. He probably
composed the treatise from which this is taken. It was intended to
appeal to non-believers, and its metaphysics would have had an obvious
appeal for Christians; the *Imāms* are the Logos, the universe is
divinized and God wears a human face.

 

The Great and Exalted has a manifestation in His own form for all
eternity in this world. . . . He has made a man noble with that form,
and all the prophets and friends of God

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

have indicated a man who would be the Great and Exalted among people in
the form of a man.

. . . Those who speak the truth call (him) Mawlānā, Our Lord, and they
consider this the greatest name of God . . . and further Mawlānā has
been called Imām. . . . The Shī‘a call Mawlānā *Qā’im of the Qiyama*;
some hold to the name Mālik al-Salām (King of Salem: Melchisedek), some
say Muhammad the Mahdī, and some say Muhammad ibn Ḥasan al-‘Askarī . . .
some are sure it is (‘Alī's son) Muhammad ibn al-Ḥanafīya. . . .

Who is this person, where does he live, and what is his name? . . . It
is known at large and among the elite that the Prophet indicated Mawlānā
‘Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib . . . as Qā’im of the Qiyāma. . . .

Above all the Imāms is Mawlānā ‘Alī . . . who has no end nor beginning.
But relatively to the people he appears now as a son, now as a grandson,
now aged . . . now young, now a king, now a beggar . . . he appears in
the form of the Imām of the time, today and tomorrow.

Haḍrat Bābā Sayyidna Ḥasan-i Ṡabbāḥ . . . was the greatest *ḥujjat* of
the Qā’im of the Qiyāma. . . .

This world from the core of the earth to the zenith of the heaven of
heavens is one body (*shakhs*). . . . And the same power which appears
in the sun and moon and stars . . . is in a black stone and darkness.
But it is necessary to see. And one must treat all opposites
analogously. . . .

The divine light first shines from the heavens . . . and (also) rises
from the core of the earth. The (Ptolemaic) heavens are called "fathers"
and the four humours (hot, cold, dry, and moist) are called "mothers";
minerals, plants, and animals are called "offspring." They (are) nine
fathers . . . then the power of divine light causes whatever is subtly
alive in fathers and mothers and offspring to become gathered into the
body of a man, and in this special form to arrive at Godhood. . . .

In the realm of *sharī‘a* its people imagine God conjecturally . . . but
one must know that in this form of man, the Lord has manifested Himself
. . . the Lord has made man

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

great and ennobled; regarded relatively He has brought Himself into this
special form. . . . <span id="fr_164"></span>[11](#fn_164)

 

This selection, while from a rather late work, displays clearly several
characteristic Ismā‘īlī arguments of the past; the central doctrines of
Islam are made part of an elaborate theosophical allegory; the Law
becomes a mere exterior form for the uninstructed, who do not have the
gnosis imparted by the ḥujjat. It is taken from *Kalām-i Pīr*, one of
the holiest manuals of the Central Asian Nizārīs, attributed wrongly to
Nāṡir-i Khusraw (died c. A.H. 480/A.D. 1087), a great Persian *dā‘ī* and
poet. It comes from a time when the *imām* was in concealment, and the
*ḥujjat* took his place. The Nizārīs of today, it should be remarked, do
not take the duties of Islam lightly, and are a very progressive
community. Such treatises as these are a part of the historic Nizārī
past.

 

. . . In the nature of man are diabolical as well as angelic and human
elements . . . it is necessary for a prophet to explain the devil-like
and brutal in concrete similes . . . thus he tells (men) that the place
for sinners is Hell . . . full of fire with snakes, scorpions and
poisonous plants. And he explains the meaning of the angelic qualities
in man in concrete forms, telling them that the place for the good is
Paradise, a garden full of good food and drink, pretty girls and boys. A
prophet must always explain his teaching in such primitive similes,
devised . . . for the understanding of all grades of intelligence.
Primitive people do not understand . . . anything beyond this, but
intelligent people will at once grasp the purport of the simile.

. . . But the conditions of mankind are always changing, under the
influence of the stars and peculiarities of different periods, and thus
the Law must change. . . . Thus the (book of a prophet) must be
allegorical and its teachings expressed

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

in similes. . . . Primitive people . . . understand (nothing) beyond the
outward meaning, the *ẓāhir*; they should follow the outward side of the
Prophet's instructions, similar to straw or bark. Those capable of
understanding the inner meaning, the *bāṭin* . . . can perceive the
meaning of the commandments . . . the *ẓāhir* must be continually
changing, while the . . . bat in is concerned with the world of reality
. . . or divinity, and is unchangeable. . . . <span
id="fr_165"></span>[12](#fn_165)

The meaning of the fast is *taqīya* or dissimulation . . . the Feast of
Fast-breaking is the Day . . . of the Great *Qiyāma* \[the triumph of
the religion\].

The meaning of the *zakāt* or religious tax is teaching the religion and
making it to reach the faithful . . . (according to) their capacity to
understand it . . . the distributor is the *Ḥujjat*, who conveys as much
as one can stand. . . .

Running in the pilgrimage means hastening toward the *Imām*.

Prostration . . . means this: if a believer who is fully initiated
(*ma’dhūn*) or a *dā‘ī*, commits a mistake, he must return to the higher
knowledge which is with the *Ḥujjat*. . . . <span
id="fr_166"></span>[13](#fn_166)

 

The treatise on the "Recognition of the Imām" was probably written for
the Nizārīs of Badakhshān in the early part of the sixteenth century. It
was written for the instruction of a small and isolated community at a
time when the *Imām* was concealed, and the only connection was the
*ḥujjat*, to whom much importance is given here; a time which must have
seemed on the whole a gloomy one. The language has changed somewhat; the
*Imām* is now the manifestation of the Creative Act, the Word. The
expectation of the promised deliverer is as strong as ever.

 

This is on the recognition of the *Imām*, who is the *maẓhar*
(manifestation) of the Divine Creative Act; and on his *Ḥujjat*, who is
the (manifestation) of the Universal Reason; on the Dā‘ī; on the senior
initiate (*ma’dhūn*) and the junior

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

initiate (*ma’dhūn-i asghar*) and the neophyte or *mustajīb*, who are
altogether the (manifestation) of the Universal Soul; and on (how to
recognize) the "opponents" of the religion) who are the (manifestation)
of the Universal Body.

I begin with the recognition of the Imām . . . he may be known
(directly) in his own person, and at another time through his *Ḥujjat*.
It is possible to recognize him directly only on the day of the "Sabbath
of Faith" . . . each "day of faith" is one thousand years . . . on the
(seventh) the Sun of Faith, the Imām, becomes manifested.

\[Each thousand year period belongs to a Nāṭiq; the thousand years after
the Hijra, toward the end of which this was written, was therefore the
"Day of Muhammad."--ED.\] . . . in the other six days . . . called the
"Night of Faith," the Law (*sharī‘a*) is a veil for the *Imām* . . . but
as there is the moon to take the place of the sun (at night) so the
*Ḥujjat* takes the place of the Imām when he is not manifest. . . .

(While) in the 6000 years of the "night of faith" the *Imām* becomes
manifest occasionally . . . these manifestations are not in his full
glory. . . . But it would be absurd to think he would leave the "Chosen"
without the possibility of recognizing him; for the purpose of their
acquiring this knowledge the world was created. . . . Therefore the moon
must exist in this night of faith. . . . <span
id="fr_167"></span>[14](#fn_167)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[239:8](isl40.htm#fr_161) Much interesting
information is to be found in J. N. Hollister, *The Shī‘a of India*
(London, 1953).

<span id="fn_162"></span>[239:9](isl40.htm#fr_162) Translated from
edition of Arabic text by Kamil Hussein in *Collectanea of the Isma‘ili
Society* (Leiden, 1948), Vol. I, p. 189. A translation of a defective
text was made earlier, by W. Iwanow, in *Studies in Early Persian
Isma‘ilism* and published by the *Isma‘ili* Society (Bombay, 1948).

<span id="fn_163"></span>[239:10](isl40.htm#fr_163) *Ibid*., p. 199.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[239:11](isl40.htm#fr_164) Marshall G. Hodgson,
trans., *The Order of Assassins* (The Hague, 1955), pp. 284-313.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[239:12](isl40.htm#fr_165) W. Iwanow, ed. and
trans., *Kalām-i Pīr* (Bombay, 1935), p. 49.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[239:13](isl40.htm#fr_166) *Ibid*., pp. 92, 93.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[239:14](isl40.htm#fr_167) W. Iwanow, trans.
*On the Recognition of the Imām* (Bombay, 1947), pp. 17-20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: References and Notes](isl41)
