[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lb00)  [Next](lb02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# AUTHOR'S PREFACE

Historical Section Shawmut College, Boston, December 26, 2000

Living as we do in the closing year of the twentieth century, enjoying
the blessings of a social order at once so simple and logical that it
seems but the triumph of common sense, it is no doubt difficult for
those whose studies have not been largely historical to realize that the
present organization of society is, in its completeness, less than a
century old. No historical fact is, however, better established than
that till nearly the end of the nineteenth century it was the general
belief that the ancient industrial system, with all its shocking social
consequences, was destined to last, with possibly a little patching, to
the end of time. How strange and wellnigh incredible does it seem that
so prodigious a moral and material transformation as has taken place
since then could have been accomplished in so brief an interval! The
readiness with which men accustom themselves, as matters of course, to
improvements in their condition, which, when anticipated, seemed to
leave nothing more to be desired, could not be more strikingly
illustrated. What reflection could be better calculated to moderate the
enthusiasm of reformers who count for their reward on the lively
gratitude of future ages!

The object of this volume is to assist persons who, while desiring to
gain a more definite idea of the social contrasts between the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, are daunted by the formal aspect of the
histories which treat the subject. Warned by a teacher's experience that
learning is accounted a weariness to the flesh, the author has sought to
alleviate the instructive quality of the book by casting it in the form
of a romantic narrative, which he would be glad to fancy not wholly
devoid of interest on its own account.

The reader, to whom modern social institutions and their underlying
principles are matters of course, may at times find Dr. Leete's
explanations of them rather trite--but it must be remembered that to Dr.
Leete's guest they were not matters of course, and that this book is
written for the express purpose of inducing the reader to forget for the
nonce that they are so to him. One word more. The almost universal theme
of the writers and orators who have celebrated this bimillennial epoch
has been the future rather than the past, not the advance that has been
made, but the progress that shall be made, ever onward and upward, till
the race shall achieve its ineffable destiny. This is well, wholly well,
but it seems to me that nowhere can we find more solid ground for daring
anticipations of human development during the next one thousand years,
than by "Looking Backward" upon the progress of the last one hundred.

That this volume may be so fortunate as to find readers whose interest
in the subject shall incline them to overlook the deficiencies of the
treatment is the hope in which the author steps aside and leaves Mr.
Julian West to speak for himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](lb02.md)
