[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lb08)  [Next](lb10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 8

When I awoke I felt greatly refreshed, and lay a considerable time in a
dozing state, enjoying the sensation of bodily comfort. The experiences
of the day previous, my waking to find myself in the year 2000, the
sight of the new Boston, my host and his family, and the wonderful
things I had heard, were a blank in my memory. I thought I was in my
bed-chamber at home, and the half-dreaming, half-waking fancies which
passed before my mind related to the incidents and experiences of my
former life. Dreamily I reviewed the incidents of Decoration Day, my
trip in company with Edith and her parents to Mount Auburn, and my
dining with them on our return to the city. I recalled how extremely
well Edith had looked, and from that fell to thinking of our marriage;
but scarcely had my imagination begun to develop this delightful theme
than my waking dream was cut short by the recollection of the letter I
had received the night before from the builder announcing that the new
strikes might postpone indefinitely the completion of the new house. The
chagrin which this recollection brought with it effectually roused me. I
remembered that I had an appointment with the builder at eleven o'clock,
to discuss the strike, and opening my eyes, looked up at the clock at
the foot of my bed to see what time it was. But no clock met my glance,
and what was more, I instantly perceived that I was not in my room.
Starting up on my couch, I stared wildly round the strange apartment.

I think it must have been many seconds that I sat up thus in bed staring
about, without being able to regain the clew to my personal identity. I
was no more able to distinguish myself from pure being during those
moments than we may suppose a soul in the rough to be before it has
received the ear-marks, the individualizing touches which make it a
person. Strange that the sense of this inability should be such anguish!
but so we are constituted. There are no words for the mental torture I
endured during this helpless, eyeless groping for myself in a boundless
void. No other experience of the mind gives probably anything like the
sense of absolute intellectual arrest from the loss of a mental fulcrum,
a starting point of thought, which comes during such a momentary
obscuration of the sense of one's identity. I trust I may never know
what it is again.

I do not know how long this condition had lasted--it seemed an
interminable time--when, like a flash, the recollection of everything
came back to me. I remembered who and where I was, and how I had come
here, and that these scenes as of the life of yesterday which had been
passing before my mind concerned a generation long, long ago mouldered
to dust. Leaping from bed, I stood in the middle of the room clasping my
temples with all my might between my hands to keep them from bursting.
Then I fell prone on the couch, and, burying my face in the pillow, lay
without motion. The reaction which was inevitable, from the mental
elation, the fever of the intellect that had been the first effect of my
tremendous experience, had arrived. The emotional crisis which had
awaited the full realization of my actual position, and all that it
implied, was upon me, and with set teeth and laboring chest, gripping
the bedstead with frenzied strength, I lay there and fought for my
sanity. In my mind, all had broken loose, habits of feeling,
associations of thought, ideas of persons and things, all had dissolved
and lost coherence and were seething together in apparently
irretrievable chaos. There were no rallying points, nothing was left
stable. There only remained the will, and was any human will strong
enough to say to such a weltering sea, "Peace, be still"? I dared not
think. Every effort to reason upon what had befallen me, and realize
what it implied, set up an intolerable swimming of the brain. The idea
that I was two persons, that my identity was double, began to fascinate
me with its simple solution of my experience.

I knew that I was on the verge of losing my mental balance. If I lay
there thinking, I was doomed. Diversion of some sort I must have, at
least the diversion of physical exertion. I sprang up, and, hastily
dressing, opened the door of my room and went down-stairs. The hour was
very early, it being not yet fairly light, and I found no one in the
lower part of the house. There was a hat in the hall, and, opening the
front door, which was fastened with a slightness indicating that
burglary was not among the perils of the modern Boston, I found myself
on the street. For two hours I walked or ran through the streets of the
city, visiting most quarters of the peninsular part of the town. None
but an antiquarian who knows something of the contrast which the Boston
of today offers to the Boston of the nineteenth century can begin to
appreciate what a series of bewildering surprises I underwent during
that time. Viewed from the house-top the day before, the city had indeed
appeared strange to me, but that was only in its general aspect. How
complete the change had been I first realized now that I walked the
streets. The few old landmarks which still remained only intensified
this effect, for without them I might have imagined myself in a foreign
town. A man may leave his native city in childhood, and return fifty
years later, perhaps, to find it transformed in many features. He is
astonished, but he is not bewildered. He is aware of a great lapse of
time, and of changes likewise occurring in himself meanwhile. He but
dimly recalls the city as he knew it when a child. But remember that
there was no sense of any lapse of time with me. So far as my
consciousness was concerned, it was but yesterday, but a few hours,
since I had walked these streets in which scarcely a feature had escaped
a complete metamorphosis. The mental image of the old city was so fresh
and strong that it did not yield to the impression of the actual city,
but contended with it, so that it was first one and then the other which
seemed the more unreal. There was nothing I saw which was not blurred in
this way, like the faces of a composite photograph.

Finally, I stood again at the door of the house from which I had come
out. My feet must have instinctively brought me back to the site of my
old home, for I had no clear idea of returning thither. It was no more
homelike to me than any other spot in this city of a strange generation,
nor were its inmates less utterly and necessarily strangers than all the
other men and women now on the earth. Had the door of the house been
locked, I should have been reminded by its resistance that I had no
object in entering, and turned away, but it yielded to my hand, and
advancing with uncertain steps through the hall, I entered one of the
apartments opening from it. Throwing myself into a chair, I covered my
burning eyeballs with my hands to shut out the horror of strangeness. My
mental confusion was so intense as to produce actual nausea. The anguish
of those moments, during which my brain seemed melting, or the
abjectness of my sense of helplessness, how can I describe? In my
despair I groaned aloud. I began to feel that unless some help should
come I was about to lose my mind. And just then it did come. I heard the
rustle of drapery, and looked up. Edith Leete was standing before me.
Her beautiful face was full of the most poignant sympathy.

"Oh, what is the matter, Mr. West?" she said. "I was here when you came
in. I saw how dreadfully distressed you looked, and when I heard you
groan, I could not keep silent. What has happened to you? Where have you
been? Can't I do something for you?"

Perhaps she involuntarily held out her hands in a gesture of compassion
as she spoke. At any rate I had caught them in my own and was clinging
to them with an impulse as instinctive as that which prompts the
drowning man to seize upon and cling to the rope which is thrown him as
he sinks for the last time. As I looked up into her compassionate face
and her eyes moist with pity, my brain ceased to whirl. The tender human
sympathy which thrilled in the soft pressure of her fingers had brought
me the support I needed. Its effect to calm and soothe was like that of
some wonder-working elixir.

"God bless you," I said, after a few moments. "He must have sent you to
me just now. I think I was in danger of going crazy if you had not
come." At this the tears came into her eyes.

"Oh, Mr. West!" she cried. "How heartless you must have thought us! How
could we leave you to yourself so long! But it is over now, is it not?
You are better, surely."

"Yes," I said, "thanks to you. If you will not go away quite yet, I
shall be myself soon."

"Indeed I will not go away," she said, with a little quiver of her face,
more expressive of her sympathy than a volume of words. "You must not
think us so heartless as we seemed in leaving you so by yourself. I
scarcely slept last night, for thinking how strange your waking would be
this morning; but father said you would sleep till late. He said that it
would be better not to show too much sympathy with you at first, but to
try to divert your thoughts and make you feel that you were among
friends."

"You have indeed made me feel that," I answered. "But you see it is a
good deal of a jolt to drop a hundred years, and although I did not seem
to feel it so much last night, I have had very odd sensations this
morning." While I held her hands and kept my eyes on her face, I could
already even jest a little at my plight. "No one thought of such a thing
as your going out in the city alone so early in the morning," she went
on. "Oh, Mr. West, where have you been?"

Then I told her of my morning's experience, from my first waking till
the moment I had looked up to see her before me, just as I have told it
here. She was overcome by distressful pity during the recital, and,
though I had released one of her hands, did not try to take from me the
other, seeing, no doubt, how much good it did me to hold it. "I can
think a little what this feeling must have been like," she said. "It
must have been terrible. And to think you were left alone to struggle
with it! Can you ever forgive us?"

"But it is gone now. You have driven it quite away for the present," I
said.

"You will not let it return again," she queried anxiously.

"I can't quite say that," I replied. "It might be too early to say that,
considering how strange everything will still be to me."

"But you will not try to contend with it alone again, at least," she
persisted. "Promise that you will come to us, and let us sympathize with
you, and try to help you. Perhaps we can't do much, but it will surely
be better than to try to bear such feelings alone."

"I will come to you if you will let me," I said.

"Oh yes, yes, I beg you will," she said eagerly. "I would do anything to
help you that I could."

"All you need do is to be sorry for me, as you seem to be now," I
replied.

"It is understood, then," she said, smiling with wet eyes, "that you are
to come and tell me next time, and not run all over Boston among
strangers."

This assumption that we were not strangers seemed scarcely strange, so
near within these few minutes had my trouble and her sympathetic tears
brought us.

"I will promise, when you come to me," she added, with an expression of
charming archness, passing, as she continued, into one of enthusiasm,
"to seem as sorry for you as you wish, but you must not for a moment
suppose that I am really sorry for you at all, or that I think you will
long be sorry for yourself. I know, as well as I know that the world now
is heaven compared with what it was in your day, that the only feeling
you will have after a little while will be one of thankfulness to God
that your life in that age was so strangely cut off, to be returned to
you in this."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](lb10.md)
