[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lb13)  [Next](lb15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 13

As Edith had promised he should do, Dr. Leete accompanied me to my
bedroom when I retired, to instruct me as to the adjustment of the
musical telephone. He showed how, by turning a screw, the volume of the
music could be made to fill the room, or die away to an echo so faint
and far that one could scarcely be sure whether he heard or imagined it.
If, of two persons side by side, one desired to listen to music and the
other to sleep, it could be made audible to one and inaudible to
another.

"I should strongly advise you to sleep if you can to-night, Mr. West, in
preference to listening to the finest tunes in the world," the doctor
said, after explaining these points. "In the trying experience you are
just now passing through, sleep is a nerve tonic for which there is no
substitute."

Mindful of what had happened to me that very morning, I promised to heed
his counsel.

"Very well," he said, "then I will set the telephone at eight o'clock."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

He explained that, by a clock-work combination, a person could arrange
to be awakened at any hour by the music.

It began to appear, as has since fully proved to be the case, that I had
left my tendency to insomnia behind me with the other discomforts of
existence in the nineteenth century; for though I took no sleeping
draught this time, yet, as the night before, I had no sooner touched the
pillow than I was asleep.

I dreamed that I sat on the throne of the Abencerrages in the banqueting
hall of the Alhambra, feasting my lords and generals, who next day were
to follow the crescent against the Christian dogs of Spain. The air,
cooled by the spray of fountains, was heavy with the scent of flowers. A
band of Nautch girls, round-limbed and luscious-lipped, danced with
voluptuous grace to the music of brazen and stringed instruments.
Looking up to the latticed galleries, one caught a gleam now and then
from the eye of some beauty of the royal harem, looking down upon the
assembled flower of Moorish chivalry. Louder and louder clashed the
cymbals, wilder and wilder grew the strain, till the blood of the desert
race could no longer resist the martial delirium, and the swart nobles
leaped to their feet; a thousand scimetars were bared, and the cry,
"Allah il Allah!" shook the hall and awoke me, to find it broad
daylight, and the room tingling with the electric music of the "Turkish
Reveille."

At the breakfast-table, when I told my host of my morning's experience,
I learned that it was not a mere chance that the piece of music which
awakened me was a reveille. The airs played at one of the halls during
the waking hours of the morning were always of an inspiring type.

"By the way," I said, "I have not thought to ask you anything about the
state of Europe. Have the societies of the Old World also been
remodeled?"

"Yes," replied Dr. Leete, "the great nations of Europe as well as
Australia, Mexico, and parts of South America, are now organized
industrially like the United States, which was the pioneer of the
evolution. The peaceful relations of these nations are assured by a
loose form of federal union of world-wide extent. An international
council regulates the mutual intercourse and commerce of the members of
the union and their joint policy toward the more backward races, which
are gradually being educated up to civilized institutions. Complete
autonomy within its own limits is enjoyed by every nation."

"How do you carry on commerce without money?" I said. "In trading with
other nations, you must use some sort of money, although you dispense
with it in the internal affairs of the nation."

"Oh, no; money is as superfluous in our foreign as in our internal
relations. When foreign commerce was conducted by private enterprise,
money was necessary to adjust it on account of the multifarious
complexity of the transactions; but nowadays it is a function of the
nations as units. There are thus only a dozen or so merchants in the
world, and their business being supervised by the international council,
a simple system of book accounts serves perfectly to regulate their
dealings. Customs duties of every sort are of course superfluous. A
nation simply does not import what its government does not think
requisite for the general interest. Each nation has a bureau of foreign
exchange, which manages its trading. For example, the American bureau,
estimating such and such quantities of French goods necessary to America
for a given year, sends the order to the French bureau, which in turn
sends its order to our bureau. The same is done mutually by all the
nations."

"But how are the prices of foreign goods settled, since there is no
competition?"

"The price at which one nation supplies another with goods," replied Dr.
Leete, "must be that at which it supplies its own citizens. So you see
there is no danger of misunderstanding. Of course no nation is
theoretically bound to supply another with the product of its own labor,
but it is for the interest of all to exchange some commodities. If a
nation is regularly supplying another with certain goods, notice is
required from either side of any important change in the relation."

"But what if a nation, having a monopoly of some natural product, should
refuse to supply it to the others, or to one of them?"

"Such a case has never occurred, and could not without doing the
refusing party vastly more harm than the others," replied Dr. Leete. "In
the fist place, no favoritism could be legally shown. The law requires
that each nation shall deal with the others, in all respects, on exactly
the same footing. Such a course as you suggest would cut off the nation
adopting it from the remainder of the earth for all purposes whatever.
The contingency is one that need not give us much anxiety."

"But," said I, "supposing a nation, having a natural monopoly in some
product of which it exports more than it consumes, should put the price
away up, and thus, without cutting off the supply, make a profit out of
its neighbors' necessities? Its own citizens would of course have to pay
the higher price on that commodity, but as a body would make more out of
foreigners than they would be out of pocket themselves."

"When you come to know how prices of all commodities are determined
nowadays, you will perceive how impossible it is that they could be
altered, except with reference to the amount or arduousness of the work
required respectively to produce them," was Dr. Leete's reply. "This
principle is an international as well as a national guarantee; but even
without it the sense of community of interest, international as well as
national, and the conviction of the folly of selfishness, are too deep
nowadays to render possible such a piece of sharp practice as you
apprehend. You must understand that we all look forward to an eventual
unification of the world as one nation. That, no doubt, will be the
ultimate form of society, and will realize certain economic advantages
over the present federal system of autonomous nations. Meanwhile,
however, the present system works so nearly perfectly that we are quite
content to leave to posterity the completion of the scheme. There are,
indeed, some who hold that it never will be completed, on the ground
that the federal plan is not merely a provisional solution of the
problem of human society, but the best ultimate solution."

"How do you manage," I asked, "when the books of any two nations do not
balance? Supposing we import more from France than we export to her."

"At the end of each year," replied the doctor, "the books of every
nation are examined. If France is found in our debt, probably we are in
the debt of some nation which owes France, and so on with all the
nations. The balances that remain after the accounts have been cleared
by the international council should not be large under our system.
Whatever they may be, the council requires them to be settled every few
years, and may require their settlement at any time if they are getting
too large; for it is not intended that any nation shall run largely in
debt to another, lest feelings unfavorable to amity should be
engendered. To guard further against this, the international council
inspects the commodities interchanged by the nations, to see that they
are of perfect quality."

"But what are the balances finally settled with, seeing that you have no
money?"

"In national staples; a basis of agreement as to what staples shall be
accepted, and in what proportions, for settlement of accounts, being a
preliminary to trade relations."

"Emigration is another point I want to ask you about," said I. "With
every nation organized as a close industrial partnership, monopolizing
all means of production in the country, the emigrant, even if he were
permitted to land, would starve. I suppose there is no emigration
nowadays."

"On the contrary, there is constant emigration, by which I suppose you
mean removal to foreign countries for permanent residence," replied Dr.
Leete. "It is arranged on a simple international arrangement of
indemnities. For example, if a man at twenty-one emigrates from England
to America, England loses all the expense of his maintenance and
education, and America gets a workman for nothing. America accordingly
makes England an allowance. The same principle, varied to suit the case,
applies generally. If the man is near the term of his labor when he
emigrates, the country receiving him has the allowance. As to imbecile
persons, it is deemed best that each nation should be responsible for
its own, and the emigration of such must be under full guarantees of
support by his own nation. Subject to these regulations, the right of
any man to emigrate at any time is unrestricted."

"But how about mere pleasure trips; tours of observation? How can a
stranger travel in a country whose people do not receive money, and are
themselves supplied with the means of life on a basis not extended to
him? His own credit card cannot, of course, be good in other lands. How
does he pay his way?"

"An American credit card," replied Dr. Leete, "is just as good in Europe
as American gold used to be, and on precisely the same condition,
namely, that it be exchanged into the currency of the country you are
traveling in. An American in Berlin takes his credit card to the local
office of the international council, and receives in exchange for the
whole or part of it a German credit card, the amount being charged
against the United States in favor of Germany on the international
account."

"Perhaps Mr. West would like to dine at the Elephant to-day," said
Edith, as we left the table.

"That is the name we give to the general dining-house in our ward,"
explained her father. "Not only is our cooking done at the public
kitchens, as I told you last night, but the service and quality of the
meals are much more satisfactory if taken at the dining-house. The two
minor meals of the day are usually taken at home, as not worth the
trouble of going out; but it is general to go out to dine. We have not
done so since you have been with us, from a notion that it would be
better to wait till you had become a little more familiar with our ways.
What do you think? Shall we take dinner at the dining-house to-day?"

I said that I should be very much pleased to do so.

Not long after, Edith came to me, smiling, and said:

"Last night, as I was thinking what I could do to make you feel at home
until you came to be a little more used to us and our ways, an idea
occurred to me. What would you say if I were to introduce you to some
very nice people of your own times, whom I am sure you used to be well
acquainted with?"

I replied, rather vaguely, that it would certainly be very agreeable,
but I did not see how she was going to manage it.

"Come with me," was her smiling reply, "and see if I am not as good as
my word."

My susceptibility to surprise had been pretty well exhausted by the
numerous shocks it had received, but it was with some wonderment that I
followed her into a room which I had not before entered. It was a small,
cosy apartment, walled with cases filled with books.

"Here are your friends," said Edith, indicating one of the cases, and as
my eye glanced over the names on the backs of the volumes, Shakespeare,
Milton, Wordsworth, Shelley, Tennyson, Defoe, Dickens, Thackeray, Hugo,
Hawthorne, Irving, and a score of other great writers of my time and all
time, I understood her meaning. She had indeed made good her promise in
a sense compared with which its literal fulfillment would have been a
disappointment. She had introduced me to a circle of friends whom the
century that had elapsed since last I communed with them had aged as
little as it had myself. Their spirit was as high, their wit as keen,
their laughter and their tears as contagious, as when their speech had
whiled away the hours of a former century. Lonely I was not and could
not be more, with this goodly companionship, however wide the gulf of
years that gaped between me and my old life.

"You are glad I brought you here," exclaimed Edith, radiant, as she read
in my face the success of her experiment. "It was a good idea, was it
not, Mr. West? How stupid in me not to think of it before! I will leave
you now with your old friends, for I know there will be no company for
you like them just now; but remember you must not let old friends make
you quite forget new ones!" and with that smiling caution she left me.

Attracted by the most familiar of the names before me, I laid my hand on
a volume of Dickens, and sat down to read. He had been my prime favorite
among the bookwriters of the century,--I mean the nineteenth
century,--and a week had rarely passed in my old life during which I had
not taken up some volume of his works to while away an idle hour. Any
volume with which I had been familiar would have produced an
extraordinary impression, read under my present circumstances, but my
exceptional familiarity with Dickens, and his consequent power to call
up the associations of my former life, gave to his writings an effect no
others could have had, to intensify, by force of contrast, my
appreciation of the strangeness of my present environment. However new
and astonishing one's surroundings, the tendency is to become a part of
them so soon that almost from the first the power to see them
objectively and fully measure their strangeness, is lost. That power,
already dulled in my case, the pages of Dickens restored by carrying me
back through their associations to the standpoint of my former life.

With a clearness which I had not been able before to attain, I saw now
the past and present, like contrasting pictures, side by side.

The genius of the great novelist of the nineteenth century, like that of
Homer, might indeed defy time; but the setting of his pathetic tales,
the misery of the poor, the wrongs of power, the pitiless cruelty of the
system of society, had passed away as utterly as Circe and the sirens,
Charybdis and Cyclops.

During the hour or two that I sat there with Dickens open before me, I
did not actually read more than a couple of pages. Every paragraph,
every phrase, brought up some new aspect of the world-transformation
which had taken place, and led my thoughts on long and widely ramifying
excursions. As meditating thus in Dr. Leete's library I gradually
attained a more clear and coherent idea of the prodigious spectacle
which I had been so strangely enabled to view, I was filled with a
deepening wonder at the seeming capriciousness of the fate that had
given to one who so little deserved it, or seemed in any way set apart
for it, the power alone among his contemporaries to stand upon the earth
in this latter day. I had neither foreseen the new world nor toiled for
it, as many about me had done regardless of the scorn of fools or the
misconstruction of the good. Surely it would have been more in
accordance with the fitness of things had one of those prophetic and
strenuous souls been enabled to see the travail of his soul and be
satisfied; he, for example, a thousand times rather than I, who, having
beheld in a vision the world I looked on, sang of it in words that again
and again, during these last wondrous days, had rung in my mind:

For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see, Saw the vision
of the world, and all the wonder that would be Till the war-drum
throbbed no longer, and the battle-flags were furled. In the Parliament
of man, the federation of the world.

Then the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe, And the
kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law.

For I doubt not through the ages one increasing purpose runs, And the
thoughts of men are widened with the process of the suns.

What though, in his old age, he momentarily lost faith in his own
prediction, as prophets in their hours of depression and doubt generally
do; the words had remained eternal testimony to the seership of a poet's
heart, the insight that is given to faith.

I was still in the library when some hours later Dr. Leete sought me
there. "Edith told me of her idea," he said, "and I thought it an
excellent one. I had a little curiosity what writer you would first turn
to. Ah, Dickens! You admired him, then! That is where we moderns agree
with you. Judged by our standards, he overtops all the writers of his
age, not because his literary genius was highest, but because his great
heart beat for the poor, because he made the cause of the victims of
society his own, and devoted his pen to exposing its cruelties and
shams. No man of his time did so much as he to turn men's minds to the
wrong and wretchedness of the old order of things, and open their eyes
to the necessity of the great change that was coming, although he
himself did not clearly foresee it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](lb15.md)
