[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lb18)  [Next](lb20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter 18

That evening I sat up for some time after the ladies had retired,
talking with Dr. Leete about the effect of the plan of exempting men
from further service to the nation after the age of forty-five, a point
brought up by his account of the part taken by the retired citizens in
the government.

"At forty-five," said I, "a man still has ten years of good manual labor
in him, and twice ten years of good intellectual service. To be
superannuated at that age and laid on the shelf must be regarded rather
as a hardship than a favor by men of energetic dispositions."

"My dear Mr. West," exclaimed Dr. Leete, beaming upon me, "you cannot
have any idea of the piquancy your nineteenth century ideas have for us
of this day, the rare quaintness of their effect. Know, O child of
another race and yet the same, that the labor we have to render as our
part in securing for the nation the means of a comfortable physical
existence is by no means regarded as the most important, the most
interesting, or the most dignified employment of our powers. We look
upon it as a necessary duty to be discharged before we can fully devote
ourselves to the higher exercise of our faculties, the intellectual and
spiritual enjoyments and pursuits which alone mean life. Everything
possible is indeed done by the just distribution of burdens, and by all
manner of special attractions and incentives to relieve our labor of
irksomeness, and, except in a comparative sense, it is not usually
irksome, and is often inspiring. But it is not our labor, but the higher
and larger activities which the performance of our task will leave us
free to enter upon, that are considered the main business of existence.

"Of course not all, nor the majority, have those scientific, artistic,
literary, or scholarly interests which make leisure the one thing
valuable to their possessors. Many look upon the last half of life
chiefly as a period for enjoyment of other sorts; for travel, for social
relaxation in the company of their life-time friends; a time for the
cultivation of all manner of personal idiosyncrasies and special tastes,
and the pursuit of every imaginable form of recreation; in a word, a
time for the leisurely and unperturbed appreciation of the good things
of the world which they have helped to create. But, whatever the
differences between our individual tastes as to the use we shall put our
leisure to, we all agree in looking forward to the date of our discharge
as the time when we shall first enter upon the full enjoyment of our
birthright, the period when we shall first really attain our majority
and become enfranchised from discipline and control, with the fee of our
lives vested in ourselves. As eager boys in your day anticipated
twenty-one, so men nowadays look forward to forty-five. At twenty-one we
become men, but at forty-five we renew youth. Middle age and what you
would have called old age are considered, rather than youth, the
enviable time of life. Thanks to the better conditions of existence
nowadays, and above all the freedom of every one from care, old age
approaches many years later and has an aspect far more benign than in
past times. Persons of average constitution usually live to eighty-five
or ninety, and at forty-five we are physically and mentally younger, I
fancy, than you were at thirty-five. It is a strange reflection that at
forty-five, when we are just entering upon the most enjoyable period of
life, you already began to think of growing old and to look backward.
With you it was the forenoon, with us it is the afternoon, which is the
brighter half of life."

After this I remember that our talk branched into the subject of popular
sports and recreations at the present time as com-pared with those of
the nineteenth century.

"In one respect," said Dr. Leete, "there is a marked difference. The
professional sportsmen, which were such a curious feature of your day,
we have nothing answering to, nor are the prizes for which our athletes
contend money prizes, as with you. Our contests are always for glory
only. The generous rivalry existing between the various guilds, and the
loyalty of each worker to his own, afford a constant stimulation to all
sorts of games and matches by sea and land, in which the young men take
scarcely more interest than the honorary guildsmen who have served their
time. The guild yacht races off Marblehead take place next week, and you
will be able to judge for yourself of the popular enthusiasm which such
events nowadays call out as compared with your day. The demand for
'panem ef circenses' preferred by the Roman populace is recognized
nowadays as a wholly reasonable one. If bread is the first necessity of
life, recreation is a close second, and the nation caters for both.
Americans of the nineteenth century were as unfortunate in lacking an
adequate provision for the one sort of need as for the other. Even if
the people of that period had enjoyed larger leisure, they would, I
fancy, have often been at a loss how to pass it agreeably. We are never
in that predicament."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](lb20.md)
