[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sos14)  [Next](sos16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0007EHL0Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret of the Saucers*, by Orfeo M. Angelucci, \[1955\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### CHAPTER XIII

### STRUCTURE AND MOTIVE FORCES OF FLYING DISKS

Contrary to present concepts, we do not conquer space, we cooperate with
it. A good dancer does not force steps and movements into a rhythm. He
feels the music and cooperates with it. A good pilot does not rip
through the air. He cooperates with its dynamic forces. Birds accomplish
this naturally.

Notice fish in a bowl or tank of water. They glide and dive in
streamlined beauty as they feel every slightest movement and vibration
of the water. Their motions are in perfect harmony with their
environment. Throughout all of nature there is no conquest of the
elements. There is only harmony and cooperation with the laws of the
elements. The creature who defies these laws must inevitably suffer.

Space is today the most challenging frontier. It is also one of the most
dangerous. Any wrong interpretation or calculation of space will result
in immediate and violent reaction.

Space ships do not carry walls of lead many feet thick. The cosmic rays
in outer space could easily penetrate these. In reality space ship hulls
are not much more than many layers of skins something like plywood but
made of plastic-crystal substance. Some

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

layers are positive ionized, and some negative. These are insulated from
each other with neutral layers between them.

The approaching cosmic rays are rendered unstable by the field of
magnetism constantly maintained around the ship. Upon reaching the hull
of the ship they are completely shattered. Then the positive and
negative charges are absorbed by the many-phased charges of the various
skins of the hull. Thus, not one cosmic ray should penetrate inside.
This is harmonic cooperation with nature's forces.

Harmony and cooperation are positive in effect. Man's first space ships
may evolve from his present limited knowledge and still navigate space
to some extent, following many of nature's laws. But many of those first
experimental craft will meet with destruction and failure because only
the highest degree of harmony and the finest perception can survive
space navigation.

First, it is well to understand that atoms are not in reality whirling
particles of energy. They are simply "bubbles" in the ether. Also, light
rays are merely portions of these bubbles, but in elongations; thus in
reality appearing as darting fissures, or splits in the ether.

There are endless variations of magnetic fields, or fluxes in the entire
universe. From the bubbles (atoms) they bounce away in all directions,
producing magnetic spheres. From the light rays they proceed away at
right angles to the rays so that magnetic vortices accompany the rays.
Cosmic rays

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

produce their own magnetic wakes in their paths. Thus the ether is in
constant motion at all times in all places.

The flying saucers utilize all these forms of energy. They direct in
precise control the conversions of the energies, and use the same forces
as means of attraction and/or repulsion in the endless sea of the ether.
Thus, their directors can use magnetic and gravitational forces far
beyond our wildest imagination.

They do not require our Earth's fields. Indeed, Earth's field and ether
slip-stream are in their way. In outer space the flying disks flow and
seem to dance in gracious beauty.

Many of the flying saucers that we have seen in our skies are actually
crystal disks, grown in chemical baths. Like the stem and capillaries of
a leaf or flower, all the functioning systems are grown into it.
Therefore these systems could be utterly invisible. These systems would
include the conducting wires spiralled from the center to the extreme
outer edge, the spirals becoming narrower in cone shape. At the extreme
edge they come to less than pinpoint, and the excess electrons are
forced into "ground" from these points. This function can be stepped up
until the very disk seems to give off flames. Usually, however, we see
it only as a fuzzy halo fringe around the object.

The crystal property of the flying disks refines all the
electro-magnetic and corpuscular energies into varying frequencies and
wave lengths. Among the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

etheric beings, however, it is possible to create a saucer of any degree
of materiality merely from a projected thought form which attracts
material substance to it.

Since, however, the majority of saucers thus far sighted have been of
the crystal disk type, we shall confine explanations to these alone.
(Although the thought-form projections behave in a very similar manner).

*CHANGING OF COLORS IN DISKS*

As the crystal is stepped up by electro-magnetic energy its lattice
structure undergoes definite changes which cause the disk to emit light
of various colors. That we might observe this phenomenon is one of their
reasons for revealing it in the skies.

The lattice of the crystal can be arrested at any attitude. When it is
suspended in an attitude of transmitting, all light will pass through,
and the disk becomes completely invisible.

When electric force is discharged under normal conditions, a flame, or
darting lightning is visible all around the disk. Thus we see flames of
all colors; also darts and streaks of fire, and in some cases, even an
exhaust trail when the entire effect is directed backward or forward of
the flying object.

By directing a sudden impulse of energy and resistance to the energy
simultaneously into the disk, it can be made to explode into a shower of
spark fragments.

*RIGHT ANGLE TURNS*

A flying disk is not just guided. It is completely

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

controlled. The master beam from the mother ship holds like a vise. This
is always the case when they perform right angle and sudden turns. Thus
they can assume incredible speed, and suddenly veer sharply without any
damage to the disk. Every atom and molecule is vectored in the same
direction at the same time. Any gravitational effects from inertia are
neutralized, or non-existent.

During my trip into space in one of these crystal crafts, you will
recall that I picked up a strange coin-shaped piece of metal from the
floor. This piece of metal appeared to be quivering and livid in the
palm of my hand: and as I held it the metal became almost glowing, as a
piece of live coal, and yet it was the same temperature as my hand.
Within forty minutes the metallic disk had disappeared. Apparently its
elements were sublimated by some type of evaporation process. Thus, it
is apparent they can explode them at any rate of speed they wish; and in
a limited frequency of energy they would explode with not the least
sound. Such remote control by complete vector is an accomplished fact
with our space neighbors.

It should be clear now to see that they can appear to the human eye and
yet never register on camera film. Or, on the other hand, they can be
made to show up on film when they were not visible to the human eye.

Presented with the true, simple explanation of the flying saucers, some
people find it harder than ever to accept. They prefer to cling to the
ideas of

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

impossible tons of lead shielding and all the other ponderous aspects of
space ships as conform to our limited sciences, most of which will have
to be discarded before we even put a ship into outer space.

*FLYING DISKS—EXTRA DIMENSIONAL CAMERAS*

A flying disk is maneuvering over a city, or some area of the Earth.
Every living thing and all their vibrations, seen and unseen by the
naked eye, are picked up by the transmitting disk, which in turn relays
these impressions back to the mother ship. There it is all permanently
recorded on crystal instruments in detail.

Most of these scanning and recording operations are conducted when the
disks are entirely invisible to us. When we do see them, they are
usually just capering for us, or for some particular individual, to whom
the display reveals a message, or an awakening. Both, spiritual and
physical evolution upon Earth is timed, and is in gradual steps. Space
visitors are in no hurry, and they enter in the evolution gradually, in
the timing permitted them by cosmic rhythm and law.

Yes, indeed, the flying disks are both receiving and sending units. They
are three-dimensional camera, television, radio, and motive entities,
all in one. In fact, they are practically a synthetic brain, lacking
only consciousness itself. Their manipulation is intrinsic and seemingly
boundless. We on Earth are close to arriving at this technology in the
realm of hypothesis, at least.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The True Nature of the Saucer Mystery](sos16)
