[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ktm06)  [Next](ktm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

# An Intercession.

"These are the days that must happen to you:  
You shall not heap up what is called riches.  
You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve.  
You but arrive at the city to which you are destined,  
You hardly settle yourself to satisfaction, before you are called, by an
irresistible call, to depart.  
You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those who
remain behind you.  
What beckonings of love you receive you shall answer with passionate
kisses of parting.  
You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reached hands
towards you."  
                      *Walt Whitman*.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

MOTHER! Far away, one whom I love is very sad to-day. His heart calls to
mine for help, but though I tell him how I love him, I leave him still
uncheered. How is it? I know he thinks towards me, I know I talk with
him. Yet I long to see him, and hear him, and comfort him face to face!

 

My child, if this were not so, the sense-life would not be yours, or
would not hold you. When you have reached that place where the communion
of souls is enough, you will find that it is more than the knowledge of
the senses, faith will already be swallowed up in sight.

But, oh Mother, what can I now do to ease this craving pain? I prayed
for the vision of Râghunath <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

and did not know that it meant torture multiplied a thousand fold. When
one is in trouble oneself, one's own little world lies in gloom;
outside, the busy feet pass up and down beneath the windows, the birds
build nests, and the children play in the sunshine, as before: but the
universe becomes all black when the beloved suffers.

 

Cease, My child, from inordinate affection. Give Me your heart, and let
Me govern it alone. Be the *witness* of earth's joys and sorrows,
sharing them not. Thus only can you keep yourself from entanglement, and
attain to peace.

 

But peace for myself, dear Mother, why should I seek? How can I turn a
deaf ear to his voice that calls me, adding another pang to the
heartache of a life, and go away myself, and be at peace? Give *him* 

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

that inner peace! Let me win it for him, if Thou wilt he kind! But I
cannot will to fail him in his need and loneliness, even to gain Thy
blessing!

.      .      .      .      .      .

Ah foolish one! Every thought of love that you send out to answer his,
becomes a fetter of iron to hold him in life's anguish. Hide you
yourself in My heart, My child, and he, too, will come home to Me. For
your *love's* sake, let your voice cease to be one with the voices of
the world. Let it come to him only in Mine, when that is borne on the
south wind at the time of sunset, calling him gently to worship at My
feet. Let it be one with transcendent love, with infinite freedom. Only
thus can you satisfy him. Only by withdrawing yourself can you bring him
peace.

.      .      .      .      .      .

Mother! I yield. Take me, I pray Thee, into Thine own heart. Let me not
look back. If Thou wilt call me I shall find my way

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

there, surely, though my eyes now are blind with tears.

And for those I love, shall I trust Thy mercy less than I trust mine
own?

Yet if at the last they seem to stumble, if the foot slip, or Thy voice
fail them by the way, promise, dear Mother, once more to wake me from
the dream of bliss. Cast me out from Thy heart, I beg of Thee, and let
those who so need Thee, go in before to peace!

 

Silly, silly child! Like a helpless bird you beat your wings of
littleness against My grace! Look up and laugh! For already the cloud
that seemed so black is passing. Already the clasp of hands about the
heart is loosened. *Two* souls draw the long breath of strength and
relief. The feet of *two* who come to Me are shod with gladness. The
hearts of two beat high, for the conquest born of renunciation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[101:\*](ktm07.htm#fr_0) The vision of Râghunath
is one of the eight perfections. It consists in feeling the sufferings
of others as if they were our own. Many stories of the saints,
especially those of the stigmata, give us special cases of it. It is
told of a Hindu devotee, that when a bullock was smitten cruelly in his
presence he screamed and fell down <span id="page_102">p. 102</span>
fainting; and when the passers-by ran to his assistance, he was found to
bear the marks of the lashes on his own back.

The allusion here is perhaps to one of the earlier steps in the
acquirement of this perfection, when we have a deepened appredation of
the pain of those we love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Kali](ktm08)
