[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hindusim](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ktm05)  [Next](ktm07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

# A Visit to Dukineshwar.

"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace,  
whose wind is stayed on Thee."--*Isaiah*.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

HE was not in the vastness. And the Soul, lying on a housetop on the
Earth, and [looking](errata.htm#6) forth into the uttermost of space,
realised the solitude and trembled.

Then came one whose voice spake within the heart, saying very gently,
"Come thou away into that quiet place and rest awhile. There it may be
that thou shalt speak with Him." And that soul arose, following after,
as it were, the Angel of the Presence,--who bore white lilies, and about
his feet played flames, and his eyes to look into were like mighty
waters--and carne by many ways unto the Lord's own garden, and rested
there.

And there was in that garden a place where five trees grew together,
beneath which oftentimes had the Master sat and prayed and entered into
glory. Thither went the soul, laden with sorrowful queries and needs,
and being received into the silence, waited.

On the left flowed the river, and the great barges went past swiftly,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

with sails full set. Beneath, the dead leaves stirred in the breeze, or
rustled under the footsteps of a mouse. And on the branches above fell
the flood of moonlight, dropping through and making spaces on the
brickwork, all outlined by quivering leaves and moving stems.

The whispers of river and trees and lone night-creatures were the only
sounds that could be heard.

.      .      .      .      .      .

"Those with whom I was wont to come, O Master, are absent now. In far
distant and separate lands think they upon this place. I would make
memorial for them at Thy feet to-night!"

And the Lord said--"It is well. My own are ever Mine. I bear their
burdens; I guide their footsteps; and at last I bring them to that haven
where they would be. There are three here to-night, My child, not one.
Be assured."

 

"Some whom we love, O Lord, are in fetters of suffering. With hearts
cramped by fear they look

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

out upon their world. One longs for death because life is bitter: to
others, life comes so hard that we almost ask for death for them. We
pray Thee, give these ease, or that light that makes ease of no
account."

And the Lord, smiling, listened--

"It cannot be, O Lord, that for the People we can do nothing! In the
midst of terrible calamity, shrinking from the gaze of death, or
striving against the blow that will rob them of the beloved: sleeping
hard in the air of poisonous swamps, ill-fed, ignorant, and oppressed,
it cannot be that we, so much more fortunate, can share nothing with
them. It cannot be that Thou wilt tell us it is vain to struggle.

 

"And what would you have?"

"Only the right to share their danger, if nothing can be done. Only to
hold their hands and hearten them--to perform some menial service for
them--not to feel utterly cut off from fellowship, while they tread the
winepress of despair!"

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

"Is this all?"

"Nay, if it were granted to us to serve truly--that would be
blessedness. If we might indeed bring help, then the cup were full. But
even without this we pray to be allowed the freedom where men do what
they can, without thought o self. Command us not forever to think of the
necessities of life. Grant us to give, and leave with Thee, and remember
not whether life or death we shall take away."

 

And there was long silence. And at last the Voice, very gentle and
reproachful--

"O foolish Children! Have ye yet to learn that this love that speaks in
your hearts is not yours but Mine? Must ye struggle and plead with me
for My own? Know ye not that difficulties and discouragements but point
out the way in which I would guide you? Strive on and fear not! That way
shall be found! Can *My* love be baffled? . . . Is yours more than its
feeblest utterance? Remember

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --'Thy right is
only to action: thy right is never to the fruit thereof.' Maybe this
struggle is itself your action. Yours not to ask how it shall end . . .
. Your love is not separate from Mine. Know that these two are one . . .
."

And as the words died away, those souls rested for a moment in the sight
of a Universe that was all Mother--of a love of which the love of human
mothers for their children is but a feeble glimmer--of a life that
whether hard or happy-seeming, was all alike the dealing of that
Universe-Mother with Her babes.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

 

And the Master put forth His hand in that place and blessed His
worshippers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Intercession](ktm07)
