[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Aztec](../index)  [Illustrations](illust)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rva05)  [Next](rva07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI. Hymn to the God of Fire.

### VI. Ixcoçauhqui icuic.

[English](#english)

1\. Huiya tzonimolco notauane ye namech maya pinauhtiz, tetemoca ye
namech maya pinauhtiz.

2\. Xonca mecatla notecua icçotl mimilcatoc chicueyocan naualcalli
nauali temoquetlaya.

3\. Huiya tzonimolco cuicotipeuhque, aya tzonimolco cuicotipeuhque, aya
iztleica naual moquizcauia, iztlauan naual moquizca.

4\. Huia tzonimolco maceualli maya temacouia, oya tonaqui, oya tonaqui
maceualli, maya temacouiya.

5\. Huiya tzonimolco xoxolcuicatl cacauantoc ya ayouica mocuiltonoaci
tontecuitl moteicnelil mauiztli.

6\. Huiya ciuatontla xatenonotza, ayyauhcalcatl quiyauatla, xatenonotza.

Var. 2. Xoncan mecatlan notechoan. 3. Iztleica (for iztlauan). 6. Ia
ayiauhcalcatl.

### Gloss.

I. *Q. n.*, yn itzonmolcatl notauane ye nemechpinauhtiz nachcan nochan
tetemoan, ye nemechpinauhtiz.

2\. *Q. n.*, yn mecatla amo tecuhuan in oncan icçotl mimilcatoc
ucyaquixtoc icçotl uncan in temoc in chicueyocan.

3\. *Q. n.*, yn tzonmolco otipeuhque macuico yn tzonmolco macuico
otipeuhque tleica in amo anualquiça tleica yn ayaualquiça.

4\. *Q. n.*, yn tzonmolco otonac auh in omaceualhoan xinechinacaqui
notechpouizque yn enetoltiloyan.

{p. 34}

5\. *Q. n.*, yn cuicatl tzomolco ca ye cauani in aic necuiltonollo
netotilo in tetecuti yeua moteicnelil ca mauiztic.

6\. *Q. n.*, yn ciuatontli xitenonotza in quiauat ayauhcalcatl, *id
est*, in ticiuatontli xitenonotza.

### <span id="english">Hymn to Ixcoçauhqui.</span>

1\. In the Hall of Flames let me not put to shame my ancestors;
descending there, let me not put you to shame.

2\. I fasten a rope to the sacred tree, I twist it in eight folds, that
by it I, a magician, may descend to the magical house.

3\. Begin your song in the Hall of Flames; begin your song in the Hall
of Flames; why does the magician not come forth? Why does he not rise
up?

4\. Let his subjects assist in the Hall of Flames; he appears, he
appears, let his subjects assist.

5\. Let the servants never cease the song in the Hall of Flames; let
them rejoice greatly, let them dance wonderfully.

6\. Call ye for the woman with abundant hair, whose care is the mist and
the rain, call ye for her.

### Notes.

Ixcoçauhqui, "*the Yellow Faced*," was the Mexican God of Fire.
Torquemada gives as his synonyms *Xiuhtecutli*, "Lord of Fire," and
*Huehueteotl*, "the Ancient God" (*Monarquia Indiana*, Lib. VI., cap.
28). Elsewhere he identifies him with the Sun-god (*Ibid.*, Lib. XIV.,
cap. 4). Sahagun describes his annual festival (*Hist.*, Lib. II., cap.
38), and gives another of his names, *Cueçaltzin*, a reverential form of
*cuezalotl*, flame (*Hist.*, Lib. I., cap. 13).

{p. 35}

The *tzonmolco* so often referred to in this hymn was the sixty-fourth
edifice in the great temple of Tenochtitlan, and was devoted to the
worship of Ixcoçauhqui (Sahagun). The word literally means "the place of
spreading hairs," the rays or ornaments spreading from the head of the
statue of the god representing flames (Sahagun).

The reference in v. 6 seems to be to one of the women who were
sacrificed at the festival, as related by Sahagun (Lib. II., App.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Hymn of Mixcoatl.](rva07) 
