[Sacred-Texts](../../../index)  [Native American](../../index) 
[Aztec](../index)  [Illustrations](illust)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](rva07)  [Next](rva09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VIII. Hymn to the God of Flowers.

### VIII. Xochipilli icuic.

[English](#english)

1\. Ye cuicaya tocniuaya ouaya yeo, ye cuicaya ye quetzalcoxcuxa
yoaltica tlao çinteutla, oay.

2\. Çan quicaquiz nocuic ocoyoalle teumechaue, oquicaquiz nocuica in
cipactonalla atilili, ouayya.

3\. Ayao, ayao, ayao, ayao, nitlanauati ay tlalocan tlamacazque, ayao,
ayao, ayao.

4\. Ayao, ayao, ayao, tlalocan tlamacazque nitlanauati, aya, ayao,
ayyao.

5\. Ac, çani uallaçic, otli nepaniuia, cani çinteutla campa ye noyaz,
campa otli nicyatoca ça oay.

6\. Ayao, aya, ayao, tlalocan tlamacazque, quiauiteteu, ayyao, aya,
ayao.

### Gloss.

1\. *Q. n.*, ca otonac, ca otlatuic ca ye cuico ca ye cuica centeotl in
quetzalcocox.

2\. *Q. n.*, macaco, in tocuic ynican maquicaquican yn nican tlaca.

3\. *Q. n.*, in tlaloque tlamacazque niquinnauatia ye niauh in nochan.

4\. *Q. n.*, yn tlaloque tlamacazque niquinnauatia ye niauh in nochan.

5\. *Q. n.*, ca onitlanauati ni tlaloca catli ye nictocaz utli.

6\. *Q. n.*, yn antlaloque yn antlamacazque catli nictocaz yn anteteuh.

{p. 40}

### <span id="english">Hymn to Xochipilli.</span>

1\. O friends, the quetzal bird sings, it sings its song at midnight to
Cinteotl.

2\. The god will surely hear my song by night, he will hear my song as
the day begins to break.

3\. I send forth the priests to the house of Tlaloc.

4\. The priests to the house of Tlaloc do I send forth.

5\. I shall go forth, I shall join myself unto them, I shall go where is
Cinteotl, I shall follow the path to him.

6\. The priests go forth to the house of Tlaloc, to the home of the gods
of the plain.

### Notes.

Xochipilli, "lord of flowers," otherwise named *Macuilxochitl*, "five
flowers" (the name of a small odorous plant), was the deity who gave and
protected all flowering plants. As one of the gods of fertility and
production, he was associated with Tlaloc, god of rains, and Cinteotl,
god of maize. His festival is described in Sahagun (*Historia*, Lib. I.,
cap. 14).

2\. *Cipactonalla*, from *cipactli*, and *tonalli*, may refer to
*Cipactonal*, the reputed discoverer of the Aztec calendar. See
*Sahagun*, *Historia*, Lib. IV., cap. i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Hymn to the Goddess of Artists](rva09) 
