[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlog10)  [Next](hlog12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI

### LAU-KA-IEIE

"Waipio Valley, the beautiful:  
Precipices around it,  
The sea on one side;  
The precipices are hard to climb;  
Not to be climbed  
Are the sea precipices."

--Hawaiian Chant.

KAKEA (the white one) and Kaholo (the runner) were the children of the
Valley. Their parents were the precipices which were sheer to the sea,
and could only be passed by boats. They married, and Kaholo conceived.
The husband said, "If a boy is born, I will name it; if a girl, you give
the name."

He went up to see his sister Pokahi, and asked her to go swiftly to see
his wife. Pokahi's husband was Kaukini, a bird-catcher. He went out into
the forest for some birds. Soon he came back and prepared them for
cooking. Hot stones were put inside the birds and the birds were packed
in calabashes, carefully covered over with wet leaves, which made steam
inside so the birds were well cooked. Then they were brought to Kaholo
for a feast.

On their way they went down to Waipio Valley,

{p. 37}

coming to the foot of the precipice. Pokahi wanted some sea-moss and
some shell-fish, so she told the two men to go on while she secured
these things to take to Kaholo. She gathered the soft lipoa\[1\] moss
and went up to the waterfall, to Ulu (Kaholo's home). The baby was born,
wrapped in the moss and thrown into the sea, making a shapeless bundle,
but a kupua (sorcerer) saw that a child was there. The child was taken
and washed clean in the soft lipoa, and cared for. All around were the
signs of the birth of a chief.

They named him Hiilawe, and from him the Waipio waterfall has its name,
according to the saying, "Falling into mist is the water of Hiilawe."

Pokahi took up her package in which she had brought the moss and
shell-fish, but the moss was gone. Hina-ulu-ohia
(Hina-the-growing-ohia-tree) was the sorcerer who took the child in the
lipoa moss. She was the aumakua, or ancestor goddess, of the
boat-builders.

Pokahi dreamed that a beautiful woman appeared, her body covered with
the leaves of ohia-trees\[2\]. "I know that you have not had any child.
I will now give you one. Awake, and go to the Waipio River; watch thirty
days, then You will find a girl wrapped in soft moss. This

\[1. Haliseris plagiogramma.

2\. Metrosideros rugosa.\]

{p. 38}

shall be your adopted child. I will show you how to care for it. Your
brother and his wife must not know. Your husband alone may know about
this adopted girl."

Pokahi and her husband went down at once to the mouth of the river,
heard an infant cry in the midst of red-colored mist, and found a child
wrapped in the fragrant moss. She wished to take it up, but was held
back by magic powers. She saw an ohia-tree rising up from the
water,--branches, leaves, and flowers,--and iiwi (birds) coming to pick
the flowers. The red birds and red flowers were very beautiful. This
tree was Hina. The birds began to sing, and quietly the tree sank down
into the water and disappeared, the birds flying away to the west.

Pokahi returned to her brother's house, going down to the sea every day,
where she saw the human form of the child growing in the shelter of that
red mist on the surface of the sea. At the end of the thirty days Pokahi
told her friends and her husband that they must go back home. On their
way they went to the river. She told her husband to look at the red
mist, but he wanted to hurry on. As they approached their house,
cooking-odors welcomed them, and they found plenty of food prepared
outside. They saw something moving inside. The trees seemed to be
walking as if with the feet of men. Steps

{p. 39}

were heard, and voices were calling for the people of the house.

Kaukini prepared a lamp, and Pokahi in a vision saw the same fine tree
which she had seen before. There was also a hala-tree\[1\] with its
beautiful yellow blossoms. As they looked they saw leaves of different
kinds falling one after another, making in one place a soft fragrant
bed.

Then a woman and a man came with an infant. They were the god Ku and
Hina his wife. They said to Pokahi and her husband, "We have accepted
your sacrifices and have seen that you are childless, so now we have
brought you this child to adopt." Then they disappeared among the trees
of the forest, leaving the child, Lau-ka-ieie\[2\] (leaf of the ieie
vine). She was well cared for and grew up into a beautiful woman without
fault or blemish. Her companions and servants were the birds and the
flowers.

Lau-ka-pali (leaf of the precipice) was one of her friends. One day she
made whistles of ti\[3\] leaves, and blew them. The
Leaf-of-the-Morning-Glory saw that the young chiefess liked this, so she
went out and found Pupu-kani-oi (the singing land-shell), whose home was
on the leaves of the forest trees. Then she found another
Pupu-hina-hina-ula (shell-beautiful with rainbow

\[1. Hala, lahala, puhala,--Pandanus adoratissimus.

2\. Freycinetia Amotti.

3\. Ki or lauki, Cordyline terminalis.\]

{p. 40}

colors). In the night the shells sang, and their voices stole their way
into the love of Lau-ka-ieie, so she gently sang with them.

Nohu-ua-palai (a fern), one of the old residents of that place, went out
into the forest, and, hearing the voices of the girl and the shells,
came to the house. She chanted her name, but there was no reply. All was
silent. At last, Pua-ohelo (the blossom of the ohelo\[1\]), one of the
flowers in the house, heard, and opening the door, invited her to come
in and eat.

Nohu-ua-palai went in and feasted with the girls. Lau-ka-ieie dreamed
about Kawelona (the setting of the sun), at Lihue, a fine young man, the
first-born of one of the high chiefs of Kauai. She told her kahu
(guardian) all about her dream and the distant island. The kahu asked
who should go to find the man of the dream. All the girl friends wanted
to go. She told them to raise their hands and the one who had the
longest fingers could go. This was Pupu-kani-oi (the singing shell). The
leaf family all sobbed as they bade farewell to the shell.

The shell said: "Oh, my leaf-sisters Laukoa \[leaf of the koa-tree\] and
Lauanau \[leaf of the paper-mulberry tree\], arise, go with me on my
journey! Oh, my shell-sisters of the blue sea, come to the beach, to the
sand! Come and show me the path I am to go! Oh,

\[1. Vaccinium penduliformis.\]

{p. 41} Pupu-moka-lau \[the land-shell clinging to the moki-hana\[1\]
leaf\], come and look at me, for I am one of your family! Call all the
shells to aid me in my journey! Come to me!"

Then she summoned her brother, Makani-kau, chief of the winds, to waft
them away in their wind bodies. They journeyed all around the island of
Hawaii to find some man who would be like the man of the dream. They
found no one there nor on any of the other islands up to Oahu, where the
Singing Shell fell in love with a chief and turned from her journey, but
Makani-kau went on to Kauai.

Ma-eli-eli, the dragon woman of Heeia, tried to persuade him to stop,
but on he went. She ran after him. Limaloa, the dragon of Laiewai, also
tried to catch Makani-kau, but he was too swift. On the way to Kauai,
Makani-kau saw some people in a boat chased by a big shark. He leaped on
the boat and told them he would play with the shark and they could stay
near but need not fear. Then he jumped into the sea. The shark turned
over and opened its mouth to seize him; he climbed on it, caught its
fins, and forced it to flee through the water. He drove it to the shore
and made it fast among the rocks. It became the great shark stone,
Koa-mano (warrior shark), at Haena. He leaped from the shark to land,
the boat following.

\[1. Pelea anisata.\]

{p. 42}

He saw the hill of "Fire-Throwing," a place where burning sticks were
thrown over the precipices, a very beautiful sight at night. He leaped
to the top of the hill in his shadow body. Far up on the hill was a vast
number of iiwi (birds). Makani-kau went to them as they were flying
toward Lehua. They only felt the force of the winds, for they could not
see him or his real body. He saw that the birds were carrying a fine man
as he drew near.

This was the one Lau-ka-ieie desired for her husband. They carried this
boy on their wings easily and gently over the hills and sea toward the
sunset island, Lehua. There they slowly flew to earth. They were the
bird guardians of Kawelona, and when they travelled from place to place
they were under the direction of the bird-sorcerer, Kukala-a-ka-manu.

Kawelona had dreamed of a beautiful girl who had visited him again and
again, so he was prepared to meet Makani-kau. He told his parents and
adopted guardians and bird-priests about his dreams and the beautiful
girl he wanted to marry.

Makani-kau met the winds of Niihau and Lehua, and at last was welcomed
by the birds. He told Kawelona his mission, who prepared to go to
Hawaii, asking how they should go. Makani-kau went to the seaside and
called for his

{p. 43}

many bodies to come and give him the boat for the husband of their great
sister Lau-ka-ieie. Thus he made known his mana, or spirit power, to
Kawelona. He called on the great cloud-gods to send the long white
cloud-boat, and it soon appeared. Kawelona entered the boat with fear,
and in a few minutes lost sight of the island of Lehua and his bird
guardians as he sailed out into the sea. Makani-kau dropped down by the
side of a beautiful shell-boat, entered it, and stopped at Mana. There
he took several girls and put them in a double canoe, or au-waa-olalua
(spirit-boat).

Meanwhile the sorcerer ruler of the birds agreed to find out where
Kawelona was to satisfy the longing of his parents, whom he had left
without showing them where he was going or what dangers he might meet.
The sorcerer poured water into a calabash and threw in two lehua
flowers, which floated on the water. Then he turned his eyes toward the
sun and prayed: "Oh, great sun, to whom belongs the heavens, turn your
eyes downward to look on the water in this calabash, and show us what
you see therein! Look upon the beautiful young woman. She is not one
from Kauai. There is no one more beautiful than she. Her home is under
the glowing East, and a royal rainbow is around her. There are beautiful
girls attending her." {p. 44} The sorcerer saw the sun-pictures in the
water, and interpreted to the friends the journey of Kawelona, telling
them it was a long, long way, and they must wait patiently many days for
any word. In the signs he saw the boy in the cloud-boat, Makani-kau in
his shell-boat, and the three girls in the spirit-boat.

The girls were carried to Oahu, and there found the shell-girl,
Pupu-kani-oi, left by Makani-kau on his way to Lehua. They took her with
her husband and his sisters in the spirit-boat. There were nine in the
company of travellers to Hawaii: Kawelona in his cloud-boat; two girls
from Kauai; Kaiahe, a girl from Oahu; three from Molokai, one from Maui;
and a girl called Lihau. Makani-kau himself was the leader; he had taken
the girls away. On this journey he turned their boats to Kahoolawe to
visit Ka-moho-alii, the ruler of the sharks. There Makani-kau appeared
in his finest human body, and they all landed. Makani-kau took Kawelona
from his cloud-boat, went inland, and placed him in the midst of the
company, telling them he was the husband for Lau-ka-ieie. They were all
made welcome by the ruler of the sharks.

Ka-moho-alii called his sharks to bring food from all the islands over
which they were placed as guardians; so they quickly brought prepared
food, fish, flowers, leis, and gifts of all kinds. {p. 45} The company
feasted and rested. Then Ka-moho-alii called his sharks to guard the
travellers on their journey. Makani-kau went in his shell-boat, Kawelona
in his cloud-boat, and they were all carried over the sea until they
landed under the mountains of Hawaii.

Makani-kau, in his wind body, carried the boats swiftly on their journey
to Waipio. Lau-ka-ieie heard her brother's voice calling her from the
sea. Hina answered. Makani-kau and Kawelona went up to Waimea to cross
over to Lau-ka-ieie's house, but were taken by Hina to the top of Mauna
Kea. Poliahu and Lilinoe saw the two fine young men and called to them,
but Makani-kau passed by, without a word, to his own wonderful home in
the caves of the mountains resting in the heart of mists and fogs, and
placed all his travellers there. Makani-kau went down to the sea and
called the sharks of Ka-moho-alii. They appeared m their human bodies in
the valley of Waipio, leaving their shark bodies resting quietly in the
sea. They feasted and danced near the ancient temple of Kahuku-welowelo,
which was the place where the wonderful shell, Kiha-pu, was kept.

Makani-kau put seven shells on the top of the precipice and they blew
until sweet sounds floated Over all the land. Thus was the marriage of
Lau-ka-ieie and Kawelona celebrated.

{p. 46}

All the shark people rested, soothed by the music. After the wedding
they bade farewell and returned to Kahoolawe, going around the southern
side of the island, for it was counted bad luck to turn back. They must
go straight ahead all the way home. Makani-kau went to his sister's
house, and met the girls and Lau-ka-ieie. He told her that his house was
full of strangers, as the people of the different kupua bodies had
assembled to celebrate the wedding. These were the kupua people of the
Hawaiian Islands. The eepa people were more like fairies and gnomes, and
were usually somewhat deformed. The kupuas may be classified as follows:

Ka-poe-kino-lau (the people who had leaf bodies).

Ka-poe-kino-pua (the people who had flower bodies).

Ka-poe-kino-manu (the people who had bird bodies).

Ka-poe-kino-laau (trees of all kinds, ferns, vines, etc.).

Ka-poe-kino-pupu (all shells).

Ka-poe-kino-ao (all clouds).

Ka-poe-kino-makani (all winds).

Ka-poe-kina-ia (all fish).

Ka-poe-kina-mano (all sharks).

Ka-poe-kina-limu (all sea-mosses).

Ka-poe-kina-pokaku (all peculiar stones).

Ka-poe-kina-hiwa-hiwa (all dangerous places of the pali).

After the marriage, Pupu-kani-oi (the singing shell) and her husband
entered the shell-boat, and started back to Molokai. On their way they

{p. 47}

heard sweet bird voices. Makani-kau had a feather house covered with
rainbow colors. Later he went to Kauai, and brought back the adopted
parents of Kawelona to dwell on Hawaii, where Lau-ka-ieie lived happily
with her husband.

Hiilawe became very ill, and called his brother Makani-kau and his
sister Lau-ka-ieie to come near and listen. He told them that he was
going to die, and they must bury him where he could always see the eyes
of the people, and then he would change his body into a wonderful new
body.

The beautiful girl took his malo and leis and placed them along the
sides of the valley, where they became trees and clinging vines, and
Hina made him live again; so Hiilawe became an aumakua of the
waterfalls. Makani-kau took the body in his hands and carried it in the
thunder and lightning, burying it on the brow of the highest precipice
of the valley. Then his body was changed into a stone, which has been
lying there for centuries; but his ghost was made by Hina into a kupua,
so that he could always appear as the wonderful misty falls of Waipio,
looking into the eyes of his people.

After many years had passed Hina assumed permanently the shape of the
beautiful ohia-tree, making her home in the forest around the volcanoes
of Hawaii. She still had magic power,

{p. 48}

and was worshipped under the name Hina-ula-ohia. Makani-kau watched over
Lau-ka-ieie, and when the time came for her to lay aside her human body
she came to him as a slender, graceful woman, covered with leaves, her
eyes blazing like fire. Makani-kau said: "You are a vine; you cannot
stand alone. I will carry you into the forest and place you by the side
of Hina. You are the ieie vine. Climb trees! Twine your long leaves
around them! Let your blazing red flowers shine between the leaves like
eyes of fire! Give your beauty to all the ohia-trees of the forest! "

Carried hither and thither by Makani-kau (great wind), and dropped by
the side of splendid tall trees, the ieie vine has for centuries been
one of the most graceful tree ornaments in all the forest life of the
Hawaiian Islands.

Makani-kau in his spirit form blew the golden clouds of the islands into
the light of the sun, so that the Rainbow Maiden, Anuenue, might lend
her garments to all her friends of the ancient days.

{p. 49}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Kauhuhu, the Shark-God of Molokai](hlog12)
