[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlog30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# POLYNESIAN LANGUAGE

"A few words should be added on the peculiar genius and structure of the
Polynesian language in general and of the Hawaiian dialect in
particular.

It is the law of all Polynesian languages that every word and syllable
must end in a vowel, so that no two consonants are ever heard without a
vowel sound between them.

Most of the radical words are dissyllables, and the accent is generally
on the penult. The Polynesian ear is as nice in marking the slightest
variations in vowel sound as it is dull in distinguishing consonants.

The vocabulary of the Hawaiian is probably richer than that of most
other Polynesian tongues. Its child-like and primitive character is
shown by the absence of abstract words and general terms.

As has been well observed by M. Gaussin, there are three classes of
words, corresponding to as many different stages of language: first,
those that express sensations; second, images; third, abstract ideas.

Not only are names wanting for the more general abstractions, such as
space, nature, fate, etc., but there are very few generic terms. For
example there is no generic term for animal, expressing the whole class
of living creatures or for insects or for colors. At the same time it
abounds in specific names and in nice distinctions.

So in the Hawaiian everything that relates to their everyday life or to
the natural objects with which they are conversant is expressed with a
vivacity, a minuteness and nicety of coloring which cannot be reproduced
in a foreign tongue. Thus the Hawaiian was very rich in terms for every
variety of cloud. It has names for every species of plant on the
mountains or fish in the sea, and is peculiarly copious in terms
relating to the ocean, the surf and waves.

For whatever belonged to their religions, their handicrafts or. their
amusements, their vocabulary was most copious and minute. Almost every
stick in a native house had its appropriate name. Hence it abounds in
synonyms which are such only in appearance, *i.e.*, "to be broken" as a
stick is 'haki,' as a string is 'moku,' as a dish 'naha,' as a wall
'hina.'

Besides the language of every-day life, there was a style appropriate to
oratory and another to religion and poetry.

The above-mentioned characteristics make it a pictorial and expressive
language. It still has the freshness of childhood. Its words are
pictures rather than colorless and abstract symbols of ideas, and are
redolent of the mountain, the forest and the surf.

However it has been and is successfully used to express the abstractions
of mathematics, of English law, and of theology."

"The Hawaiian is but a dialect of the great Polynesian language, which
is spoken with extraordinary uniformity over all the numerous islands of
the Pacific Ocean between New Zealand and Hawaii. Again, the Polynesian
language is but one member of that wide-spread family of languages,
known as the Malayo-Polynesian or Oceanic family, which extends from
Madagascar to the Hawaiian Islands and from New Zealand to Formosa. The
Hawaiian dialect is peculiarly interesting to the philologist from its
isolated position, being the most remote of the family from its primeval
seat in Southeastern Asia, and leading the van with the Malagasy in the
rear. We believe the Hawaiian to be the most copious and expressive, as
well as the richest in native traditional history and poetry. Dr.
Reinhold Forster, the celebrated naturalist of Captain Cook's second
voyage, drew up a table containing 47 words taken from 11 Oceanic
dialects and the corresponding terms in Malay, Mexican, Peruvian and
Chilian. From this table he inferred that the Polynesian languages
afford many analogies with the Malay while they present no point of
contact with the American.

Baron William von Humboldt, the distinguished statesman and scholar,
showed that the Tagala, the leading language of the Philippine Islands,
is by far the richest and most perfect of these languages. 'It
possesses,' he says, 'all the forms collectively of which particular
ones are found singly in other dialects; and it has preserved them all
with very trifling exceptions unbroken and in entire harmony and
symmetry.'

The languages of the Oceanic region have been divided into six great
groups; i.e., the Polynesian; the Micronesian; the Melanesian or Papuan;
the Australian; the Malaysian; the Malagasy. Many examples might be
given if they were needed to illustrate the connection of these
languages. The Polynesian is an ancient and primitive member of the
Malay family. The New Zealand dialect is the most primitive and entire
in its forms. The Hawaiians, Marquesans and Tahitians form a closely
related group by themselves. For example, the Marquesan converts are
using Hawaiian books and the people of the Austral Islands read the
Tahitian Bible."

The above was written by W. D. Alexander in Honolulu in 1865, author of
the "History of the Hawaiian Islands" as preface to Andrew's Dictionary.
