[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4712)  [Next](sbe4714) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930055/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part V: Marvels of Zoroastrianism (SBE47)*, E.W. West,
tr. \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX.

1\. About the marvellousness which is after the end of the millennium of
Zaratû*s*t and the arrival of Aûshê*d*ar, until the end of the
millennium of Aûshê*d*ar and the arrival of Aûshê*d*ar-mâh; and as to
tidings of the same period.

2\. The marvellousness of Aûshê*d*ar as to birth <span
id="fr_302"></span>[2](#fn_298), glory of person, sayings and actions;
the standing of the sun ten days amid the sky <span
id="fr_303"></span>[3](#fn_299); the perishing of the fiend of the
four-legged race; the production of a three-spring cloudless
influence <span id="fr_304"></span>[4](#fn_300) for vegetation; the
weakening of superfluity *and* destitution; the extreme strengthening of
alliance; the gratification *due to* the good friendship of foreigners;
the great increase of the wisdom of religion; and the praise

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

of Aûshê*d*ar's smiting *with* a serpent-scourge of several kinds *in*
the religion of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers.

3\. The mightiness of the resources in the fifth century of the same
millennium; the manifestation of the wizard Mahrkûs <span
id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_301) for seven years, in the year which is
reported in all the regions which are seven; the coming on *and* arrival
of the winter of Mahrkûs, the perishing of most *of* mankind *and*
animals within three winters and in the fourth, through the awfulness
*of* those winters *and* the witchcraft of Mahrkûs; and the dying away
of Mahrkûs of scanty progeny (ga*s*ûkŏ-zahi*s*nŏ), during the fourth
winter, through the Dâhmân Âf*r*în <span
id="fr_306"></span>[2](#fn_302). 4. The opening of the enclosure made by
Yim, the coming of mankind *and* animals therefrom, *and* the complete
progress of mankind and animals again, arising specially from them.

5\. After those winters, the abundant and great increase in the milk of
cattle, and the abundant nourishment *of* mankind by milk; the less
distress of body *in* cattle, the fullness and prosperity *of* the
world, the celebrity of assembled mankind, *and* the great increase of
liberality. 6. Also the feebleness

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

*of* poverty among mankind, *just* like what revelation mentions thus:
'Even so he, *O* Zaratû*s*t! though he be more unfortunate than he who
is accepting *from him*, is like the creator whose bounty of permanent
liberality does thus, in the embodied existence, remain in his
dwelling.'

7\. And this, too, it says, namely: ‘When that winter passes away, *of*
which *it is* said that *it is* boisterous and destructive <span
id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_303), then a wild beast, black and
wide-travelling, walks up to the. Ma*zd*a-worshippers, and thus it
thinks, that they *who* worship Ma*zd*a *will* therefore not finally
hate us more than him who is their own progeny, the son whom they thus
bring up *as* a Ma*zd*a-worshipper here *below, in* fondness *and*
freedom from malice towards well-yielding cattle.

8\. ‘Then Ashavahi*s*tô calls out to the Ma*zd*a-worshippers from the
upper region, *and* thus he speaks: “You are for the worship of Ma*zd*a;
let no one *of you* become such a slaughterer of cattle as the
slaughterers you have been before. 9. Recommend increase in gifts,
recommend neighbourliness in person; are you worshipping Ma*zd*a? do you
slaughter cattle? do you slaughter those of them which give you
assistance, which speak to you thus: 'On account of your helpfulness
*one* tells you that you are worshipping Ma*zd*a *and* you *may* eat?' I
*am* in neighbourliness before that, until *the time* when you exclaim:
'Mine *are* the serpent and toad.'

10\. ‘“And you recommend increase, you recommend neighbourliness, *and*
the Ma*zd*a-worshippers slaughter cattle, even those of them who give
them

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

assistance, so that you are worshipping Ma*zd*a *and* you eat; I *am* in
neighbourliness before that, until *the time* when you exclaim: 'Mine
*are* the serpent *and* toad.'

11\. '"Contentedly the Ma*zd*a-worshippers slaughter cattle, contentedly
the cattle of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers let *them* butcher <span
id="fr_308"></span>[1](#fn_304), and contented are the cattle when they
do not butcher *them;* contentedly the Ma*zd*a-worshippers eat cattle,
*and* contented *are the cattle* when they eat them. 12. And then, when
*there* are spirits, the slaughterers and whatever they slaughter, the
butchers and whatever they butcher, *and* the eaters and whatever they
eat *are* alike watched *by them*."'

13\. And this, too, it says, namely: 'When that century fully elapses,
which is the fifth in the second millennium as regards the religion of
the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, then of all those who *are* upon the earth, the
existences which are both wicked and righteous, two-thirds *in* the land
of Irân are righteous and one-*third* wicked; and so likewise the
Tûrânians *and* those who *are* around Irân remain non-Irânian around
Irân; the chief increase in dwellings here *below*, of those in the
embodied existence, remains *just* as now.'

14\. And this, too, it says, namely: 'When that millennium *has* fully
elapsed, which is the first of the religion of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers,
what is the separation after the first century?' 15. And Aûha*r*ma*zd*
spoke thus: 'The sun conceals *itself*.' 16. 'And what is the separation
after the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth,
*or* tenth

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

century?' 17. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'The sun conceals *itself*.'

18\. Then, when thirty winters of the tenth century *are* unelapsed
(arânako), a maiden, who is Shapîr-abû <span
id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_305), walks up to the water; *she* that is
the mother of that good Aûshê*d*ar-mâh <span
id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_306), and her former lineage is from
Vôhû-rô*k*ô-î Frahânyân <span id="fr_311"></span>[3](#fn_307) in the
family of Îsa*d*vâstar, the son of Zaratû*s*t *that* is brought forth by
Aran*g*: 19. Then she sits in that water *and* drinks *it, and* she
kindles in a high degree those germs which were the second *of* the last
that the righteous Zaratû*s*t *was* dropping forth originally, and they
introduce that son whose name is the Developer *of* Worship <span
id="fr_312"></span>[4](#fn_308) (that is, he augments liberality). 20.
Though fifteen years old, the damsel (zihânakŏ) *has* not before that
associated with men; nor yet afterwards, when she becomes pregnant, *has
she done so* before the time when she gives birth <span
id="fr_313"></span>[5](#fn_309).

21\. When that man becomes thirty years old, the sun stands still in the
zenith of the sky *for* the duration of twenty days *and* nights <span
id="fr_314"></span>[6](#fn_310), *and* it shines over all the regions
which are seven. 22. So, too, the declaration of them themselves is that
they know

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

that the separation of the millennium, which this religion *has* heard
about by listening, is even thus; *and* of those who do not even then
know, that it is something which is different.

23\. When that man becomes thirty years old, he confers with the
archangels, the good rulers *and* good providers; *on* the morrow, in
the daylight of the day, *it is* moreover manifest, when the embodied
existence is *thus* undistressed—without a Kai and without a Karap (that
is, not blind *and* not deaf to the affairs of the sacred beings), and
is to be appropriated (that is, has not made its own self apart *from*
the affairs of the sacred beings), and is produced full of life—that it
has become extending, and is again great *in* various places in
Aîrân-vê*g* where the good Dâîtî *is*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_298"></span>[107:2](sbe4713.htm#fr_302) See Chap. VIII,
55-57.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[107:3](sbe4713.htm#fr_303) See Chap. VIII, 58.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[107:4](sbe4713.htm#fr_304) Pahl. '3-zarem*âê*
an-*av*argarîh.'

<span id="fn_301"></span>[108:1](sbe4713.htm#fr_305) Av. Mahrkûsha of
Westergaard's Fragment VIII, 2, who is evidently a wizard or fiend;
according to Pahl. Vd. II, 49 (Sp.) the evil winter which was foretold
to Yim is called the winter of Markûs. In later times this name has been
understood as Heb. Malkôs, 'autumnal rain;' so the idea of the fatal
freezing winter of Mahrkûs, the intender of death, was abandoned for
that of the deluging rain of Malkôs, as in Mkh. XXVII, 28. In Dd.
XXXVII, 94, both snow and rain are mentioned as produced by Mahrkûs or
Markûs (as it is always written in Pahlavi), and in Sd. IX, 5 only his
name is stated. The most complete account of him is given in our text.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[108:2](sbe4713.htm#fr_306) The *Â*f*r*în of
the Ameshâspends.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[109:1](sbe4713.htm#fr_307) The Pahlavi version
of Av. 'stakhrahê meretô zaya' in Westerg. Frag. VIII, 2.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[110:1](sbe4713.htm#fr_308) Assuming that
bûr’zâvand stands for bûrînênd which occurs in § 12.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[111:1](sbe4713.htm#fr_309) 'Having a good
father,' the Zvâri*s* of Av. Vanghu-fedhri, Yt. XIII, 142.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[111:2](sbe4713.htm#fr_310) See Chap. I, 42.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[111:3](sbe4713.htm#fr_311) See Chap. VIII,
55-57.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[111:4](sbe4713.htm#fr_312) The Pahlavi
interpretation of Aûshê*d*ar-mâh which is an imperfect transcript of the
Av. Ukhshya*d*-nemangh of Yt. XIII, 128.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[111:5](sbe4713.htm#fr_313) Compare the summary
in Dk. VIII, xiv, 13, as follows:—'The arrival of Aûshê*d*ar-mâh, son of
Zaratû*s*t, at the end of the second millennium; information *about* him
and his time, *and* the destroyers *of* the organizers who *were* within
the millennium *of* Aûshê*d*ar.'

<span id="fn_310"></span>[111:6](sbe4713.htm#fr_314) The MS. omits a
clause here, which occurs in Chap. VIII, 58, possibly by mistake, as
part of it is given In Chap. X, 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](sbe4714)
