[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4711)  [Next](sbe4713) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417930055/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part V: Marvels of Zoroastrianism (SBE47)*, E.W. West,
tr. \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

1\. About the marvellousness which is manifested and is openly specified
after the collapsing of the sovereignty of Irân *and* the country of
Irân; *also* the end of the millennium of Zaratû*s*t and the arrival of
Aûshê*d*ar the descendant of Zaratû*s*t <span
id="fr_269"></span>[1](#fn_266).

2\. There is this marvellousness, really overthrowing the blessedness of
the knowledge of former government, revealed by the Avesta about the
ninth and tenth centuries, that which is an indicator of circumstances
(aê*d*ûnŏîh) now visible, *such* as the dispersion of the sovereignty of
Irân from the country of Irân, the disturbance of just law *and* custom,
the predominance of *those with* dishevelled hair <span
id="fr_270"></span>[2](#fn_267), *and* the haughty profession of
ecclesiastics <span id="fr_271"></span>[3](#fn_268). Also the collection
and even connection of all their four systems of belief
(v*âv*arî-hastanŏ) <span id="fr_272"></span>[4](#fn_269) together

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

for the upper rank; the coming of *one* working with the sacred beings
to the inferior, the transient, and the captive of the period; and the
dispersion and downfall of dependent and public men in their time.

4\. The disappearance of a disposition for wisdom from the foreigners
*in* the countries of Irân, which is an indication of shame *at* the
truth of the religion, and *at* the praise, peace, liberality, and other
goodness whose provision *has* lodgement in a disposition for wisdom. 5.
Also the abundance *of* the decisions of apostasy, the falsehood,
deceit, slander, quarrelsomeness, fraudulence, ingratitude, discord,
stinginess, and other vileness whose real connection is a disposition to
devour, neglecting heedfulness for the archangels of fire, water, and
worldly *existence* <span id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_270). 6. The
oppressiveness of infidelity *and* idol-worship, the scarcity *of*
freedom, the extreme predominance of avarice in the individuals (tanŏ)
of mankind, the plenitude of different opinions about witchcraft, *and*
the much inclination of many for paralyzing the religion of the sacred
beings.

7\. The annihilation of the sovereignty of mankind one over the other,
the desolation of localities and settlements by severe actual distress,
and the evil foreign potentates who *are*, one after the other,
scattering the valiant; the destruction among cattle *and* the
defilement *of* the spirit of enjoyment, owing to the lodgement of
lamentation and weeping *in* the countries of Irân, the clamour of the
demon-worshipper in the country, *and* the unobtainable stature,
non-existent strength, blighted destiny, and short

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

life of mankind. 8. Also the abundance of ordinances (âyinŏ) <span
id="fr_274"></span>[1](#fn_271) of various descriptions, the approval of
the apostate among tyrants and the non-approval of the Zoti <span
id="fr_275"></span>[2](#fn_272) who is well-disposed and wise, the
coming of the Zoti to want, *and* all the other adversity, disruption,
and running astray which *are* over-powering even in districts *and*
localities of the countries of Irân.

9\. The maintenance of no ritual (*a*pandîh) of the religion of the
sacred beings; the weakness, suffering, and evil habits of those *of*
the good religion; the lamentation and recantation (khûstûkîh) of the
upholders of the religion; *and* the wickedness and extermination of
good works in most of the countries of Irân. to. Also much other misery
in these two centuries is recounted in the Avesta, which passed away
with them and is also now so visible therein, and manifestly occurs in
them.

11\. This, too, is a statement (nisang-1) as to them, *which* revelation
mentions thus: 'That is the age mingled with iron (that is, from every
side they perceive *it is* of iron) in which they bring forth into life
him who is a sturdy praying apostate. 12. This is their sturdiness, that
their approval is unobservant of both doctrines (âînakŏ); and this is
their praying, that whenever *it is* possible for them they shall cause
misery to others; *also* when an old man publicly advances into a crowd
(galakŏ) of youths, owing to the evil times in which that man who is
learned is born, they are unfriendly *to him* (that is, they are no
friends of the high-priests of the priestly assembly). 13. They are
freely speaking (that is,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

they utter phrases smoothly), they are wicked and are fully maliciously
talking, so that they shall make the statements of priests and
high-priests useless; they also tear asunder the spiritual lordship
*and* priestly authority, and shall bring the ruler *and* priestly
authority into evil behaviour as vicious, but they bring together those
*who are* singular. 14. Anything they say is always mischief (agîh), and
that district which had a judge they cast into the smiting precinct,
into hell; it is misery without any intermission they shall inflict
therein, till they attain unto damnation (darvandîh) through the
recitation they persevere in, *both* he who is the evil progeny
disseminated by the apostate *and* he who is the villainous wolf full of
disaster *and* full of depravity.'

15\. 'Here *below* they fight, the friend with him who is a friend, they
also defraud (zîvênd) him of his own work (that is, whenever it is
possible for them, they shall seize upon his property), and they give it
to him from whom they obtain prosperity in return; if not, they seek him
who is acting as a confederate (nishîn-gûn), and they make that other
*one* defraud the poor *man* (so that they shall seize upon his
property); they also cheat him when he shall make complaint. 16. I
*shall* not again produce such for thee, no friend here for him who is a
friend, no brother for him who is a brother, no son for him who is a
father, nor yet a father *for* him who is a son; admonished, *but* not
convinced, they become the abode of the will of the place, so that they
subsist in every single place where it is necessary for them *to be*, in
each that is necessary for them they march on together, and on the way
they reflect upon the path of blessedness and the

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

manifold learning they utter owing to knowledge of me <span
id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_273).'

17\. 'These three, our increase, learning, *and* reward, we fully
understand through the ascendancy *of* him who is ignoble, *and* through
the downfall *of* him who is noble *and* superior to him of little
thorough instruction who, in every thing, *will* be at the foot of the
tyrant. 18. Thinking of a priest *one* becomes spiritual, thinking of a
tyrant one becomes a Kavîg <span id="fr_277"></span>[2](#fn_274); a
demon *in* disposition is an incipient demon, a Kavîg *in* disposition
is himself attracted towards a youth.'

19\. Then, when character and wisdom recede from the countries of Irân
(that is, they depart), so *that* destitution and also winter, produced
by demons who are worshipping the demon, rush together from the vicinity
of disaster (vôighn) on to the countries of Irân, where even rain
becomes scanty and pestilence is secretly advancing and deceiving, so
that deaths become numerous; thus even *he* of perverted wisdom, who is
wicked, and the apostate also, who is unrighteous, rush together in
companionship. 20. As what *one* says they *all* exclaim thus: 'Consume
and destroy, *O* ruler! for *it* is to be consumed and destroyed by
thee; destroy even the fire, consume even as food those who are the
protection of the association enforcing *religious* obedience, and those
leading on the poor *man* of the righteous dispensation by their
guidance.' 21. So that they shall make him thoroughly detached and smite
him;

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

likewise wisdom is the wealth they bring him, *and* it is when property
is being carried off by them, *that* the wisdom conveyed by them arises.

22\. 'And in that age, *O* righteous *one of* the Spîtâmas! the coming
of my desire is not purely for thee, nor is a thorough belief *of* the
departure of life, so that the bringing *and* conducting of a speaker of
promises (mit*r*agôv) is not necessary; those of the perfect apostate
injure this discourse of thine, the Avesta and Zand, so that they shall
make *it* thoroughly weak; *and* those of the perfect apostate harass
their own souls, for love of the wealth which he produced.'

23\. And about the ninth and tenth centuries this also it says, that,
'*as* that age proceeds, this is what occurs, *O* Zaratû*s*t of the
Spîtâmas! when many apostates utter the righteousness of priestly
instruction and authority, *which* is wickedness towards me, they cause
begging for water, they wither vegetation, and they put down all
excellence which is due to the manifestation of righteousness.'

24\. Again Zaratû*s*t enquired of him thus: 'What do they so produce by
that, *O* Aûha*r*ma*zd*! when they cause begging for water, they wither
vegetation, and they put down all excellence due to the manifestation of
righteousness?' 25. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'They so produce those
*things* among them, *O* Zaratû*s*t! when they mention a greater reward
for bantlings *and* relations than that of their own souls (that is,
they talk more concerning their allowance, where it is that for their
own). 26. Moreover, they give to the Kîgs *and* Karaps, for some repute
*with* the shepherd people of the husbandman, and with the swift-horsed
people *of* the warrior, as

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

though they would provide us <span id="fr_278"></span>[1](#fn_275) here
*below* with a large share of meat, that they would make our privilege,
just as we <span id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_275) here supply him with
meat whom we render greatly precious. 27. The property *of* even a
wicked *man* here *below*, *O* Zaratû*s*t! in the average opinion among
the disorganized (anârâstânŏ) is a dignified provision (that is, we form
a strong opinion, the approval *of which* is more to be asserted as
*being* the opinion of a poor righteous *man*, about a worthy righteous
*man* whose manifest righteousness is a homage (franâmi*s*nŏ) to duty
*and* good works).'

28\. Again he enquired of him thus: 'Is there so perfect a manifestation
here *below*, in the age of the worldly existence of the religion of the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers (that is, is there a lodgement of the religion of
the Ma*zd*a-worshippers in any one)?' 29. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus:
'It is so, among those men of mine <span
id="fr_280"></span>[2](#fn_276), *O* Zaratû*s*t! for here *below there*
are priests who are eloquent, and they, too, are men voluble and
requisite in the embodied existence, all-beneficent and producing the
destruction *of* harm and the wizard; the people of the wicked tyrant
say also regarding them, *that*, excepting thee, *O* Zaratû*s*t! they
rightly practise righteousness more largely, more powerfully, *and* more
volubly. 30. Blind are those *of* the fiend, who are consulting with
thee and are unaware of the tyrant; and observant are also those *of*
the fiend who consult with them and think of *their* intelligence, and
oppose the imbecile (anâkâsîh-aûmônd) apostate who is near them, so that

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

they say <span id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_277) this, namely: "*As to*
this which thou tellest us, *it* is evidently not so as thou sayest," of
which they speak thus: "This duty of thy man is not mine (that is, it is
not necessary for me to perform) nor thine (that is, it is not necessary
even *for* thee to perform), because *it* is not this which is
righteousness (that is, not a good work)." 31. For this *one* is
produced for these words *and* thoughts of thine, *of* whom thou, too,
art aware, he who is whatever is here *below* of Aûshê*d*ar <span
id="fr_282"></span>[2](#fn_278) of thoughtful controversy, *O*
Zaratû*s*t of the Spîtâmas! for he brings into notice, through the
intermingling of his own soul, *him* who is righteous, or has not become
*so*.'

32\. This, too, he says, namely: '*Of* those, *O* Zaratû*s*t of the
Spîtâmas! who come in the ninth and tenth centuries, I tell thee that
they are *of* the fiend *of* Greed (Âzî); it is in *her* womb that they
are to be fashioned, they who assist those who would be vicious, through
pre-eminence in leader-ship, or through excellence in subserviency.'

33\. And this, too, it says about them: 'Those men are much to be
destroyed;' so it is said by Aûha*r*ma*zd* that 'these who are
righteous, who carry away a corpse in this world, distress their fire,
according to every high-priest <span id="fr_283"></span>[3](#fn_279),
and even long-flowing water; their bodies, which are really
cesspools <span id="fr_284"></span>[4](#fn_280) of a terrible character,
become very assisting for the tormentors whose corpses are grievously
wicked. 34. Concerning them I tell thee, *O* Zaratû*s*t

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

of the Spîtâmas! that, in the ninth and tenth centuries, *there* come
those who are the brood of the fiend and the wound-producer
(reshgâr) <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_281) of the evil spirit; even
one of them is more to be destroyed than ten demon-worshippers <span
id="fr_286"></span>[2](#fn_282); they also produce extermination for
these who are mine, for these of my religion, whom they, call a
provision for destruction (that is, when it is possible to live in our
way, and *ours* are wicked, they diminish in superiority). 35. Even the
iniquity that they shall commit in leadership and subserviency, the sin
which is smiting thee, they call a trifle (khalakŏ), *O* pure *one* of
the Spîtâmas! and the smiter, they say, is *he* whom these of thy
religion of Ma*zd*a-worshippers smite. 36. Besides thee, *O* Zaratû*s*t!
they distress those *duties*, too, which *are* to be acquired *by* thy
people (lagânŏ); they think scornfully of this ceremonial of thine,
scornfully of *thy* worship, *O* Zaratû*s*t! *and* they think scornfully
of both the two blessed utterances <span
id="fr_287"></span>[3](#fn_283), the Avesta and Zand, which *were*
proclaimed *to* thee *by* me who am the most propitious of spirits. 37.
They foster villainous outrage, *and* they say the best work for mankind
is immoderate fighting whose joyfulness is due to actions that are
villainous; those, too, *that* they exterminate are the existences *due
to* the spirits, they exterminate their own souls, they exterminate the
embodied existences *of* the world; *and* they produce lamentation for
the soul, and even the religion, as regards what is the mode of
controlling orthodox people *together* with the iniquitous of the same
period.'

38\. And this, too, it says, that Zaratû*s*t enquired

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of Aûha*r*ma*zd* thus: 'So what *shall* we prescribe for those who are
not capable, through *being* poor (that is, they have no means), nor
have they troops, nor a protector over *them*, and they have many
persecutors?' 39. *And* Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'The
strong-minded <span id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_284) man, through
understanding, is a token of the development of those who, not being in
the army, are capable; their persecutors also are many, and the passing
over of authority is owing to the iniquitous of the same period.'

40\. This, too, it says, that Zaratû*s*t enquired thus: 'Is he, *O*
Aûha*r*ma*zd*! who is a Kai *or* a Karap, or he who is a most evil ruler
in authority, mingled again with the good?' 41. *And* Aûha*r*ma*zd*
spoke thus: 'Even he <span id="fr_289"></span>[2](#fn_285).'

42\. Zaratû*s*t *also* enquired thus: 'Is he, too, *O* Aûha*r*ma*zd*!
who is *one of* those of the good sovereignty, mingled again with the
good; or these, *such* as the Kaîsar and Khâkân <span
id="fr_290"></span>[3](#fn_286)?' 43. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus:
'Even that *former*, *O* Zaratû*s*t!'

44\. About the same iniquitous <span id="fr_291"></span>[4](#fn_287)
this, too, he says, namely: ‘When they are aware and understand about
the sayings (galimakŏ) due to righteousness, they are pleased, so that a
bribe seems better to them than duty and good works; they love the
darkness *rather* than light, the existence they love

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

is the worst existence *rather* than the best existence, *and* they
promote difficulty. 45. Concerning them, too, I tell thee that they are
more to be destroyed than the leaping (shas*p*ŏ) serpent which is like a
wolf *or* a lion, and they ever advance in malice *and* persecution from
that *time* till when that man arrives who is Kitrô-mêhônŏ <span
id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_288) the righteous, with the victorious club.
46. He *has* marched with fifty triplets of men <span
id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_289) who are disciples, powerful and tall,
looking after duties and ordinances, wide-shouldered, stout-armed, *and*
very hairy (kabed-milîh), so that their appearance is rough and of a
black colour <span id="fr_294"></span>[3](#fn_290), wherefore the demon
and the iniquity *proceeding* from him fear them. 47. He also smites the
evil spirit, *together* with *his* creatures; *and* those three manifest
branches, that worship the fiend with simultaneous worship, are really
these who march for eminent service on horses, even the Turkish demons
with dishevelled hair; the Arab, and also She*d*âspô <span
id="fr_295"></span>[4](#fn_291) the ecclesiastical Arûman.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

48\. 'And he *has* then to attract men, contented and discontented,
mostly through the incentive of duty; he who is not contented (that is,
not agreeing with what he says) contentedly pays respect to him, *O*
Zaratû*s*t! (so that he brings him into the religion). 49. Likewise,
through that club, he makes *one* press in the same manner; so that
*one* is distressed by his hand to hold *others in* contempt, through
the valiant arm and through the youthful bodily organs. 50. And he
attaches power and triumph to his religion of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and through
that power and triumph they become ever respected thenceforth, when
those arrive who are the sons of Zaratû*s*t, who shall pro-duce the
renovation in an existence undecaying *and* immortal, hungerless and
thirstless, the long-continued perpetuity including all.'

51\. And about the separation (burînakŏ) of the ten centuries in the one
millennium of Zaratû*s*t, *and* the tidings of Aûshê*d*ar <span
id="fr_296"></span>[1](#fn_292), son of Zaratû*s*t, it says also this,
namely: 'When that century fully elapses which is the first of the
religion of the Ma*zd*a-worshippers, from *the time when* Zaratû*s*t
came forward to *his* conference, what is the separation of *this* first
century?' 52. And Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'The sun conceals *itself*'
53. 'What is the separation after the second, third, fourth, *fifth*,
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, *or* tenth century?' 54. And
Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'The sun conceals *itself*.'

55\. Then, when thirty winters of the tenth century are unelapsed (that
is, thirty winters *are* remaining) a maiden, who is Shemig-abû <span
id="fr_297"></span>[2](#fn_293), walks up

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

to the water; she that is the mother of that famous Aûshê*d*ar, and her
former lineage is from Vohû-rô*k*ô-î Frahânyân <span
id="fr_298"></span>[1](#fn_294) in the family of Îsa*d*vâstar, the son
of Zaratû*s*t *that* is brought forth by Arang. 56. Then she sits in
that water *and* drinks it, and she kindles in a high degree those germs
which were the third *of* the last that the righteous Zaratû*s*t *was*
dropping forth originally, and they introduce that son whose name is the
Developer *of* Righteousness <span id="fr_299"></span>[2](#fn_295). 57.
Though *she* is fifteen years old, the girl (kanîg) *has* not before
that associated with men <span id="fr_300"></span>[3](#fn_296); nor
afterwards, when she becomes pregnant, *has she done so* before the time
when she gives birth.

58\. When that man becomes thirty years old, the sun stands still in the
zenith (bâlistŏ) of the sky *for* the duration of ten days *and* ten
nights, and it arrives again at that place where it *was* first
appointed by allotment, where it occupies one finger*-breadth* out of
the four finger*-breadths*, and it shines over all the regions which are
seven. 59. So, too, *O* Zaratû*s*t! of them themselves, their
declaration is thus, that they know that the separation of the
millennium, which this religion *has* heard about by listening, is thus;
*and* of those who do not even then know, that it is something which is
different.

60\. Then, when that man becomes thirty years old, he confers with the
archangels, the good rulers *and* good providers; *on* the morrow, in
the daylight of the day, *it is* moreover manifest, when the *embodied*
existence is thus undistressed—without

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

a Kaî and without a Karap (that is, not deaf and blind to the affairs of
the sacred beings), and is to be appropriated (that is, has not made its
own self apart *from* the affairs of the sacred beings), and is produced
full of life—that it has become extending (vâlân), and remains again
great *in* various places in Aîrân-vê*g* where the good Dâîti <span
id="fr_301"></span>[1](#fn_297) is.

61\. These are the characteristics as regards the two centuries which
are the ninth and tenth; the accuracy of what *was* to come has
continued *and* this has happened, and both are declared as regards the
accuracy which is stated on evidence as to what *will* happen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_266"></span>[94:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_269) The contents of
Chaps. VII-XI have some connection with the following summary in Dk.
VIII, xiv, 11, 12:—'*And* about the nature of the advancement of the
people of the period, the separation *of* centuries and millenniums,
*and* the signs, wonders, and perplexity which are manifested in the
world at the end of each millennium in the world. Also as to the birth
*and* arrival of Aûshê*d*ar, son of Zaratû*s*t, at the end of the first
millennium, and a report of him and his time, *and of* the many
destroyers of the organizers of the period between Zaratû*s*t's
millennium and the coming of Aûshê*d*ar.'

<span id="fn_267"></span>[94:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_270) This meaning for
vi*g*ârdŏ-vars is chiefly based upon the use of vi*g*âr*d* in AV. XXXIV,
5, for a woman's hair being 'combed.' These invaders of Irân from the
east, at the end of the first millennium of the religion, are mentioned
in Byt. II, 22, 24, 28; III, 1, 6, 13. They are called 'Turkish demons'
in § 47.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[94:3](sbe4712.htm#fr_271) The Byzantine
Christians.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[94:4](sbe4712.htm#fr_272) Zoroastrianism,
Muhammadanism, Christianity, and either Judaism or Idolatry.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[95:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_273) Ashavahi*s*tô,
Khû*r*da*d*, and Spenda*r*ma*d*.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[96:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_274) Or it may be hênô,
'squadrons.'

<span id="fn_272"></span>[96:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_275) The chief
officiating priest in religious ceremonies.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[98:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_276) So far, this
statement (§§ 11-16) seems to be ascribed to Aûha*r*ma*zd*; but what
follows (§§ 17, 18, 20) appears to represent the sentiments of some
Irânians of those later times.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[98:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_277) See Chap. II, 9 n.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[100:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_279) The archangels.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[100:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_280) Reading minam,
instead of madam which is unintelligible here.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[101:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_281) To the apostate.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[101:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_282) See §§ 55-60 and
Chap. I, 42 n. Here spelt Aûkhshê*d*ar.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[101:3](sbe4712.htm#fr_283) Reading dastûr,
instead of vastûr.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[101:4](sbe4712.htm#fr_284) Pahl. mayâ-vakhdûn
= Pers. âb-gîr.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[102:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_285) Or it may be
riyâgâr, 'hypocrite.'

<span id="fn_282"></span>[102:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_286) Or 'idolators.'

<span id="fn_283"></span>[102:3](sbe4712.htm#fr_287) Pahl. vâfrîgânîh =
Av. urvâtâ.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[103:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_288) Assuming that
tôshtŏ-mîni*s*nŏ is a miswriting of toshînŏ-mini*s*nŏ.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[103:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_289) That is, after
expiating his misdeeds by his allotted punishment. The last thirteen
Pahlavi words of §§ 42, 43 are also added here by mistake in the MS.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[103:3](sbe4712.htm#fr_290) The Byzantine
emperor and the sovereign Khân of the invaders from the east.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[103:4](sbe4712.htm#fr_291) Mentioned in §§ 37,
39.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[104:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_292) So spelt here, but
in Dk. IX, xli, 6, it is *K*itrag-mêhônŏ, and other slight variations
occur in the best MSS. of Bd. XX, 7, 31; XXIX, 5; Byt. III, 25, 26; Dd.
XC, 3; but they can all be traced to an, original *K*itrô-mêhan = Av.
*K*ithrô-maêthanem, 'of the racial home,' a title applied both to the
river and the immortal sacerdotal ruler of Kangd*ez*. The latter is
supposed to be Pêshyôtanŏ, a son of king Vi*s*tâsp, who is expected to
restore religious rites in Irân and throughout the world.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[104:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_293) With 150 disciples,
as stated in Byt. III, 27, 29, 42. Here it is written levat*â* 50
3-gabrâân.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[104:3](sbe4712.htm#fr_294) Byt. III, 27, 29,
42, states that they wear black marten fur.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[104:4](sbe4712.htm#fr_295) In Byt. III, 3, 5,
8, 21, this name is written Shê*d*âspîh which can also be read
Shê*d*âsfa*s*, and is probably a corrupt pronunciation of the name of
some Byzantine emperor or general (such as Theodosius) who had signally
defeated the Persians some time in the fifth to seventh century, in
which period Zaratû*s*t's millennium probably ended.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[105:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_296) See Chap. I, 42.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[105:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_297) 'Having a renowned
father,' the Zvâri*s* of Av. Srûta*d*-fedhri. Yt. XIII, 141.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[106:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_298) See Yt. XIII, 97.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[106:2](sbe4712.htm#fr_299) The Pahlavi
interpretation of Aûshê*d*ar which is an imperfect transcript of the Av.
Ukhshya*d*-ereta of Yt. XIII, 128.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[106:3](sbe4712.htm#fr_300) Pahl. 'levat*â*
gab*r*âânŏ ba*r*â vepayî*d*ŏ.'

<span id="fn_297"></span>[107:1](sbe4712.htm#fr_301) See Chap. III, 51,
54; Bd. XX, 13. It is the name of a river.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](sbe4713)
