[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow12)  [Next](vow14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

### PART V.

BUT I perceive, O Asclepios, that thou art anxious to know in what
manner Heaven and those who inhabit it can be the object of the
aspiration and adoration of man; learn, then, O Asclepios, that to
aspire after the God of heaven and all those who are therein is to
render them frequent homage; for alone of all animated beings, divine
and human, man is able to render it. The admiration, adoration, praise,
and homage of man rejoice heaven and the celestial inhabitants; and the
choir of the Muses has been sent among men by the supreme Divinity in
order that the terrestrial world might not be without the sweet science
of hymns; or rather that the human voice might celebrate Him who only is
All, since He is the Father of all things, and that the tender harmonies
of earth might ever unite themselves with the celestial choirs. Only a
few men, rarely endowed with a pure intelligence, are entrusted with
this holy function of beholding heaven clearly. Those in whom the
confusion of their two natures holds the intelligence captive under the
weight of the body, are appointed to have communion with the inferior
elements. Man is not, then, debased because he has a mortal part; on the
contrary, this mortality augments his aptitudes and his power; his
double functions are possible to him only by his double nature; he is
constituted in such a manner that he can embrace alike the terrestrial
and the divine. I desire, O Asclepios, that thou mayest bring to this
exposition all the attention and all the ardour of thy mind; for many
are wanting in

\[faith

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

faith concerning these things. And now I am about to unfold true
principles for the instruction of the holiest intelligences.

<span id="img_sep00"></span> ![](img/sep00.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](vow14)
