[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow10)  [Next](vow12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### PART III.

MAN, then, Asclepios, is a great marvel; a creature worthy of respect
and adoration. For amid this divine Nature he moves as if he himself
were a God. He knows the order of the genii, and, aware that he is of
the same origin, he despises the human side of his being in order to
attach himself exclusively to the divine element.

How happily constituted and near to the Gods is humanity! In joining
himself to the divine, man disdains that which he has in him of the
earthly; he connects himself by a bond of love to all other beings, and
thereby feels himself necessary to the universal order. He contemplates
heaven; and in this happy middle sphere in which he is placed, he loves
all that is below him, he is beloved of all that is above. He cultivates
the earth; he borrows the speed of the elements; his piercing thought
fathoms the deeps of the sea. Everything is clear for him. Heaven does
not seem to him too high, for knowledge lifts him to it. The brightness
of his mind is not obscured by the thick mists of the air; the earth's
gravitation is no obstacle to his efforts; the profundity of deep seas
does not disturb him; he includes everything and remains everywhere the
same.

All animate beings have as it were roots passing downwards; inanimate
beings, on the contrary, have a single root passing from below upwards,
and supporting a whole forest of branches. Some creatures nourish

\[themselves

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

themselves upon two elements, others upon one only. There are two kinds
of aliment for the two portions of the creature--one for the soul and
another for the body. The soul of the world sustains itself by perpetual
motion. Bodies develop themselves by means of water and of earth, the
aliments of the inferior world. The spirit which fills everything,
mingles with everything, and vivifies everything, adds consciousness to
the intelligence, which, by a peculiar privilege, man borrows from the
fifth element--the ether. In man, the consciousness is raised to the
knowledge of the divine order.

Since I am led to speak of the consciousness, I will presently expound
to you its function, which is great and holy as that of divinity itself.
But let us first complete the exposition already begun. I was speaking
of union with the Gods--a privilege which they accord only to humanity.
A few men only have the happiness of rising to that perception of the
Divine which subsists only in God and in the human intelligence.

*Asclepios*:

Are, then, not all men similarly conscient, Trismegistos?

*Hermes*:

All, Asclepios, have not the true intelligence. They are deceived when
they suffer themselves to be drawn after the image of things, without
seeking for the true reason of them. It is thus that evil is produced in
man; and that the first of all creatures lowers himself almost to the
level of the brutes.

\[But

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

But I will speak to you of the consciousness and all that belongs to it,
when I come to my exposition of the mind. For man alone is a dual
creature. One of the two parts of which he consists is single, and, as
the Greeks say, essential; that is, formed after the divine likeness.
The part which the Greeks call Kosmic--that is, belonging to the
world--is quadruple, and constitutes the body, which, in man, serves as
an envelope to the divine principle. This divine principle, and that
which belongs to it, the perceptions of the pure intelligence, conceal
themselves behind the rampart of the body. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[53:1](vow11.htm#fr_32) "The five elements of
the Microcosm are here made to correspond with the five elements which
the Greeks allotted to the Macrocosm; earth, water, air, fire, and
ether. Trismegistos says that man obtains his intelligence from "the
ether--the fifth element." Trismegistos includes in the body the
physical particles, the exterior consciousness, the magnetic forces, and
the sensible or mundane mind. In the fifth element he includes the
immortal part--soul and spirit; since he speaks of the "divine principle
and that which belongs to it--the perceptions of the pure intelligence."
The soul, as we have already seen in the "Virgin of the world," is the
percipient principle of man; the spirit is the divine light by means of
which she sees. It is advisable, in this place, to point out, for the
sake of a clear under-standing of what follows, that Hermetic doctrine
regards man as having a twofold nature. For he is in one sense a child
of the earth, developed by progressive evolution from below upwards; a
true animal, and therefore bound by strict ties of kinship with the
lower races, and of allegiance to Nature. In the other sense, man
descends from above, and is of celestial origin; because when a certain
point in his development from below is reached, the human soul focuses
and fixes the Divine Spirit, which is peculiarly the attribute of man,
and the possession of which constitutes his sovereignty over all other
creatures. And until this vivification of the soul occurs, man is not
truly Man in the Hermetic sense.

A.K.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](vow12)
