[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Gnostic and Hermetic](../../gno/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](vow29)  [Next](vow31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002FGTM4C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Virgin of the World*, by Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland,
\[1884\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART III.

THE Lord, the Creator of immortal forms, O Tatios, after having
accomplished His work, made nothing further, nor does He now make
anything. Once consigned to themselves and united to one another, these
eternal forms move without having need of anything; or if, indeed, they
are necessary one to another, they have at least no need of any
extraneous impulsion, since they are immortal. Such ought, indeed, to be
the nature of the creations of the supreme God. But our (immediate)
maker has a body; he has brought us forth, and unceasingly he brings
forth, and will bring forth dissoluble and mortal bodies, for he ought
not to imitate his own Creator, and, moreover, he cannot. For the first
has evolved His

\[creations

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

creations from His own essence, primordial and incorporeal; the second
has formed us of that which is corporeal and engendered. Whence it
follows naturally, that heavenly forms born of incorporeal essence are
imperishable, while our bodies, being constituted of corporeal matter,
are consequently weak in themselves, and need extraneous assistance.

For how, indeed, could the combination which composes our bodies be
sustained, if it were not continually fed and supported by elements of
the same nature? The earth, the water, the fire, and the air flow into
us and renew our covering. We are so weak that we cannot even endure a
single day of movement. Thou knowest well, my son, that without the
repose of the night our bodies would not resist the day's toil. For this
reason our good creator, in his universal providence, has ensured the
continual life of his creatures by devising sleep, the restorer of
movement, and by assigning to repose an equal or even longer time (than
to labour). Meditate, my son, on this virtue of sleep, opposed to that
of the soul, and not less energetic. For if the function of the soul be
movement, bodies cannot live without slumber, which loosens and unbinds
the yoke of the organism, and by its restoring action dispenses to it
the matter which it needs, giving water to the blood, earth to the
bones, air to the nerves and vessels, fire to the eyes. And hence the
great pleasure which the body finds in sleep.

\[A great

\[NOTE.--The opening passage of this fragmentary discourse will not lead
the reader into error if he bears in mind the pantheistic character of
all Hermetic teaching. The influx of the divine substance into the
universe is perpetual, but the channels or forms through which <span
id="page_132">p. 132</span> it flows are immutable, unchangeable, and
self-sustaining. The method of nature is determined from the beginning,
and is incapable of variation or of intermittance. But the descent of
soul into generation is a continual process, and will not cease until
the creative period or "Day of Manifestation" closes. There has never
been any suspension of the divine energies since the commencement of
their primordial operation. The outflow of Being into Existence is
unending, otherwise natural generation would cease, and evolution be
arrested. The secondary creator mentioned in this fragment is the
Demiourgos, the [fabricator](errata.htm#3) of the material universe.

A.K.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part IV](vow31)
