<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act020)  [Next](act022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 21:0</span></span>

([Act 21:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001).md) Paul's voyage towards
Jerusalem.

([Act 21:8-18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008).md) Paul at Cesarea. The
prophecy of Agabus, Paul at Jerusalem.

([Act 21:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#019).md) He is persuaded to
join in ceremonial observances.

([Act 21:27-40](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027).md) Being in danger from
the Jews, he is rescued by the Romans.

[Acts 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 21:1</span></span>

Providence must be acknowledged when our affairs go on well. Wherever
Paul came, he inquired what disciples were there, and found them out.
Foreseeing his troubles, from love to him, and concern for the church,
they wrongly thought it would be most for the glory of God that he
should continue at liberty; but their earnestness to dissuade him from
it, renders his pious resolution the more illustrious. He has taught us
by example, as well as by rule, to pray always, to pray without ceasing.
Their last farewell was sweetened with prayer.

[Acts 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 21:8</span></span>

Paul had express warning of his troubles, that when they came, they
might be no surprise or terror to him. The general notice given us, that
through much tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of God, should
be of the same use to us. Their weeping began to weaken and slacken his
resolution Has not our Master told us to take up our cross? It was a
trouble to him, that they should so earnestly press him to do that in
which he could not gratify them without wronging his conscience. When we
see trouble coming, it becomes us to say, not only, The will of the Lord
must be done, and there is no remedy; but, Let the will of the Lord be
done; for his will is his wisdom, and he doeth all according to the
counsel of it. When a trouble is come, this must allay our griefs, that
the will of the Lord is done; when we see it coming, this must silence
our fears, that the will of the Lord shall be done; and we ought to say,
Amen, let it be done. It is honourable to be an old disciple of Jesus
Christ, to have been enabled by the grace of God to continue long in a
course of duty, stedfast in the faith, growing more and more
experienced, to a good old age. And with these old disciples one would
choose to lodge; for the multitude of their years shall teach wisdom.
Many brethren at Jerusalem received Paul gladly. We think, perhaps, that
if we had him among us, we should gladly receive him; but we should not,
if, having his doctrine, we do not gladly receive that.

[Acts 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 21:19</span></span>

Paul ascribed all his success to God, and to God they gave the praise.
God had honoured him more than any of the apostles, yet they did not
envy him; but on the contrary, glorified the Lord. They could not do
more to encourage Paul to go on cheerfully in his work. James and the
elders of the church at Jerusalem, asked Paul to gratify the believing
Jews, by some compliance with the ceremonial law. They thought it was
prudent in him to conform thus far. It was great weakness to be so fond
of the shadows, when the substance was come. The religion Paul preached,
tended not to destroy the law, but to fulfil it. He preached Christ, the
end of the law for righteousness, and repentance and faith, in which we
are to make great use of the law. The weakness and evil of the human
heart strongly appear, when we consider how many, even of the disciples
of Christ, had not due regard to the most eminent minister that even
lived. Not the excellence of his character, nor the success with which
God blessed his labours, could gain their esteem and affection, seeing
that he did not render the same respect as themselves to mere ceremonial
observances. How watchful should we be against prejudices! The apostles
were not free from blame in all they did; and it would be hard to defend
Paul from the charge of giving way too much in this matter. It is vain
to attempt to court the favour of zealots, or bigots to a party. This
compliance of Paul did not answer, for the very thing by which he hoped
to pacify the Jews, provoked them, and brought him into trouble. But the
all-wise God overruled both their advice and Paul's compliance with it,
to serve a better purpose than was intended. It was in vain to think of
pleasing men who would be pleased with nothing but the rooting out of
Christianity. Integrity and uprightness will be more likely to preserve
us than insincere compliances. And it should warn us not to press men to
doing what is contrary to their own judgment to oblige us.

[Acts 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 21:27</span></span>

In the temple, where Paul should have been protected as in a place of
safety, he was violently set upon. They falsely charged him with ill
doctrine and ill practice against the Mosaic ceremonies. It is no new
thing for those who mean honestly and act regularly, to have things laid
to their charge which they know not and never thought of. It is common
for the wise and good to have that charged against them by malicious
people, with which they thought to have obliged them. God often makes
those a protection to his people, who have no affection to them, but
only have compassion for sufferers, and regard to the public peace. And
here see what false, mistaken notions of good people and good ministers,
many run away with. But God seasonably interposes for the safety of his
servants, from wicked and unreasonable men; and gives them opportunities
to speak for themselves, to plead for the Redeemer, and to spread abroad
his glorious gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 22](act022.md)

</div>
