<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act008)  [Next](act010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 9:0</span></span>

([Act 9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001).md) The conversion of Saul.

([Act 9:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010).md) Saul converted preaches
Christ.

([Act 9:23-31](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023).md) Saul is persecuted at
Damascus, and goes to Jerusalem.

([Act 9:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032).md) Cure of Aeneas.

([Act 9:36-43](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036).md) Dorcas raised to life.

[Acts 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 9:1</span></span>

So ill informed was Saul, that he thought he ought to do all he could
against the name of Christ, and that he did God service thereby; he
seemed to breathe in this as in his element. Let us not despair of
renewing grace for the conversion of the greatest sinners, nor let such
despair of the pardoning mercy of God for the greatest sin. It is a
signal token of Divine favour, if God, by the inward working of his
grace, or the outward events of his providence, stops us from
prosecuting or executing sinful purposes. Saul saw that Just One, [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014.md) and [Act
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#013.md). How near to us is the unseen
world! It is but for God to draw aside the veil, and objects are
presented to the view, compared with which, whatever is most admired on
earth is mean and contemptible. Saul submitted without reserve, desirous
to know what the Lord Jesus would have him to do. Christ's discoveries
of himself to poor souls are humbling; they lay them very low, in mean
thoughts of themselves. For three days Saul took no food, and it pleased
God to leave him for that time without relief. His sins were now set in
order before him; he was in the dark concerning his own spiritual state,
and wounded in spirit for sin. When a sinner is brought to a proper
sense of his own state and conduct, he will cast himself wholly on the
mercy of the Saviour, asking what he would have him to do. God will
direct the humbled sinner, and though he does not often bring
transgressors to joy and peace in believing, without sorrows and
distress of conscience, under which the soul is deeply engaged as to
eternal things, yet happy are those who sow in tears, for they shall
reap in joy.

[Acts 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 9:10</span></span>

A good work was begun in Saul, when he was brought to Christ's feet with
those words, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And never did Christ
leave any who were brought to that. Behold, the proud Pharisee, the
unmerciful oppressor, the daring blasphemer, prayeth! And thus it is
even now, and with the proud infidel, or the abandoned sinner. What
happy tidings are these to all who understand the nature and power of
prayer, of such prayer as the humbled sinner presents for the blessings
of free salvation! Now he began to pray after another manner than he had
done; before, he said his prayers, now, he prayed them. Regenerating
grace sets people on praying; you may as well find a living man without
breath, as a living Christian without prayer. Yet even eminent
disciples, like Ananias, sometimes stagger at the commands of the Lord.
But it is the Lord's glory to surpass our scanty expectations, and show
that those are vessels of his mercy whom we are apt to consider as
objects of his vengeance. The teaching of the Holy Spirit takes away the
scales of ignorance and pride from the understanding; then the sinner
becomes a new creature, and endeavours to recommend the anointed
Saviour, the Son of God, to his former companions.

[Acts 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 9:23</span></span>

When we enter into the way of God, we must look for trials; but the Lord
knows how to deliver the godly, and will, with the temptation, also make
a way to escape. Though Saul's conversion was and is a proof of the
truth of Christianity, yet it could not, of itself, convert one soul at
enmity with the truth; for nothing can produce true faith, but that
power which new-creates the heart. Believers are apt to be too
suspicious of those against whom they have prejudices. The world is full
of deceit, and it is necessary to be cautious, but we must exercise
charity, [Co1 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005.md). The Lord will
clear up the characters of true believers; and he will bring them to his
people, and often gives them opportunities of bearing testimony to his
truth, before those who once witnessed their hatred to it. Christ now
appeared to Saul, and ordered him to go quickly out of Jerusalem, for he
must be sent to the Gentiles: see [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021.md). Christ's witnesses cannot be
slain till they have finished their testimony. The persecutions were
stayed. The professors of the gospel walked uprightly, and enjoyed much
comfort from the Holy Ghost, in the hope and peace of the gospel, and
others were won over to them. They lived upon the comfort of the Holy
Ghost, not only in the days of trouble and affliction, but in days of
rest and prosperity. Those are most likely to walk cheerfully, who walk
circumspectly.

[Acts 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 9:32</span></span>

Christians are saints, or holy people; not only the eminent ones, as
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, but every sincere professor of the faith of
Christ. Christ chose patients whose diseases were incurable in the
course of nature, to show how desperate was the case of fallen mankind.
When we were wholly without strength, as this poor man, he sent his word
to heal us. Peter does not pretend to heal by any power of his own, but
directs Aeneas to look up to Christ for help. Let none say, that because
it is Christ, who, by the power of his grace, works all our works in us,
therefore we have no work, no duty to do; for though Jesus Christ makes
thee whole, yet thou must arise, and use the power he gives thee.

[Acts 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 9:36</span></span>

Many are full of good words, who are empty and barren in good works; but
Tabitha was a great doer, no great talker. Christians who have not
property to give in charity, may yet be able to do acts of charity,
working with their hands, or walking with their feet, for the good of
others. Those are certainly best praised whose own works praise them,
whether the words of others do so or not. But such are ungrateful
indeed, who have kindness shown them, and will not acknowledge it, by
showing the kindness that is done them. While we live upon the fulness
of Christ for our whole salvation, we should desire to be full of good
works, for the honour of his name, and for the benefit of his saints.
Such characters as Dorcas are useful where they dwell, as showing the
excellency of the word of truth by their lives. How mean then the cares
of the numerous females who seek no distinction but outward decoration,
and who waste their lives in the trifling pursuits of dress and vanity!
Power went along with the word, and Dorcas came to life. Thus in the
raising of dead souls to spiritual life, the first sign of life is the
opening of the eyes of the mind. Here we see that the Lord can make up
every loss; that he overrules every event for the good of those who
trust in him, and for the glory of his name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 10](act010.md)

</div>
