<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act022)  [Next](act024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 23:0</span></span>

([Act 23:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001).md) Paul's defence before
the council of the Jews.

([Act 23:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006).md) Paul's defence. He
receives a Divine assurance that he shall go to Rome.

([Act 23:12-24](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012).md) The Jews conspire to
kill Paul, Lysias sends him to Cesarea.

([Act 23:25-35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#025).md) Lysias's letter to
Felix.

[Acts 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 23:1</span></span>

See here the character of an honest man. He sets God before him, and
lives as in his sight. He makes conscience of what he says and does,
and, according to the best of his knowledge, he keeps from whatever is
evil, and cleaves to what is good. He is conscientious in all his words
and conduct. Those who thus live before God, may, like Paul, have
confidence both toward God and man. Though the answer of Paul contained
a just rebuke and prediction, he seems to have been too angry at the
treatment he received in uttering them. Great men may be told of their
faults, and public complaints may be made in a proper manner; but the
law of God requires respect for those in authority.

[Acts 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 23:6</span></span>

The Pharisees were correct in the faith of the Jewish church. The
Sadducees were no friends to the Scripture or Divine revelation; they
denied a future state; they had neither hope of eternal happiness, nor
dread of eternal misery. When called in question for his being a
Christian, Paul might truly say he was called in question for the hope
of the resurrection of the dead. It was justifiable in him, by this
profession of his opinion on that disputed point, to draw off the
Pharisees from persecuting him, and to lead them to protect him from
this unlawful violence. How easily can God defend his own cause! Though
the Jews seemed to be perfectly agreed in their conspiracy against
religion, yet they were influenced by very different motives. There is
no true friendship among the wicked, and in a moment, and with the
utmost ease, God can turn their union into open enmity. Divine
consolations stood Paul in the most stead; the chief captain rescued him
out of the hands of cruel men, but the event he could not tell. Whoever
is against us, we need not fear, if the Lord stand by us. It is the will
of Christ, that his servants who are faithful, should be always
cheerful. He might think he should never see Rome; but God tells him,
even in that he should be gratified, since he desired to go there only
for the honour of Christ, and to do good.

[Acts 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 23:12</span></span>

False religious principles, adopted by carnal men, urge on to such
wickedness, as human nature would hardly be supposed capable of. Yet the
Lord readily disappoints the best concerted schemes of iniquity. Paul
knew that the Divine providence acts by reasonable and prudent means;
and that, if he neglected to use the means in his power, he could not
expect God's providence to work on his behalf. He who will not help
himself according to his means and power, has neither reason nor
revelation to assure him that he shall receive help from God. Believing
in the Lord, we and ours shall be kept from every evil work, and kept to
his kingdom. Heavenly Father, give us by thy Holy Spirit, for Christ's
sake, this precious faith.

[Acts 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 23:25</span></span>

God has instruments for every work. The natural abilities and moral
virtues of the heathens often have been employed to protect his
persecuted servants. Even the men of the world can discern between the
conscientious conduct of upright believers, and the zeal of false
professors, though they disregard or understand not their doctrinal
principles. All hearts are in God's hand, and those are blessed who put
their trust in him, and commit their ways unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 24](act024.md)

</div>
