<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act001)  [Next](act003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 2:0</span></span>

([Act 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001).md) The descent of the Holy
Spirit at the day of Pentecost.

([Act 2:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005).md) The apostles speak in
divers languages.

(v. 14-36) Peter's address to the Jews.

([Act 2:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037).md) Three thousand souls
converted.

([Act 2:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042).md) The piety and affection
of the disciples.

[Acts 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 2:1</span></span>

We cannot forget how often, while their Master was with them there were
strifes among the disciples which should be the greatest; but now all
these strifes were at an end. They had prayed more together of late.
Would we have the Spirit poured out upon us from on high, let us be all
of one accord. And notwithstanding differences of sentiments and
interests, as there were among those disciples, let us agree to love one
another; for where brethren dwell together in unity, there the Lord
commands his blessing. A rushing mighty wind came with great force. This
was to signify the powerful influences and working of the Spirit of God
upon the minds of men, and thereby upon the world. Thus the convictions
of the Spirit make way for his comforts; and the rough blasts of that
blessed wind, prepare the soul for its soft and gentle gales. There was
an appearance of something like flaming fire, lighting on every one of
them, according to John Baptist's saying concerning Christ; He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. The Spirit, like fire,
melts the heart, burns up the dross, and kindles pious and devout
affections in the soul; in which, as in the fire on the altar, the
spiritual sacrifices are offered up. They were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, more than before. They were filled with the graces of the Spirit,
and more than ever under his sanctifying influences; more weaned from
this world, and better acquainted with the other. They were more filled
with the comforts of the Spirit, rejoiced more than ever in the love of
Christ and the hope of heaven: in it all their griefs and fears were
swallowed up. They were filled with the gifts of the Holy Ghost; they
had miraculous powers for the furtherance of the gospel. They spake, not
from previous though or meditation, but as the Spirit gave them
utterance.

[Acts 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 2:5</span></span>

The difference in languages which arose at Babel, has much hindered the
spread of knowledge and religion. The instruments whom the Lord first
employed in spreading the Christian religion, could have made no
progress without this gift, which proved that their authority was from
God.

[Acts 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 2:14</span></span>

Peter's sermon shows that he was thoroughly recovered from his fall, and
thoroughly restored to the Divine favour; for he who had denied Christ,
now boldly confessed him. His account of the miraculous pouring forth of
the Spirit, was designed to awaken the hearers to embrace the faith of
Christ, and to join themselves to his church. It was the fulfilling the
Scripture, and the fruit of Christ's resurrection and ascension, and
proof of both. Though Peter was filled with the Holy Ghost, and spake
with tongues as the Spirit gave him utterance, yet he did not think to
set aside the Scriptures. Christ's scholars never learn above their
Bible; and the Spirit is given, not to do away the Scriptures, but to
enable us to understand, approve, and obey them. Assuredly none will
escape the condemnation of the great day, except those who call upon the
name of the Lord, in and through his Son Jesus Christ, as the Saviour of
sinners, and the Judge of all mankind.

[Acts 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 2:22</span></span>

From this gift of the Holy Ghost, Peter preaches unto them Jesus: and
here is the history of Christ. Here is an account of his death and
sufferings, which they witnessed but a few weeks before. His death is
considered as God's act; and of wonderful grace and wisdom. Thus Divine
justice must be satisfied, God and man brought together again, and
Christ himself glorified, according to an eternal counsel, which could
not be altered. And as the people's act; in them it was an act of awful
sin and folly. Christ's resurrection did away the reproach of his death;
Peter speaks largely upon this. Christ was God's Holy One, sanctified
and set apart to his service in the work of redemption. His death and
sufferings should be, not to him only, but to all his, the entrance to a
blessed life for evermore. This event had taken place as foretold, and
the apostles were witnesses. Nor did the resurrection rest upon this
alone; Christ had poured upon his disciples the miraculous gifts and
Divine influences, of which they witnessed the effects. Through the
Saviour, the ways of life are made known; and we are encouraged to
expect God's presence, and his favour for evermore. All this springs
from assured belief that Jesus is the Lord, and the anointed Saviour.

[Acts 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 2:37</span></span>

From the first delivery of that Divine message, it appeared that there
was Divine power going with it; and thousands were brought to the
obedience of faith. But neither Peter's words, nor the miracle they
witnessed, could have produced such effects, had not the Holy Spirit
been given. Sinners, when their eyes are opened, cannot but be pricked
to the heart for sin, cannot but feel an inward uneasiness. The apostle
exhorted them to repent of their sins, and openly to avow their belief
in Jesus as the Messiah, by being baptized in his name. Thus professing
their faith in Him, they would receive remission of their sins, and
partake of the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit. To separate from
wicked people, is the only way to save ourselves from them. Those who
repent of their sins, and give up themselves to Jesus Christ, must prove
their sincerity by breaking off from the wicked. We must save ourselves
from them; which denotes avoiding them with dread and holy fear. By
God's grace three thousand persons accepted the gospel invitation. There
can be no doubt that the gift of the Holy Ghost, which they all
received, and from which no true believer has ever been shut out, was
that Spirit of adoption, that converting, guiding, sanctifying grace,
which is bestowed upon all the members of the family of our heavenly
Father. Repentance and remission of sins are still preached to the chief
of sinners, in the Redeemer's name; still the Holy Spirit seals the
blessing on the believer's heart; still the encouraging promises are to
us and our children; and still the blessings are offered to all that are
afar off.

[Acts 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 2:42</span></span>

In these verses we have the history of the truly primitive church, of
the first days of it; its state of infancy indeed, but, like that, the
state of its greatest innocence. They kept close to holy ordinances, and
abounded in piety and devotion; for Christianity, when admitted in the
power of it, will dispose the soul to communion with God in all those
ways wherein he has appointed us to meet him, and has promised to meet
us. The greatness of the event raised them above the world, and the Holy
Ghost filled them with such love, as made every one to be to another as
to himself, and so made all things common, not by destroying property,
but doing away selfishness, and causing charity. And God who moved them
to it, knew that they were quickly to be driven from their possessions
in Judea. The Lord, from day to day, inclined the hearts of more to
embrace the gospel; not merely professors, but such as were actually
brought into a state of acceptance with God, being made partakers of
regenerating grace. Those whom God has designed for eternal salvation,
shall be effectually brought to Christ, till the earth is filled with
the knowledge of his glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 3](act003.md)

</div>
