<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 15:0</span></span>

([Act 15:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)) The dispute raised by
Judaizing teachers.

([Act 15:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)) The council at
Jerusalem.

([Act 15:22-35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)) The letter from the
council.

([Act 15:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)) Paul and Barnabas
separate.

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

Some from Judea taught the Gentile converts at Antioch, that they could
not be saved, unless they observed the whole ceremonial law as given by
Moses; and thus they sought to destroy Christian liberty. There is a
strange proneness in us to think that all do wrong who do not just as we
do. Their doctrine was very discouraging. Wise and good men desire to
avoid contests and disputes as far as they can; yet when false teachers
oppose the main truths of the gospel, or bring in hurtful doctrines, we
must not decline to oppose them.

[Acts 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 15:7</span></span>

We see from the words "purifying their hearts by faith," and the address
of St. Peter, that justification by faith, and sanctification by the
Holy Ghost, cannot be separated; and that both are the gift of God. We
have great cause to bless God that we have heard the gospel. May we have
that faith which the great Searcher of hearts approves, and attests by
the seal of the Holy Spirit. Then our hearts and consciences will be
purified from the guilt of sin, and we shall be freed from the burdens
some try to lay upon the disciples of Christ. Paul and Barnabas showed
by plain matters of fact, that God owned the preaching of the pure
gospel to the Gentiles without the law of Moses; therefore to press that
law upon them, was to undo what God had done. The opinion of James was,
that the Gentile converts ought not to be troubled about Jewish rites,
but that they should abstain from meats offered to idols, so that they
might show their hatred of idolatry. Also, that they should be cautioned
against fornication, which was not abhorred by the Gentiles as it should
be, and even formed a part of some of their rites. They were counselled
to abstain from things strangled, and from eating blood; this was
forbidden by the law of Moses, and also here, from reverence to the
blood of the sacrifices, which being then still offered, it would
needlessly grieve the Jewish converts, and further prejudice the
unconverted Jews. But as the reason has long ceased, we are left free in
this, as in the like matters. Let converts be warned to avoid all
appearances of the evils which they formerly practised, or are likely to
be tempted to; and caution them to use Christian liberty with moderation
and prudence.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

Being warranted to declare themselves directed by the immediate
influence of the Holy Ghost, the apostles and disciples were assured
that it seemed good unto God the Holy Spirit, as well as to them, to lay
upon the converts no other burden than the things before mentioned,
which were necessary, either on their own account, or from present
circumstances. It was a comfort to hear that carnal ordinances were no
longer imposed on them, which perplexed the conscience, but could not
purify or pacify it; and that those who troubled their minds were
silenced, so that the peace of the church was restored, and that which
threatened division was removed. All this was consolation for which they
blessed God. Many others were at Antioch. Where many labour in the word
and doctrine, yet there may be opportunity for us: the zeal and
usefulness of others should stir us up, not lay us asleep.

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

Here we have a private quarrel between two ministers, no less than Paul
and Barnabas, yet made to end well. Barnabas wished his nephew John Mark
to go with them. We should suspect ourselves of being partial, and guard
against this in putting our relations forward. Paul did not think him
worthy of the honour, nor fit for the service, who had departed from
them without their knowledge, or without their consent: see [Mar
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#013). Neither would yield, therefore
there was no remedy but they must part. We see that the best of men are
but men, subject to like passions as we are. Perhaps there were faults
on both sides, as usual in such contentions. Christ's example alone, is
a copy without a blot. Yet we are not to think it strange, if there are
differences among wise and good men. It will be so while we are in this
imperfect state; we shall never be all of one mind till we come to
heaven. But what mischief the remainders of pride and passion which are
found even in good men, do in the world, and do in the church! Many who
dwelt at Antioch, who had heard but little of the devotedness and piety
of Paul and Barnabas, heard of their dispute and separation; and thus it
will be with ourselves, if we give way to contention. Believers must be
constant in prayer, that they may never be led by the allowance of
unholy tempers, to hurt the cause they really desire to serve. Paul
speaks with esteem and affection both of Barnabas and Mark, in his
epistles, written after this event. May all who profess thy name, O
loving Saviour, be thoroughly reconciled by that love derived from thee
which is not easily provoked, and which soon forgets and buries
injuries.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016)

</div>
