<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act019)  [Next](act021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 20:0</span></span>

([Act 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001).md) Paul's journeys.

([Act 20:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007).md) Eutychus restored to
life.

([Act 20:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013).md) Paul travels towards
Jerusalem.

([Act 20:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017).md) Paul's discourse to
the elders of Ephesus.

([Act 20:28-38](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028).md) Their farewell.

[Acts 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 20:1</span></span>

Tumults or opposition may constrain a Christian to remove from his
station or alter his purpose, but his work and his pleasure will be the
same, wherever he goes. Paul thought it worth while to bestow five days
in going to Troas, though it was but for seven days' stay there; but he
knew, and so should we, how to redeem even journeying time, and to make
it turn to some good account.

[Acts 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 20:7</span></span>

Though the disciples read, and meditated, and prayed, and sung apart,
and thereby kept up communion with God, yet they came together to
worship God, and so kept up their communion with one another. They came
together on the first day of the week, the Lord's day. It is to be
religiously observed by all disciples of Christ. In the breaking of the
bread, not only the breaking of Christ's body for us, to be a sacrifice
for our sins, is remembered, but the breaking of Christ's body to us, to
be food and a feast for our souls, is signified. In the early times it
was the custom to receive the Lord's supper every Lord's day, thus
celebrating the memorial of Christ's death. In this assembly Paul
preached. The preaching of the gospel ought to go with the sacraments.
They were willing to hear, he saw they were so, and continued his speech
till midnight. Sleeping when hearing the word, is an evil thing, a sign
of low esteem of the word of God. We must do what we can to prevent
being sleepy; not put ourselves to sleep, but get our hearts affected
with the word we hear, so as to drive sleep far away. Infirmity requires
tenderness; but contempt requires severity. It interrupted the apostle's
preaching; but was made to confirm his preaching. Eutychus was brought
to life again. And as they knew not when they should have Paul's company
again, they made the best use of it they could, and reckoned a night's
sleep well lost for that purpose. How seldom are hours of repose broken
for the purposes of devotion! but how often for mere amusement or sinful
revelry! So hard is it for spiritual life to thrive in the heart of man!
so naturally do carnal practices flourish there!

[Acts 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 20:13</span></span>

Paul hastened to Jerusalem, but tried to do good by the way, when going
from place to place, as every good man should do. In doing God's work,
our own wills and those of our friends must often be crossed; we must
not spend time with them when duty calls us another way.

[Acts 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 20:17</span></span>

The elders knew that Paul was no designing, self-seeking man. Those who
would in any office serve the Lord acceptably, and profitably to others,
must do it with humility. He was a plain preacher, one that spoke his
message so as to be understood. He was a powerful preacher; he preached
the gospel as a testimony to them if they received it; but as a
testimony against them if they rejected it. He was a profitable
preacher; one that aimed to inform their judgments, and reform their
hearts and lives. He was a painful preacher, very industrious in his
work. He was a faithful preacher; he did not keep back reproofs when
necessary, nor keep back the preaching of the cross. He was a truly
Christian, evangelical preacher; he did not preach notions or doubtful
matters; nor affairs of state or the civil government; but he preached
faith and repentance. A better summary of these things, without which
there is no salvation, cannot be given: even repentance towards God, and
faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ, with their fruits and effects.
Without these no sinner can escape, and with these none will come short
of eternal life. Let them not think that Paul left Asia for fear of
persecution; he was in full expectation of trouble, yet resolved to go
on, well assured that it was by Divine direction. Thanks be to God that
we know not the things which shall befall us during the year, the week,
the day which has begun. It is enough for the child of God to know that
his strength shall be equal to his day. He knows not, he would not know,
what the day before him shall bring forth. The powerful influences of
the Holy Spirit bind the true Christian to his duty. Even when he
expects persecution and affliction, the love of Christ constrains him to
proceed. None of these things moved Paul from his work; they did not
deprive him of his comfort. It is the business of our life to provide
for a joyful death. Believing that this was the last time they should
see him, he appeals concerning his integrity. He had preached to them
the whole counsel of God. As he had preached to them the gospel purely,
so he had preached it to them entire; he faithfully did his work,
whether men would bear or forbear.

[Acts 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 20:28</span></span>

If the Holy Ghost has made ministers overseers of the flock, that is,
shepherds, they must be true to their trust. Let them consider their
Master's concern for the flock committed to their charge. It is the
church He has purchased with his own blood. The blood was his as Man;
yet so close is the union between the Divine and human nature, that it
is there called the blood of God, for it was the blood of Him who is
God. This put such dignity and worth into it, as to ransom believers
from all evil, and purchase all good. Paul spake about their souls with
affection and concern. They were full of care what would become of them.
Paul directs them to look up to God with faith, and commends them to the
word of God's grace, not only as the foundation of their hope and the
fountain of their joy, but as the rule of their walking. The most
advanced Christians are capable of growing, and will find the word of
grace help their growth. As those cannot be welcome guests to the holy
God who are unsanctified; so heaven would be no heaven to them; but to
all who are born again, and on whom the image of God is renewed, it is
sure, as almighty power and eternal truth make it so. He recommends
himself to them as an example of not caring as to things of the present
world; this they would find help forward their comfortable passage
through it. It might seem a hard saying, therefore Paul adds to it a
saying of their Master's, which he would have them always remember; "It
is more blessed to give than to receive:" it seems they were words often
used to his disciples. The opinion of the children of this world, is
contrary to this; they are afraid of giving, unless in hope of getting.
Clear gain, is with them the most blessed thing that can be; but Christ
tell us what is more blessed, more excellent. It makes us more like to
God, who gives to all, and receives from none; and to the Lord Jesus,
who went about doing good. This mind was in Christ Jesus, may it be in
us also. It is good for friends, when they part, to part with prayer.
Those who exhort and pray for one another, may have many weeping seasons
and painful separations, but they will meet before the throne of God, to
part no more. It was a comfort to all, that the presence of Christ both
went with him and stayed with them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 21](act021.md)

</div>
