<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act010)  [Next](act012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 11:0</span></span>

(v. 1-18) Peter's defence.

([Act 11:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019)) The success of the
gospel at Antioch.

([Act 11:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025)) The disciples named
Christians, Relief sent to Judea.

[Acts 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 11:1</span></span>

The imperfect state of human nature strongly appears, when godly persons
are displeased even to hear that the word of God has been received,
because their own system has not been attended to. And we are too apt to
despair of doing good to those who yet, when tried, prove very
teachable. It is the bane and damage of the church, to shut out those
from it, and from the benefit of the means of grace, who are not in
every thing as we are. Peter stated the whole affair. We should at all
times bear with the infirmities of our brethren; and instead of taking
offence, or answering with warmth, we should explain our motives, and
show the nature of our proceedings. That preaching is certainly right,
with which the Holy Ghost is given. While men are very zealous for their
own regulations, they should take care that they do not withstand God;
and those who love the Lord will glorify him, when made sure that he has
given repentance to life to any fellow-sinners. Repentance is God's
gift; not only his free grace accepts it, but his mighty grace works it
in us, grace takes away the heart of stone, and gives us a heart of
flesh. The sacrifice of God is a broken spirit.

[Acts 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 11:19</span></span>

The first preachers of the gospel at Antioch, were dispersed from
Jerusalem by persecution; thus what was meant to hurt the church, was
made to work for its good. The wrath of man is made to praise God. What
should the ministers of Christ preach, but Christ? Christ, and him
crucified? Christ, and him glorified? And their preaching was
accompanied with the Divine power. The hand of the Lord was with them,
to bring that home to the hearts and consciences of men, which they
could but speak to the outward ear. They believed; they were convinced
of the truth of the gospel. They turned from a careless, carnal way of
living, to live a holy, heavenly, spiritual life. They turned from
worshipping God in show and ceremony, to worship him in the Spirit and
in truth. They turned to the Lord Jesus, and he became all in all with
them. This was the work of conversion wrought upon them, and it must be
wrought upon every one of us. It was the fruit of their faith; all who
sincerely believe, will turn to the Lord, When the Lord Jesus is
preached in simplicity, and according to the Scriptures, he will give
success; and when sinners are thus brought to the Lord, really good men,
who are full of faith and of the Holy Ghost, will admire and rejoice in
the grace of God bestowed on them. Barnabas was full of faith; full of
the grace of faith, and full of the fruits of the faith that works by
love.

[Acts 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 11:25</span></span>

Hitherto the followers of Christ were called disciples, that is,
learners, scholars; but from that time they were called Christians. The
proper meaning of this name is, a follower of Christ; it denotes one
who, from serious thought, embraces the religion of Christ, believes his
promises, and makes it his chief care to shape his life by Christ's
precepts and example. Hence it is plain that multitudes take the name of
Christian to whom it does not rightly belong. But the name without the
reality will only add to our guilt. While the bare profession will
bestow neither profit nor delight, the possession of it will give both
the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
Grant, Lord, that Christians may forget other names and distinctions,
and love one another as the followers of Christ ought to do. True
Christians will feel for their brethren under afflictions. Thus will
fruit be brought forth to the praise and glory of God. If all mankind
were true Christians, how cheerfully would they help one another! The
whole earth would be like one large family, every member of which would
strive to be dutiful and kind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 12](act012)

</div>
