<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act003)  [Next](act005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 4:0</span></span>

([Act 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001).md) Peter and John
imprisoned.

([Act 4:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005).md) The apostles boldly
testify to Christ.

([Act 4:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015).md) Peter and John refuse
to be silenced.

([Act 4:23-31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023).md) The believers unite in
prayer and praise.

([Act 4:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032).md) The holy charity of the
Christians.

[Acts 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 4:1</span></span>

The apostles preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead. It
includes all the happiness of the future state; this they preached
through Jesus Christ, to be had through him only. Miserable is their
case, to whom the glory of Christ's kingdom is a grief; for since the
glory of that kingdom is everlasting, their grief will be everlasting
also. The harmless and useful servants of Christ, like the apostles,
have often been troubled for their work of faith and labour of love,
when wicked men have escaped. And to this day instances are not wanting,
in which reading the Scriptures, social prayer, and religious
conversation meet with frowns and checks. But if we obey the precepts of
Christ, he will support us.

[Acts 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 4:5</span></span>

Peter being filled with the Holy Ghost, would have all to understand,
that the miracle had been wrought by the name, or power, of Jesus of
Nazareth, the Messiah, whom they had crucified; and this confirmed their
testimony to his resurrection from the dead, which proved him to be the
Messiah. These rulers must either be saved by that Jesus whom they had
crucified, or they must perish for ever. The name of Jesus is given to
men of every age and nation, as that whereby alone believers are saved
from the wrath to come. But when covetousness, pride, or any corrupt
passion, rules within, men shut their eyes, and close their hearts, in
enmity against the light; considering all as ignorant and unlearned, who
desire to know nothing in comparison with Christ crucified. And the
followers of Christ should act so that all who converse with them, may
take knowledge that they have been with Jesus. That makes them holy,
heavenly, spiritual, and cheerful, and raises them above this world.

[Acts 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 4:15</span></span>

All the care of the rulers is, that the doctrine of Christ spread not
among the people, yet they cannot say it is false or dangerous, or of
any ill tendency; and they are ashamed to own the true reason; that it
testifies against their hypocrisy, wickedness, and tyranny. Those who
know how to put a just value upon Christ's promises, know how to put
just contempt upon the world's threatenings. The apostles look with
concern on perishing souls, and know they cannot escape eternal ruin but
by Jesus Christ, therefore they are faithful in warning, and showing the
right way. None will enjoy peace of mind, nor act uprightly, till they
have learned to guide their conduct by the fixed standard of truth, and
not by the shifting opinions and fancies of men. Especially beware of a
vain attempt to serve two masters, God and the world; the end will be,
you can serve neither fully.

[Acts 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 4:23</span></span>

Christ's followers do best in company, provided it is their own company.
It encourages God's servants, both in doing work, and suffering work,
that they serve the God who made all things, and therefore has the
disposal of all events; and the Scriptures must be fulfilled. Jesus was
anointed to be a Saviour, therefore it was determined he should be a
sacrifice, to make atonement for sin. But sin is not the less evil for
God's bringing good out of it. In threatening times, our care should not
be so much that troubles may be prevented, as that we may go on with
cheerfulness and courage in our work and duty. They do not pray, Lord
let us go away from our work, now that it is become dangerous, but,
Lord, give us thy grace to go on stedfastly in our work, and not to fear
the face of man. Those who desire Divine aid and encouragement, may
depend upon having them, and they ought to go forth, and go on, in the
strength of the Lord God. God gave a sign of acceptance of their
prayers. The place was shaken, that their faith might be established and
unshaken. God gave them greater degrees of his Spirit; and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, more than ever; by which they were not only
encouraged, but enabled to speak the word of God with boldness. When
they find the Lord God help them by his Spirit, they know they shall not
be confounded, Isaiah 1.7.

[Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 4:32</span></span>

The disciples loved one another. This was the blessed fruit of Christ's
dying precept to his disciples, and his dying prayer for them. Thus it
was then, and it will be so again, when the Spirit shall be poured upon
us from on high. The doctrine preached was the resurrection of Christ; a
matter of fact, which being duly explained, was a summary of all the
duties, privileges, and comforts of Christians. There were evident
fruits of Christ's grace in all they said and did. They were dead to
this world. This was a great evidence of the grace of God in them. They
did not take away others' property, but they were indifferent to it.
They did not call it their own; because they had, in affection, forsaken
all for Christ, and were expecting to be stripped of all for cleaving to
him. No marvel that they were of one heart and soul, when they sat so
loose to the wealth of this world. In effect, they had all things
common; for there was not any among them who lacked, care was taken for
their supply. The money was laid at the apostles' feet. Great care ought
to be taken in the distribution of public charity, that it be given to
such as have need, such as are not able to procure a maintenance for
themselves; those who are reduced to want for well-doing, and for the
testimony of a good conscience, ought to be provided for. Here is one in
particular mentioned, remarkable for this generous charity; it was
Barnabas. As one designed to be a preacher of the gospel, he
disentangled himself from the affairs of this life. When such
dispositions prevail, and are exercised according to the circumstances
of the times, the testimony will have very great power upon others.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 5](act005.md)

</div>
