<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act026)  [Next](act028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 27:0</span></span>

([Act 27:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)) Paul's voyage towards
Rome.

([Act 27:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#012)) Paul and his
companions endangered by a tempest.

([Act 27:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#021)) He receives a Divine
assurance of safety.

([Act 27:30-38](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#030)) Paul encourages those
with him.

([Act 27:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#039)) They are shipwrecked.

[Acts 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 27:1</span></span>

It was determined by the counsel of God, before it was determined by the
counsel of Festus, that Paul should go to Rome; for God had work for him
to do there. The course they steered, and the places they touched at,
are here set down. And God here encourages those who suffer for him, to
trust in him; for he can put it into the hearts of those to befriend
them, from whom they least expect it. Sailors must make the best of the
wind: and so must we all in our passage over the ocean of this world.
When the winds are contrary, yet we must be getting forward as well as
we can. Many who are not driven backward by cross providences, do not
get forward by favourable providences. And many real Christians complain
as to the concerns of their souls, that they have much ado to keep their
ground. Every fair haven is not a safe haven. Many show respect to good
ministers, who will not take their advice. But the event will convince
sinners of the vanity of their hopes, and the folly of their conduct.

[Acts 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 27:12</span></span>

Those who launch forth on the ocean of this world, with a fair gale,
know not what storms they may meet with; and therefore must not easily
take it for granted that they have obtained their purpose. Let us never
expect to be quite safe till we enter heaven. They saw neither sun nor
stars for many days. Thus melancholy sometimes is the condition of the
people of God as to their spiritual matters; they walk in darkness, and
have no light. See what the wealth of this world is: though coveted as a
blessing, the time may come when it will be a burden; not only too heavy
to be carried safely, but heavy enough to sink him that has it. The
children of this world can be prodigal of their goods for the saving
their lives, yet are sparing of them in works of piety and charity, and
in suffering for Christ. Any man will rather make shipwreck of his goods
than of his life; but many rather make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience, than of their goods. The means the sailors used did not
succeed; but when sinners give up all hope of saving themselves, they
are prepared to understand God's word, and to trust in his mercy through
Jesus Christ.

[Acts 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 27:21</span></span>

They did not hearken to the apostle when he warned them of their danger;
yet if they acknowledge their folly, and repent of it, he will speak
comfort and relief to them when in danger. Most people bring themselves
into trouble, because they do not know when they are well off; they come
to harm and loss by aiming to mend their condition, often against
advice. Observe the solemn profession Paul made of relation to God. No
storms or tempests can hinder God's favour to his people, for he is a
Help always at hand. It is a comfort to the faithful servants of God
when in difficulties, that as long as the Lord has any work for them to
do, their lives shall be prolonged. If Paul had thrust himself
needlessly into bad company, he might justly have been cast away with
them; but God calling him into it, they are preserved with him. They are
given thee; there is no greater satisfaction to a good man than to know
he is a public blessing. He comforts them with the same comforts
wherewith he himself was comforted. God is ever faithful, therefore let
all who have an interest in his promises be ever cheerful. As, with God,
saying and doing are not two things, believing and enjoying should not
be so with us. Hope is an anchor of the soul, sure and stedfast,
entering into that within the veil. Let those who are in spiritual
darkness hold fast by that, and think not of putting to sea again, but
abide by Christ, and wait till the day break, and the shadows flee away.

[Acts 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 27:30</span></span>

God, who appointed the end, that they should be saved, appointed the
means, that they should be saved by the help of these shipmen. Duty is
ours, events are God's; we do not trust God, but tempt him, when we say
we put ourselves under his protection, if we do not use proper means,
such as are within our power, for our safety. But how selfish are men in
general, often even ready to seek their own safety by the destruction of
others! Happy those who have such a one as Paul in their company, who
not only had intercourse with Heaven, but was of an enlivening spirit to
those about him. The sorrow of the world works death, while joy in God
is life and peace in the greatest distresses and dangers. The comfort of
God's promises can only be ours by believing dependence on him, to
fulfil his word to us; and the salvation he reveals must be waited for
in use of the means he appoints. If God has chosen us to salvation, he
has also appointed that we shall obtain it by repentance, faith, prayer,
and persevering obedience; it is fatal presumption to expect it in any
other way. It is an encouragement to people to commit themselves to
Christ as their Saviour, when those who invite them, clearly show that
they do so themselves.

[Acts 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 27:39</span></span>

The ship that had weathered the storm in the open sea, where it had
room, is dashed to pieces when it sticks fast. Thus, if the heart fixes
in the world in affection, and cleaving to it, it is lost. Satan's
temptations beat against it, and it is gone; but as long as it keeps
above the world, though tossed with cares and tumults, there is hope for
it. They had the shore in view, yet suffered shipwreck in the harbour;
thus we are taught never to be secure. Though there is great difficulty
in the way of the promised salvation, it shall, without fail, be brought
to pass. It will come to pass that whatever the trials and dangers may
be, in due time all believers will get safely to heaven. Lord Jesus,
thou hast assured us that none of thine shall perish. Thou wilt bring
them all safe to the heavenly shore. And what a pleasing landing will
that be! Thou wilt present them to thy Father, and give thy Holy Spirit
full possession of them for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 28](act028)

</div>
