<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act004)  [Next](act006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 5:0</span></span>

([Act 5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001).md) The death of Ananias and
Sapphira.

([Act 5:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012).md) The power which
accompanied the preaching of the gospel.

([Act 5:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017).md) The apostles
imprisoned, but set free by an angel.

([Act 5:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#026).md) The apostles testify to
Christ before the council.

([Act 5:34-42](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#034).md) The advice of Gamaliel,
The council let the apostles go.

[Acts 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 5:1</span></span>

The sin of Ananias and Sapphira was, that they were ambitious of being
thought eminent disciples, when they were not true disciples. Hypocrites
may deny themselves, may forego their worldly advantage in one instance,
with a prospect of finding their account in something else. They were
covetous of the wealth of the world, and distrustful of God and his
providence. They thought they might serve both God and mammon. They
thought to deceive the apostles. The Spirit of God in Peter discerned
the principle of unbelief reigning in the heart of Ananias. But whatever
Satan might suggest, he could not have filled the heart of Ananias with
this wickedness had he not been consenting. The falsehood was an attempt
to deceive the Spirit of truth, who so manifestly spoke and acted by the
apostles. The crime of Ananias was not his retaining part of the price
of the land; he might have kept it all, had he pleased; but his
endeavouring to impose upon the apostles with an awful lie, from a
desire to make a vain show, joined with covetousness. But if we think to
put a cheat upon God, we shall put a fatal cheat upon our own souls. How
sad to see those relations who should quicken one another to that which
is good, hardening one another in that which is evil! And this
punishment was in reality mercy to vast numbers. It would cause strict
self-examination, prayer, and dread of hypocrisy, covetousness, and
vain-glory, and it should still do so. It would prevent the increase of
false professors. Let us learn hence how hateful falsehood is to the God
of truth, and not only shun a direct lie, but all advantages from the
use of doubtful expressions, and double meaning in our speech.

[Acts 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 5:12</span></span>

The separation of hypocrites by distinguishing judgments, should make
the sincere cleave closer to each other and to the gospel ministry.
Whatever tends to the purity and reputation of the church, promotes its
enlargement; but that power alone which wrought such miracles by the
apostles, can rescue sinners from the power of sin and Satan, and add
believers to His worshippers. Christ will work by all his faithful
servants; and every one who applies to him shall be healed.

[Acts 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 5:17</span></span>

There is no prison so dark, so strong, but God can visit his people in
it, and, if he pleases, fetch them out. Recoveries from sickness,
releases out of trouble, are granted, not that we may enjoy the comforts
of life, but that God may be honoured with the services of our life. It
is not for the preachers of Christ's gospel to retire into corners, as
long as they can have any opportunity of preaching in the great
congregation. They must preach to the lowest, whose souls are as
precious to Christ as the souls of the greatest. Speak to all, for all
are concerned. Speak as those who resolve to stand to it, to live and
die by it. Speak all the words of this heavenly, divine life, in
comparison with which the present earthly life does not deserve the
name. These words of life, which the Holy Ghost puts into your mouth.
The words of the gospel are the words of life; words whereby we may be
saved. How wretched are those who are vexed at the success of the
gospel! They cannot but see that the word and power of the Lord are
against them; and they tremble for the consequences, yet they will go
on.

[Acts 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 5:26</span></span>

Many will do an evil thing with daring, yet cannot bear to hear of it
afterward, or to have it charged upon them. We cannot expect to be
redeemed and healed by Christ, unless we give up ourselves to be ruled
by him. Faith takes the Saviour in all his offices, who came, not to
save us in our sins, but to save us from our sins. Had Christ been
exalted to give dominion to Israel, the chief priests would have
welcomed him. But repentance and remission of sins are blessings they
neither valued nor saw their need of; therefore they, by no means,
admitted his doctrine. Wherever repentance is wrought, remission is
granted without fail. None are freed from the guilt and punishment of
sin, but those who are freed from the power and dominion of sin; who are
turned from it, and turned against it. Christ gives repentance, by his
Spirit working with the word, to awaken the conscience, to work sorrow
for sin, and an effectual change in the heart and life. The giving of
the Holy Ghost, is plain evidence that it is the will of God that Christ
should be obeyed. And He will surely destroy those who will not have Him
to reign over them.

[Acts 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 5:34</span></span>

The Lord still has all hearts in his hands, and sometimes directs the
prudence of the worldly wise, so as to restrain the persecutors. Common
sense tells us to be cautious, while experience and observation show
that the success of frauds in matters of religion has been very short.
Reproach for Christ is true preferment, as it makes us conformable to
his pattern, and serviceable to his interest. They rejoiced in it. If we
suffer ill for doing well, provided we suffer it well, and as we should,
we ought to rejoice in that grace which enabled us so to do. The
apostles did not preach themselves, but Christ. This was the preaching
that most offended the priests. But it ought to be the constant business
of gospel ministers to preach Christ: Christ, and him crucified; Christ,
and him glorified; nothing beside this, but what has reference to it.
And whatever is our station or rank in life, we should seek to make Him
known, and to glorify his name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 6](act006.md)

</div>
