<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act023)  [Next](act025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 24:0</span></span>

([Act 24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001).md) The speech of Tertullus
against Paul.

([Act 24:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010).md) Paul's defence before
Felix.

([Act 24:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022).md) Felix trembles at the
reasoning of Paul.

[Acts 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 24:1</span></span>

See here the unhappiness of great men, and a great unhappiness it is, to
have their services praised beyond measure, and never to be faithfully
told of their faults; hereby they are hardened and encouraged in evil,
like Felix. God's prophets were charged with being troublers of the
land, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that he perverted the nation; the very
same charges were brought against Paul. The selfish and evil passions of
men urge them forward, and the graces and power of speech, too often
have been used to mislead and prejudice men against the truth. How
different will the characters of Paul and Felix appear at the day of
judgement, from what they are represented in the speech of Tertullus!
Let not Christians value the applause, or be troubled at the revilings
of ungodly men, who represent the vilest of the human race almost as
gods, and the excellent of the earth as pestilences and movers of
sedition.

[Acts 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 24:10</span></span>

Paul gives a just account of himself, which clears him from crime, and
likewise shows the true reason of the violence against him. Let us never
be driven from any good way by its having an ill name. It is very
comfortable, in worshipping God, to look to him as the God of our
fathers, and to set up no other rule of faith or practice but the
Scriptures. This shows there will be a resurrection to a final judgment.
Prophets and their doctrines were to be tried by their fruits. Paul's
aim was to have a conscience void of offence. His care and endeavour was
to abstain from many things, and to abound in the exercises of religion
at all times; both towards God. and towards man. If blamed for being
more earnest in the things of God than our neighbours, what is our
reply? Do we shrink from the accusation? How many in the world would
rather be accused of any weakness, nay, even of wickedness, than of an
earnest, fervent feeling of love to the Lord Jesus Christ, and of
devotedness to his service! Can such think that He will confess them
when he comes in his glory, and before the angels of God? If there is
any sight pleasing to the God of our salvation, and a sight at which the
angels rejoice, it is, to behold a devoted follower of the Lord, here
upon earth, acknowledging that he is guilty, if it be a crime, of loving
the Lord who died for him, with all his heart, and soul, and mind, and
strength. And that he will not in silence see God's word despised, or
hear his name profaned; he will rather risk the ridicule and the hatred
of the world, than one frown from that gracious Being whose love is
better than life.

[Acts 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 24:22</span></span>

The apostle reasoned concerning the nature and obligations of
righteousness, temperance, and of a judgment to come; thus showing the
oppressive judge and his profligate mistress, their need of repentance,
forgiveness, and of the grace of the gospel. Justice respects our
conduct in life, particularly in reference to others; temperance, the
state and government of our souls, in reference to God. He who does not
exercise himself in these, has neither the form nor the power of
godliness, and must be overwhelmed with the Divine wrath in the day of
God's appearing. A prospect of the judgment to come, is enough to make
the stoutest heart to tremble. Felix trembled, but that was all. Many
are startled by the word of God, who are not changed by it. Many fear
the consequences of sin, yet continue in the love and practice of sin.
In the affairs of our souls, delays are dangerous. Felix put off this
matter to a more convenient season, but we do not find that the more
convenient season ever came. Behold now is the accepted time; hear the
voice of the Lord to-day. He was in haste to turn from hearing the
truth. Was any business more urgent than for him to reform his conduct,
or more important than the salvation of his soul! Sinners often start up
like a man roused from his sleep by a loud noise, but soon sink again
into their usual drowsiness. Be not deceived by occasional appearances
of religion in ourselves or in others. Above all, let us not trifle with
the word of God. Do we expect that as we advance in life our hearts will
grow softer, or that the influence of the world will decline? Are we not
at this moment in danger of being lost for ever? Now is the day of
salvation; tomorrow may be too late.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 25](act025.md)

</div>
