<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act027)  [Next](rom000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 28:0</span></span>

([Act 28:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001).md) Paul kindly received at
Melita.

([Act 28:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011).md) He arrives at Rome.

([Act 28:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017).md) His conference with
the Jews.

([Act 28:23-31](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023).md) Paul preaches to the
Jews, and abides at Rome a prisoner.

[Acts 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 28:1</span></span>

God can make strangers to be friends; friends in distress. Those who are
despised for homely manners, are often more friendly than the more
polished; and the conduct of heathens, or persons called barbarians,
condemns many in civilized nations, professing to be Christians. The
people thought that Paul was a murderer, and that the viper was sent by
Divine justice, to be the avenger of blood. They knew that there is a
God who governs the world, so that things do not come to pass by chance,
no, not the smallest event, but all by Divine direction; and that evil
pursues sinners; that there are good works which God will reward, and
wicked works which he will punish. Also, that murder is a dreadful
crime, one which shall not long go unpunished. But they thought all
wicked people were punished in this life. Though some are made examples
in this world, to prove that there is a God and a Providence, yet many
are left unpunished, to prove that there is a judgment to come. They
also thought all who were remarkably afflicted in this life were wicked
people. Divine revelation sets this matter in a true light. Good men
often are greatly afflicted in this life, for the trial and increase of
their faith and patience. Observe Paul's deliverance from the danger.
And thus in the strength of the grace of Christ, believers shake off the
temptations of Satan, with holy resolution. When we despise the censures
and reproaches of men, and look upon them with holy contempt, having the
testimony of our consciences for us, then, like Paul, we shake off the
viper into the fire. It does us no harm, except we are kept by it from
our duty. God hereby made Paul remarkable among these people, and so
made way for the receiving of the gospel. The Lord raises up friends for
his people in every place whither he leads them, and makes them
blessings to those in affliction.

[Acts 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 28:11</span></span>

The common events of travelling are seldom worthy of being told; but the
comfort of communion with the saints, and kindness shown by friends,
deserve particular mention. The Christians at Rome were so far from
being ashamed of Paul, or afraid of owning him, because he was a
prisoner, that they were the more careful to show him respect. He had
great comfort in this. And if our friends are kind to us, God puts it
into their hearts, and we must give him the glory. When we see those
even in strange places, who bear Christ's name, fear God, and serve him,
we should lift up our hearts to heaven in thanksgiving. How many great
men have made their entry into Rome, crowned and in triumph, who really
were plagues to the world! But here a good man makes his entry into
Rome, chained as a poor captive, who was a greater blessing to the world
than any other merely a man. Is not this enough to put us for ever out
of conceit with worldly favour? This may encourage God's prisoners, that
he can give them favour in the eyes of those that carry them captives.
When God does not soon deliver his people out of bondage, yet makes it
easy to them, or them easy under it, they have reason to be thankful.

[Acts 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 28:17</span></span>

It was for the honour of Paul that those who examined his case,
acquitted him. In his appeal he sought not to accuse his nation, but
only to clear himself. True Christianity settles what is of common
concern to all mankind, and is not built upon narrow opinions and
private interests. It aims at no worldly benefit or advantage, but all
its gains are spiritual and eternal. It is, and always has been, the lot
of Christ's holy religion, to be every where spoken against. Look
through every town and village where Christ is exalted as the only
Saviour of mankind, and where the people are called to follow him in
newness of life, and we see those who give themselves up to Christ,
still called a sect, a party, and reproached. And this is the treatment
they are sure to receive, so long as there shall continue an ungodly man
upon earth.

[Acts 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 28:23</span></span>

Paul persuaded the Jews concerning Jesus. Some were wrought upon by the
word, and others hardened; some received the light, and others shut
their eyes against it. And the same has always been the effect of the
gospel. Paul parted with them, observing that the Holy Ghost had well
described their state. Let all that hear the gospel, and do not heed it,
tremble at their doom; for who shall heal them, if God does not? The
Jews had afterwards much reasoning among themselves. Many have great
reasoning, who do not reason aright. They find fault with one another's
opinions, yet will not yield to truth. Nor will men's reasoning among
themselves convince them, without the grace of God to open their
understandings. While we mourn on account of such despisers, we should
rejoice that the salvation of God is sent to others, who will receive
it; and if we are of that number, we should be thankful to Him who hath
made us to differ. The apostle kept to his principle, to know and preach
nothing but Christ and him crucified. Christians, when tempted from
their main business, should bring themselves back with this question,
What does this concern the Lord Jesus? What tendency has it to bring us
to him, and to keep us walking in him? The apostle preached not himself,
but Christ, and he was not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. Though Paul
was placed in a very narrow opportunity for being useful, he was not
disturbed in it. Though it was not a wide door that was opened to him,
yet no man was suffered to shut it; and to many it was an effectual
door, so that there were saints even in Nero's household, [Phi
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022.md). We learn also from [Phi
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#013.md), how God overruled Paul's
imprisonment for the furtherance of the gospel. And not the residents at
Rome only, but all the church of Christ, to the present day, and in the
most remote corner of the globe, have abundant reason to bless God, that
during the most mature period of his Christian life and experience, he
was detained a prisoner. It was from his prison, probably chained hand
to hand to the soldier who kept him, that the apostle wrote the epistles
to the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and Hebrews; epistles
showing, perhaps more than any others, the Christian love with which his
heart overflowed, and the Christian experience with which his soul was
filled. The believer of the present time may have less of triumph, and
less of heavenly joy, than the apostle, but every follower of the same
Saviour, is equally sure of safety and peace at the last. Let us seek to
live more and more in the love of the Saviour; to labour to glorify Him
by every action of our lives; and we shall assuredly, by his strength,
be among the number of those who now overcome our enemies; and by his
free grace and mercy, be hereafter among the blessed company who shall
sit with Him upon his throne, even as He also has overcome, and is
sitting on his Father's throne, at God's right hand for evermore.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Introduction](rom000.md)

</div>
