<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act025)  [Next](act027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001.md)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 26:0</span></span>

([Act 26:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001).md) Paul's defence before
Agrippa.

([Act 26:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012).md) His conversion and
preaching to the Gentiles.

([Act 26:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024).md) Festus and Agrippa
convinced of Paul's innocence.

[Acts 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 26:1</span></span>

Christianity teaches us to give a reason of the hope that is in us, and
also to give honour to whom honour is due, without flattery or fear of
man. Agrippa was well versed in the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
therefore could the better judge as to the controversy about Jesus being
the Messiah. Surely ministers may expect, when they preach the faith of
Christ, to be heard patiently. Paul professes that he still kept to all
the good in which he was first educated and trained up. See here what
his religion was. He was a moralist, a man of virtue, and had not
learned the arts of the crafty, covetous Pharisees; he was not
chargeable with any open vice and profaneness. He was sound in the
faith. He always had a holy regard for the ancient promise made of God
unto the fathers, and built his hope upon it. The apostle knew very well
that all this would not justify him before God, yet he knew it was for
his reputation among the Jews, and an argument that he was not such a
man as they represented him to be. Though he counted this but loss, that
he might win Christ, yet he mentioned it when it might serve to honour
Christ. See here what Paul's religion is; he has not such zeal for the
ceremonial law as he had in his youth; the sacrifices and offerings
appointed by that, are done away by the great Sacrifice which they
typified. Of the ceremonial cleansings he makes no conscience, and
thinks the Levitical priesthood is done away in the priesthood of
Christ; but, as to the main principles of his religion, he is as zealous
as ever. Christ and heaven, are the two great doctrines of the gospel;
that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
These are the matter of the promise made unto the fathers. The temple
service, or continual course of religious duties, day and night, was
kept up as the profession of faith in the promise of eternal life, and
in expectation of it. The prospect of eternal life should engage us to
be diligent and stedfast in all religious exercises. Yet the Sadducees
hated Paul for preaching the resurrection; and the other Jews joined
them, because he testified that Jesus was risen, and was the promised
Redeemer of Israel. Many things are thought to be beyond belief, only
because the infinite nature and perfections of Him that has revealed,
performed, or promised them, are overlooked. Paul acknowledged, that
while he continued a Pharisee, he was a bitter enemy to Christianity.
This was his character and manner of life in the beginning of his time;
and there was every thing to hinder his being a Christian. Those who
have been most strict in their conduct before conversion, will
afterwards see abundant reason for humbling themselves, even on account
of things which they then thought ought to have been done.

[Acts 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 26:12</span></span>

Paul was made a Christian by Divine power; by a revelation of Christ
both to him and in him; when in the full career of his sin. He was made
a minister by Divine authority: the same Jesus who appeared to him in
that glorious light, ordered him to preach the gospel to the Gentiles. A
world that sits in darkness must be enlightened; those must be brought
to know the things that belong to their everlasting peace, who are yet
ignorant of them. A world that lies in wickedness must be sanctified and
reformed; it is not enough for them to have their eyes opened, they must
have their hearts renewed; not enough to be turned from darkness to
light, but they must be turned from the power of Satan unto God. All who
are turned from sin to God, are not only pardoned, but have a grant of a
rich inheritance. The forgiveness of sins makes way for this. None can
be happy who are not holy; and to be saints in heaven we must be first
saints on earth. We are made holy, and saved by faith in Christ; by
which we rely upon Christ as the Lord our Righteousness, and give up
ourselves to him as the Lord our Ruler; by this we receive the remission
of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and eternal life. The cross of
Christ was a stumbling-block to the Jews, and they were in a rage at
Paul's preaching the fulfilling of the Old Testament predictions. Christ
should be the first that should rise from the dead; the Head or
principal One. Also, it was foretold by the prophets, that the Gentiles
should be brought to the knowledge of God by the Messiah; and what in
this could the Jews justly be displeased at? Thus the true convert can
give a reason of his hope, and a good account of the change manifest in
him. Yet for going about and calling on men thus to repent and to be
converted, vast numbers have been blamed and persecuted.

[Acts 26:24](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 26:24</span></span>

It becomes us, on all occasions, to speak the words of truth and
soberness, and then we need not be troubled at the unjust censures of
men. Active and laborious followers of the gospel often have been
despised as dreamers or madmen, for believing such doctrines and such
wonderful facts; and for attesting that the same faith and diligence,
and an experience like their own, are necessary to all men, whatever
their rank, in order to their salvation. But apostles and prophets, and
the Son of God himself, were exposed to this charge; and none need be
moved thereby, when Divine grace has made them wise unto salvation.
Agrippa saw a great deal of reason for Christianity. His understanding
and judgment were for the time convinced, but his heart was not changed.
And his conduct and temper were widely different from the humility and
spirituality of the gospel. Many are almost persuaded to be religious,
who are not quite persuaded; they are under strong convictions of their
duty, and of the excellence of the ways of God, yet do not pursue their
convictions. Paul urged that it was the concern of every one to become a
true Christian; that there is grace enough in Christ for all. He
expressed his full conviction of the truth of the gospel, the absolute
necessity of faith in Christ in order to salvation. Such salvation from
such bondage, the gospel of Christ offers to the Gentiles; to a lost
world. Yet it is with much difficulty that any person can be persuaded
he needs a work of grace on his heart, like that which was needful for
the conversion of the Gentiles. Let us beware of fatal hesitation in our
own conduct; and recollect how far the being almost persuaded to be a
Christian, is from being altogether such a one as every true believer
is.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 27](act027.md)

</div>
