<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act011)  [Next](act013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 12:0</span></span>

([Act 12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001)) The martyrdom of James,
and the imprisonment of Peter.

([Act 12:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006)) He is delivered from
prison by an angel.

([Act 12:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)) Peter departs, Herod's
rage.

([Act 12:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020)) The death of Herod.

[Acts 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 12:1</span></span>

James was one of the sons of Zebedee, whom Christ told that they should
drink of the cup that he was to drink of, and be baptized with the
baptism that he was to be baptized with, [Mat
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023). Now the words of Christ were
made good in him; and if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him.
Herod imprisoned Peter: the way of persecution, as of other sins, is
downhill; when men are in it, they cannot easily stop. Those make
themselves an easy prey to Satan, who make it their business to please
men. Thus James finished his course. But Peter, being designed for
further services, was safe; though he seemed now marked out for a speedy
sacrifice. We that live in a cold, prayerless generation, can hardly
form an idea of the earnestness of these holy men of old. But if the
Lord should bring on the church an awful persecution like this of Herod,
the faithful in Christ would learn what soul-felt prayer is.

[Acts 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 12:6</span></span>

A peaceful conscience, a lively hope, and the consolations of the Holy
Spirit, can keep men calm in the full prospect of death; even those very
persons who have been most distracted with terrors on that account.
God's time to help, is when things are brought to the last extremity.
Peter was assured that the Lord would cause this trial to end in the way
that should be most for his glory. Those who are delivered out of
spiritual imprisonment must follow their Deliverer, like the Israelites
when they went out of the house of bondage. They knew not whither they
went, but knew whom they followed. When God will work salvation for his
people, all difficulties in their way will be overcome, even gates of
iron are made to open of their own accord. This deliverance of Peter
represents our redemption by Christ, which not only proclaims liberty to
the captives, but brings them out of the prison-house. Peter, when he
recollected himself, perceived what great things God had done for him.
Thus souls delivered out of spiritual bondage, are not at first aware
what God has wrought in them; many have the truth of grace, that want
evidence of it. But when the Comforter comes, whom the Father will send,
sooner or later, he will let them know what a blessed change is wrought.

[Acts 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 12:12</span></span>

God's providence leaves room for the use of our prudence, though he has
undertaken to perform and perfect what he has begun. These Christians
continued in prayer for Peter, for they were truly in earnest. Thus men
ought always to pray, and not to faint. As long as we are kept waiting
for a mercy, we must continue praying for it. But sometimes that which
we most earnestly wish for, we are most backward to believe. The
Christian law of self-denial and of suffering for Christ, has not done
away the natural law of caring for our own safety by lawful means. In
times of public danger, all believers have God for their hiding-place;
which is so secret, that the world cannot find them. Also, the
instruments of persecution are themselves exposed to danger; the wrath
of God hangs over all that engage in this hateful work. And the range of
persecutors often vents itself on all in its way.

[Acts 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 12:20</span></span>

Many heathen princes claimed and received Divine honours, but it was far
more horrible impiety in Herod, who knew the word and worship of the
living God, to accept such idolatrous honours without rebuking the
blasphemy. And such men as Herod, when puffed with pride and vanity, are
ripening fast for signal vengeance. God is very jealous for his own
honour, and will be glorified upon those whom he is not glorified by.
See what vile bodies we carry about with us; they have in them the seeds
of their own dissolution, by which they will soon be destroyed, whenever
God does but speak the word. We may learn wisdom from the people of Tyre
and Sidon, for we have offended the Lord with our sins. We depend on him
for life, and breath, and all things; it surely then behoves us to
humble ourselves before him, that through the appointed Mediator, who is
ever ready to befriend us, we may be reconciled to him, lest wrath come
upon us to the utmost.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 13](act013)

</div>
