<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Amos Index](amo.md)  
  [Previous](amo007)  [Next](amo009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001.md)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 8:0</span></span>

([Amo 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001).md) The near approach of the
ruin of Israel.

([Amo 8:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004).md) Oppression reproved.

([Amo 8:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011).md) A famine of the word of
God.

[Amos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 8:1</span></span>

Amos saw a basket of summer fruit gathered, and ready to be eaten; which
signified, that the people were ripe for destruction, that the year of
God's patience was drawing towards a conclusion. Such summer fruits will
not keep till winter, but must be used at once. Yet these judgments
shall not draw from them any acknowledgement, either of God's
righteousness or their own unrighteousness. Sinners put off repentance
from day to day, because they think the Lord thus delays his judgments.

[Amos 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 8:4</span></span>

The rich and powerful of the land were the most guilty of oppression, as
well as the foremost in idolatry. They were weary of the restraints of
the sabbaths and the new moons, and wished them over, because no common
work might be done therein. This is the character of many who are called
Christians. The sabbath day and sabbath work are a burden to carnal
hearts. It will either be profaned or be accounted a dull day. But can
we spend our time better than in communion with God? When employed in
religious services, they were thinking of marketings. They were weary of
holy duties, because their worldly business stood still the while. Those
are strangers to God, and enemies to themselves, who love market days
better than sabbath days, who would rather be selling corn than
worshipping God. They have no regard to man: those who have lost the
savour of piety, will not long keep the sense of common honesty. They
cheat those they deal with. They take advantage of their neighbour's
ignorance or necessity, in a traffic which nearly concerns the labouring
poor. Could we witness the fraud and covetousness, which, in such
numerous forms, render trading an abomination to the Lord, we should not
wonder to see many dealers backward in the service of God. But he who
thus despises the poor, reproaches his Maker; as it regards Him, rich
and poor meet together. Riches that are got by the ruin of the poor,
will bring ruin on those that get them. God will remember their sin
against them. This speaks the case of such unjust, unmerciful men, to be
miserable indeed, miserable for ever. There shall be terror and
desolation every where. It shall come upon them when they little think
of it. Thus uncertain are all our creature-comforts and enjoyments, even
life itself; in the midst of life we are in death. What will be the
wailing in the bitter day which follows sinful and sensual pleasures!

[Amos 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 8:11</span></span>

Here was a token of God's highest displeasure. At any time, and most in
a time of trouble, a famine of the word of God is the heaviest judgment.
To many this is no affliction, yet some will feel it very much, and will
travel far to hear a good sermon; they feel the loss of the mercies
others foolishly sin away. But when God visits a backsliding church,
their own plans and endeavours to find out a way of salvation, will
stand them in no stead. And the most amiable and zealous would perish,
for want of the water of life, which Christ only can bestow. Let us
value our advantages, seek to profit by them, and fear sinning them
away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 9](amo009.md)

</div>
