<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1000)  [Next](co1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

([Co1 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)) A salutation and
thanksgiving.

([Co1 1:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)) Exhortation to
brotherly love, and reproof for divisions.

([Co1 1:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)) The doctrine of a
crucified Saviour, as advancing the glory of God.

([Co1 1:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)) And humbling the
creature before him.

[1 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 1:1</span></span>

All Christians are by baptism dedicated and devoted to Christ, and are
under strict obligations to be holy. But in the true church of God are
all who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, and who
call upon him as God manifest in the flesh, for all the blessings of
salvation; who acknowledge and obey him as their Lord, and as Lord of
all; it includes no other persons. Christians are distinguished from the
profane and atheists, that they dare not live without prayer; and they
are distinguished from Jews and pagans, that they call on the name of
Christ. Observe how often in these verses the apostle repeats the words,
Our Lord Jesus Christ. He feared not to make too frequent or too
honourable mention of him. To all who called upon Christ, the apostle
gave his usual salutation, desiring, in their behalf, the pardoning
mercy, sanctifying grace, and comforting peace of God, through Jesus
Christ. Sinners can have no peace with God, nor any from him, but
through Christ. He gives thanks for their conversion to the faith of
Christ; that grace was given them by Jesus Christ. They had been
enriched by him with all spiritual gifts. He speaks of utterance and
knowledge. And where God has given these two gifts, he has given great
power for usefulness. These were gifts of the Holy Ghost, by which God
bore witness to the apostles. Those that wait for the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, will be kept by him to the end; and those that are so,
will be blameless in the day of Christ, made so by rich and free grace.
How glorious are the hopes of such a privilege; to be kept by the power
of Christ, from the power of our corruptions and Satan's temptations!

[1 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 1:10</span></span>

In the great things of religion be of one mind; and where there is not
unity of sentiment, still let there be union of affection. Agreement in
the greater things should extinguish divisions about the lesser. There
will be perfect union in heaven, and the nearer we approach it on earth,
the nearer we come to perfection. Paul and Apollos both were faithful
ministers of Jesus Christ, and helpers of their faith and joy; but those
disposed to be contentious, broke into parties. So liable are the best
things to be corrupted, and the gospel and its institutions made engines
of discord and contention. Satan has always endeavoured to stir up
strife among Christians, as one of his chief devices against the gospel.
The apostle left it to other ministers to baptize, while he preached the
gospel, as a more useful work.

[1 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 1:17</span></span>

Paul had been bred up in Jewish learning; but the plain preaching of a
crucified Jesus, was more powerful than all the oratory and philosophy
of the heathen world. This is the sum and substance of the gospel.
Christ crucified is the foundation of all our hopes, the fountain of all
our joys. And by his death we live. The preaching of salvation for lost
sinners by the sufferings and death of the Son of God, if explained and
faithfully applied, appears foolishness to those in the way to
destruction. The sensual, the covetous, the proud, and ambitious, alike
see that the gospel opposes their favourite pursuits. But those who
receive the gospel, and are enlightened by the Spirit of God, see more
of God's wisdom and power in the doctrine of Christ crucified, than in
all his other works. God left a great part of the world to follow the
dictates of man's boasted reason, and the event has shown that human
wisdom is folly, and is unable to find or retain the knowledge of God as
the Creator. It pleased him, by the foolishness of preaching, to save
them that believe. By the foolishness of preaching; not by what could
justly be called foolish preaching. But the thing preached was
foolishness to wordly-wise men. The gospel ever was, and ever will be,
foolishness to all in the road to destruction. The message of Christ,
plainly delivered, ever has been a sure touchstone by which men may
learn what road they are travelling. But the despised doctrine of
salvation by faith in a crucified Saviour, God in human nature,
purchasing the church with his own blood, to save multitudes, even all
that believe, from ignorance, delusion, and vice, has been blessed in
every age. And the weakest instruments God uses, are stronger in their
effects, than the strongest men can use. Not that there is foolishness
or weakness in God, but what men consider as such, overcomes all their
admired wisdom and strength.

[1 Corinthians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 1:26</span></span>

God did not choose philosophers, nor orators, nor statesmen, nor men of
wealth, and power, and interest in the world, to publish the gospel of
grace and peace. He best judges what men and what measures serve the
purposes of his glory. Though not many noble are usually called by
Divine grace, there have been some such in every age, who have not been
ashamed of the gospel of Christ; and persons of every rank stand in need
of pardoning grace. Often, a humble Christian, though poor as to this
world, has more true knowledge of the gospel, than those who have made
the letter of Scripture the study of their lives, but who have studied
it rather as the witness of men, than as the word of God. And even young
children have gained such knowledge of Divine truth as to silence
infidels. The reason is, they are taught of God; the design is, that no
flesh should glory in his presence. That distinction, in which alone
they might glory, was not of themselves. It was by the sovereign choice
and regenerating grace of God, that they were in Jesus Christ by faith.
He is made of God to us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption; all we need, or can desire. And he is made wisdom to us,
that by his word and Spirit, and from his fulness and treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, we may receive all that will make us wise unto
salvation, and fit for every service to which we are called. We are
guilty, liable to just punishment; and he is made righteousness, our
great atonement and sacrifice. We are depraved and corrupt, and he is
made sanctification, that he may in the end be made complete redemption;
may free the soul from the being of sin, and loose the body from the
bonds of the grave. And this is, that all flesh, according to the
prophecy by Jeremiah, [Jer 9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023),
may glory in the special favour, all-sufficient grace, and precious
salvation of Jehovah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 2](co1002)

</div>
