<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1012)  [Next](co1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 13:0</span></span>

([Co1 13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)) The necessity and
advantage of the grace of love.

([Co1 13:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)) Its excellency
represented by its properties and effects.

([Co1 13:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)) And by its abiding, and
its superiority.

[1 Corinthians 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 13:1</span></span>

The excellent way had in view in the close of the former chapter, is not
what is meant by charity in our common use of the word, almsgiving, but
love in its fullest meaning; true love to God and man. Without this, the
most glorious gifts are of no account to us, of no esteem in the sight
of God. A clear head and a deep understanding, are of no value without a
benevolent and charitable heart. There may be an open and lavish hand,
where there is not a liberal and charitable heart. Doing good to others
will do none to us, if it be not done from love to God, and good-will to
men. If we give away all we have, while we withhold the heart from God,
it will not profit. Nor even the most painful sufferings. How are those
deluded who look for acceptance and reward for their good works, which
are as scanty and defective as they are corrupt and selfish!

[1 Corinthians 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 13:4</span></span>

Some of the effects of charity are stated, that we may know whether we
have this grace; and that if we have not, we may not rest till we have
it. This love is a clear proof of regeneration, and is a touchstone of
our professed faith in Christ. In this beautiful description of the
nature and effects of love, it is meant to show the Corinthians that
their conduct had, in many respects, been a contrast to it. Charity is
an utter enemy to selfishness; it does not desire or seek its own
praise, or honour, or profit, or pleasure. Not that charity destroys all
regard to ourselves, or that the charitable man should neglect himself
and all his interests. But charity never seeks its own to the hurt of
others, or to neglect others. It ever prefers the welfare of others to
its private advantage. How good-natured and amiable is Christian
charity! How excellent would Christianity appear to the world, if those
who profess it were more under this Divine principle, and paid due
regard to the command on which its blessed Author laid the chief stress!
Let us ask whether this Divine love dwells in our hearts. Has this
principle guided us into becoming behaviour to all men? Are we willing
to lay aside selfish objects and aims? Here is a call to watchfulness,
diligence, and prayer.

[1 Corinthians 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 13:8</span></span>

Charity is much to be preferred to the gifts on which the Corinthians
prided themselves. From its longer continuance. It is a grace, lasting
as eternity. The present state is a state of childhood, the future that
of manhood. Such is the difference between earth and heaven. What narrow
views, what confused notions of things, have children when compared with
grown men! Thus shall we think of our most valued gifts of this world,
when we come to heaven. All things are dark and confused now, compared
with what they will be hereafter. They can only be seen as by the
reflection in a mirror, or in the description of a riddle; but hereafter
our knowledge will be free from all obscurity and error. It is the light
of heaven only, that will remove all clouds and darkness that hide the
face of God from us. To sum up the excellences of charity, it is
preferred not only to gifts, but to other graces, to faith and hope.
Faith fixes on the Divine revelation, and assents thereto, relying on
the Divine Redeemer. Hope fastens on future happiness, and waits for
that; but in heaven, faith will be swallowed up in actual sight, and
hope in enjoyment. There is no room to believe and hope, when we see and
enjoy. But there, love will be made perfect. There we shall perfectly
love God. And there we shall perfectly love one another. Blessed state!
how much surpassing the best below! God is love, [Jo1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008), [Jo1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016). Where God is to be seen as he
is, and face to face, there charity is in its greatest height; there
only will it be perfected.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 14](co1014)

</div>
