<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1013)  [Next](co1015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 14:0</span></span>

([Co1 14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)) Prophecy preferred to
the gift of tongues.

([Co1 14:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)) The unprofitableness of
speaking in unknown languages.

([Co1 14:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)) Exhortations to
worship that can be understood.

([Co1 14:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)) Disorders from vain
display of gifts.

([Co1 14:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)) And from women
speaking in the church.

[1 Corinthians 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 14:1</span></span>

Prophesying, that is, explaining Scripture, is compared with speaking
with tongues. This drew attention, more than the plain interpretation of
Scripture; it gratified pride more, but promoted the purposes of
Christian charity less; it would not equally do good to the souls of
men. What cannot be understood, never can edify. No advantage can be
reaped from the most excellent discourses, if delivered in language such
as the hearers cannot speak or understand. Every ability or possession
is valuable in proportion to its usefulness. Even fervent, spiritual
affection must be governed by the exercise of the understanding, else
men will disgrace the truths they profess to promote.

[1 Corinthians 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 14:6</span></span>

Even an apostle could not edify, unless he spoke so as to be understood
by his hearers. To speak words that have no meaning to those who hear
them, is but speaking into the air. That cannot answer the end of
speaking, which has no meaning; in this case, speaker and hearers are
barbarians to each other. All religious services should be so performed
in Christian assemblies, that all may join in, and profit by them.
Language plain and easy to be understood, is the most proper for public
worship, and other religious exercises. Every true follower of Christ
will rather desire to do good to others, than to get a name for learning
or fine speaking.

[1 Corinthians 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 14:15</span></span>

There can be no assent to prayers that are not understood. A truly
Christian minister will seek much more to do spiritual good to men's
souls, than to get the greatest applause to himself. This is proving
himself the servant of Christ. Children are apt to be struck with
novelty; but do not act like them. Christians should be like children,
void of guile and malice; yet they should not be unskilful as to the
word of righteousness, but only as to the arts of mischief. It is a
proof that a people are forsaken of God, when he gives them up to the
rule of those who teach them to worship in another language. They can
never be benefitted by such teaching. Yet thus the preachers did who
delivered their instructions in an unknown tongue. Would it not make
Christianity ridiculous to a heathen, to hear the ministers pray or
preach in a language which neither he nor the assembly understood? But
if those who minister, plainly interpret Scripture, or preach the great
truths and rules of the gospel, a heathen or unlearned person might
become a convert to Christianity. His conscience might be touched, the
secrets of his heart might be revealed to him, and so he might be
brought to confess his guilt, and to own that God was present in the
assembly. Scripture truth, plainly and duly taught, has a wonderful
power to awaken the conscience and touch the heart.

[1 Corinthians 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 14:26</span></span>

Religious exercises in public assemblies should have this view; Let all
be done to edifying. As to the speaking in an unknown tongue, if another
were present who could interpret, two miraculous gifts might be
exercised at once, and thereby the church be edified, and the faith of
the hearers confirmed at the same time. As to prophesying, two or three
only should speak at one meeting, and this one after the other, not all
at once. The man who is inspired by the Spirit of God will observe order
and decency in delivering his revelations. God never teaches men to
neglect their duties, or to act in any way unbecoming their age or
station.

[1 Corinthians 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 14:34</span></span>

When the apostle exhorts Christian women to seek information on
religious subjects from their husbands at home, it shows that believing
families ought to assemble for promoting spiritual knowledge. The Spirit
of Christ can never contradict itself; and if their revelations are
against those of the apostle, they do not come from the same Spirit. The
way to keep peace, truth, and order in the church, is to seek that which
is good for it, to bear with that which is not hurtful to its welfare,
and to keep up good behaviour, order, and decency.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 15](co1015)

</div>
