<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1.md)  
  [Previous](co1008)  [Next](co1010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001.md)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 9:0</span></span>

([Co1 9:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001).md) The apostle shows his
authority, and asserts his right to be maintained.

([Co1 9:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015).md) He waved this part of
his Christian liberty, for the good of others.

([Co1 9:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024).md) He did all this, with
care and diligence, in view of an unfading crown.

[1 Corinthians 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 9:1</span></span>

It is not new for a minister to meet with unkind returns for good-will
to a people, and diligent and successful services among them. To the
cavils of some, the apostle answers, so as to set forth himself as an
example of self-denial, for the good of others. He had a right to marry
as well as other apostles, and to claim what was needful for his wife,
and his children if he had any, from the churches, without labouring
with his own hands to get it. Those who seek to do our souls good,
should have food provided for them. But he renounced his right, rather
than hinder his success by claiming it. It is the people's duty to
maintain their minister. He may wave his right, as Paul did; but those
transgress a precept of Christ, who deny or withhold due support.

[1 Corinthians 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 9:15</span></span>

It is the glory of a minister to deny himself, that he may serve Christ
and save souls. But when a minister gives up his right for the sake of
the gospel, he does more than his charge and office demands. By
preaching the gospel, freely, the apostle showed that he acted from
principles of zeal and love, and thus enjoyed much comfort and hope in
his soul. And though he looked on the ceremonial law as a yoke taken off
by Christ, yet he submitted to it, that he might work upon the Jews, do
away their prejudices, prevail with them to hear the gospel, and win
them over to Christ. Though he would transgress no laws of Christ, to
please any man, yet he would accommodate himself to all men, where he
might do it lawfully, to gain some. Doing good was the study and
business of his life; and, that he might reach this end, he did not
stand on privileges. We must carefully watch against extremes, and
against relying on any thing but trust in Christ alone. We must not
allow errors or faults, so as to hurt others, or disgrace the gospel.

[1 Corinthians 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 9:24</span></span>

The apostle compares himself to the racers and combatants in the
Isthmian games, well known by the Corinthians. But in the Christian race
all may run so as to obtain. There is the greatest encouragement,
therefore, to persevere with all our strength, in this course. Those who
ran in these games were kept to a spare diet. They used themselves to
hardships. They practised the exercises. And those who pursue the
interests of their souls, must combat hard with fleshly lusts. The body
must not be suffered to rule. The apostle presses this advice on the
Corinthians. He sets before himself and them the danger of yielding to
fleshly desires, pampering the body, and its lusts and appetites. Holy
fear of himself was needed to keep an apostle faithful: how much more is
it needful for our preservation! Let us learn from hence humility and
caution, and to watch against dangers which surround us while in the
body.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 10](co1010.md)

</div>
