<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1007)  [Next](co1009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 8:0</span></span>

([Co1 8:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)) The danger of having a
high conceit of knowledge.

([Co1 8:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007)) The mischief of
offending weak brethren.

[1 Corinthians 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 8:1</span></span>

There is no proof of ignorance more common than conceit of knowledge.
Much may be known, when nothing is known to good purpose. And those who
think they know any thing, and grow vain thereon, are the least likely
to make good use of their knowledge. Satan hurts some as much by
tempting them to be proud of mental powers, as others, by alluring to
sensuality. Knowledge which puffs up the possessor, and renders him
confident, is as dangerous as self-righteous pride, though what he knows
may be right. Without holy affections all human knowledge is worthless.
The heathens had gods of higher and lower degree; gods many, and lords
many; so called, but not such in truth. Christians know better. One God
made all, and has power over all. The one God, even the Father,
signifies the Godhead as the sole object of all religious worship; and
the Lord Jesus Christ denotes the person of Emmanuel, God manifest in
the flesh, One with the Father, and with us; the appointed Mediator, and
Lord of all; through whom we come to the Father, and through whom the
Father sends all blessings to us, by the influence and working of the
Holy Spirit. While we refuse all worship to the many who are called gods
and lords, and to saints and angels, let us try whether we really come
to God by faith in Christ.

[1 Corinthians 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 8:7</span></span>

Eating one kind of food, and abstaining from another, have nothing in
them to recommend a person to God. But the apostle cautions against
putting a stumbling-block in the way of the weak; lest they be made bold
to eat what was offered to the idol, not as common food, but as a
sacrifice, and thereby be guilty of idolatry. He who has the Spirit of
Christ in him, will love those whom Christ loved so as to die for them.
Injuries done to Christians, are done to Christ; but most of all, the
entangling them in guilt: wounding their consciences, is wounding him.
We should be very tender of doing any thing that may occasion stumbling
to others, though it may be innocent in itself. And if we must not
endanger other men's souls, how much should we take care not to destroy
our own! Let Christians beware of approaching the brink of evil, or the
appearance of it, though many do this in public matters, for which
perhaps they plead plausibly. Men cannot thus sin against their
brethren, without offending Christ, and endangering their own souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 9](co1009)

</div>
