<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1003)  [Next](co1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 4:0</span></span>

([Co1 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)) The true character of
gospel ministers.

([Co1 4:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)) Cautions against
despising the apostle.

([Co1 4:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)) He claims their regard
as their spiritual father in Christ, and shows his concern for them.

[1 Corinthians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 4:1</span></span>

Apostles were no more than servants of Christ, but they were not to be
undervalued. They had a great trust, and for that reason, had an
honourable office. Paul had a just concern for his own reputation, but
he knew that he who chiefly aimed to please men, would not prove himself
a faithful servant of Christ. It is a comfort that men are not to be our
final judges. And it is not judging well of ourselves, or justifying
ourselves, that will prove us safe and happy. Our own judgment is not to
be depended upon as to our faithfulness, any more than our own works for
our justification. There is a day coming, that will bring men's secret
sins into open day, and discover the secrets of their hearts. Then every
slandered believer will be justified, and every faithful servant
approved and rewarded. The word of God is the best rule by which to
judge as to men. Pride commonly is at the bottom of quarrels.
Self-conceit contributes to produce undue esteem of our teachers, as
well as of ourselves. We shall not be puffed up for one against another,
if we remember that all are instruments, employed by God, and endowed by
him with various talents.

[1 Corinthians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 4:7</span></span>

We have no reason to be proud; all we have, or are, or do, that is good,
is owing to the free and rich grace of God. A sinner snatched from
destruction by sovereign grace alone, must be very absurd and
inconsistent, if proud of the free gifts of God. St. Paul sets forth his
own circumstances, [Co1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009). Allusion
is made to the cruel spectacles in the Roman games; where men were
forced to cut one another to pieces, to divert the people; and where the
victor did not escape with his life, though he should destroy his
adversary, but was only kept for another combat, and must be killed at
last. The thought that many eyes are upon believers, when struggling
with difficulties or temptations, should encourage constancy and
patience. "We are weak, but ye are strong." All Christians are not alike
exposed. Some suffer greater hardships than others. The apostle enters
into particulars of their sufferings. And how glorious the charity and
devotion that carried them through all these hardships! They suffered in
their persons and characters as the worst and vilest of men; as the very
dirt of the world, that was to be swept away: nay, as the offscouring of
all things, the dross of all things. And every one who would be faithful
in Christ Jesus, must be prepared for poverty and contempt. Whatever the
disciples of Christ suffer from men, they must follow the example, and
fulfil the will and precepts of their Lord. They must be content, with
him and for him, to be despised and abused. It is much better to be
rejected, despised, and ill used, as St. Paul was, than to have the good
opinion and favour of the world. Though cast off by the world as vile,
yet we may be precious to God, gathered up with his own hand, and placed
upon his throne.

[1 Corinthians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 4:14</span></span>

In reproving for sin, we should distinguish between sinners and their
sins. Reproofs that kindly and affectionately warn, are likely to
reform. Though the apostle spoke with authority as a parent, he would
rather beseech them in love. And as ministers are to set an example,
others must follow them, as far as they follow Christ in faith and
practice. Christians may mistake and differ in their views, but Christ
and Christian truth are the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.
Whenever the gospel is effectual, it comes not in word only, but also in
power, by the Holy Spirit, quickening dead sinners, delivering persons
from the slavery of sin and Satan, renewing them both inwardly and
outwardly, and comforting, strengthening, and establishing the saints,
which cannot be done by the persuasive language of men, but by the power
of God. And it is a happy temper, to have the spirit of love and
meekness bear the rule, yet to maintain just authority.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 5](co1005)

</div>
