<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2010)  [Next](co2012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 11:0</span></span>

([Co2 11:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)) The apostle gives the
reasons for speaking in his own commendation.

([Co2 11:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005)) Shows that he had
freely preached the gospel.

([Co2 11:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016)) Explains what he was
going to add in defence of his own character.

([Co2 11:22-33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022)) He gives an account of
his labours, cares, sufferings, dangers, and deliverances.

[2 Corinthians 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 11:1</span></span>

The apostle desired to preserve the Corinthians from being corrupted by
the false apostles. There is but one Jesus, one Spirit, and one gospel,
to be preached to them, and received by them; and why should any be
prejudiced, by the devices of an adversary, against him who first taught
them in faith? They should not listen to men, who, without cause, would
draw them away from those who were the means of their conversion.

[2 Corinthians 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 11:5</span></span>

It is far better to be plain in speech, yet walking openly and
consistently with the gospel, than to be admired by thousands, and be
lifted up in pride, so as to disgrace the gospel by evil tempers and
unholy lives. The apostle would not give room for any to accuse him of
worldly designs in preaching the gospel, that others who opposed him at
Corinth, might not in this respect gain advantage against him. Hypocrisy
may be looked for, especially when we consider the great power which
Satan, who rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience, has upon
the minds of many. And as there are temptations to evil conduct, so
there is equal danger on the other side. It serves Satan's purposes as
well, to set up good works against the atonement of Christ, and
salvation by faith and grace. But the end will discover those who are
deceitful workers; their work will end in ruin. Satan will allow his
ministers to preach either the law or the gospel separately; but the law
as established by faith in Christ's righteousness and atonement, and the
partaking of his Spirit, is the test of every false system.

[2 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 11:16</span></span>

It is the duty and practice of Christians to humble themselves, in
obedience to the command and example of the Lord; yet prudence must
direct in what it is needful to do things which we may do lawfully, even
the speaking of what God has wrought for us, and in us, and by us.
Doubtless here is reference to facts in which the character of the false
apostles had been shown. It is astonishing to see how such men bring
their followers into bondage, and how they take from them and insult
them.

[2 Corinthians 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 11:22</span></span>

The apostle gives an account of his labours and sufferings; not out of
pride or vain-glory, but to the honour of God, who enabled him to do and
suffer so much for the cause of Christ; and shows wherein he excelled
the false apostles, who tried to lessen his character and usefulness. It
astonishes us to reflect on this account of his dangers, hardships, and
sufferings, and to observe his patience, perseverance, diligence,
cheerfulness, and usefulness, in the midst of all these trials. See what
little reason we have to love the pomp and plenty of this world, when
this blessed apostle felt so much hardship in it. Our utmost diligence
and services appear unworthy of notice when compared with his, and our
difficulties and trials scarcely can be perceived. It may well lead us
to inquire whether or not we really are followers of Christ. Here we may
study patience, courage, and firm trust in God. Here we may learn to
think less of ourselves; and we should ever strictly keep to truth, as
in God's presence; and should refer all to his glory, as the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is blessed for evermore.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 12](co2012)

</div>
