<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2006)  [Next](co2008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 7:0</span></span>

([Co2 7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001).md) An exhortation to
holiness, and the whole church entreated to bear affection to the
apostle.

([Co2 7:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005).md) He rejoiced in their
sorrowing to repentance.

([Co2 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012).md) And in the comfort they
and Titus had together.

[2 Corinthians 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 7:1</span></span>

The promises of God are strong reasons for us to follow after holiness;
we must cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. If we
hope in God as our Father, we must seek to be holy as he is holy, and
perfect as our Father in heaven. His grace, by the influences of his
Spirit, alone can purify, but holiness should be the object of our
constant prayers. If the ministers of the gospel are thought
contemptible, there is danger lest the gospel itself be despised also;
and though ministers must flatter none, yet they must be gentle towards
all. Ministers may look for esteem and favour, when they can safely
appeal to the people, that they have corrupted no man by false doctrines
or flattering speeches; that they have defrauded no man; nor sought to
promote their own interests so as to hurt any. It was affection to them
made the apostle speak so freely to them, and caused him to glory of
them, in all places, and upon all occasions.

[2 Corinthians 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 7:5</span></span>

There were fightings without, or continual contentions with, and
opposition from Jews and Gentiles; and there were fears within, and
great concern for such as had embraced the Christian faith. But God
comforts those who are cast down. We should look above and beyond all
means and instruments, to God, as the author of all the consolation and
good we enjoy. Sorrow according to the will of God, tending to the glory
of God, and wrought by the Spirit of God, renders the heart humble,
contrite, submissive, disposed to mortify every sin, and to walk in
newness of life. And this repentance is connected with saving faith in
Christ, and an interest in his atonement. There is a great difference
between this sorrow of a godly sort, and the sorrow of the world. The
happy fruits of true repentance are mentioned. Where the heart is
changed, the life and actions will be changed. It wrought indignation at
sin, at themselves, at the tempter and his instruments. It wrought a
fear of watchfulness, and a cautious fear of sin. It wrought desire to
be reconciled with God. It wrought zeal for duty, and against sin. It
wrought revenge against sin and their own folly, by endeavours to make
satisfaction for injuries done thereby. Deep humility before God, hatred
of all sin, with faith in Christ, a new heart and a new life, make
repentance unto salvation. May the Lord bestow it on every one of us.

[2 Corinthians 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 7:12</span></span>

The apostle was not disappointed concerning them, which he signified to
Titus; and he could with joy declare the confidence he had in them for
the time to come. Here see the duties of a pastor and of his flock; the
latter must lighten the troubles of the pastoral office, by respect and
obedience; the former make a due return by his care of them, and cherish
the flock by testimonies of satisfaction, joy, and tenderness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 8](co2008.md)

</div>
