<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2002)  [Next](co2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 3:0</span></span>

([Co2 3:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001).md) The preference of the
gospel to the law given by Moses.

([Co2 3:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012).md) The preaching of the
apostle was suitable to the excellency and evidence of the gospel,
through the power of the Holy Ghost.

[2 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 3:1</span></span>

Even the appearance of self-praise and courting human applause, is
painful to the humble and spiritual mind. Nothing is more delightful to
faithful ministers, or more to their praise, than the success of their
ministry, as shown in the spirits and lives of those among whom they
labour. The law of Christ was written in their hearts, and the love of
Christ shed abroad there. Nor was it written in tables of stone, as the
law of God given to Moses, but on the fleshy (not fleshly, as
fleshliness denotes sensuality) tables of the heart, [Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026.md). Their hearts were humbled and
softened to receive this impression, by the new-creating power of the
Holy Spirit. He ascribes all the glory to God. And remember, as our
whole dependence is upon the Lord, so the whole glory belongs to him
alone. The letter killeth: the letter of the law is the ministration of
death; and if we rest only in the letter of the gospel, we shall not be
the better for so doing: but the Holy Spirit gives life spiritual, and
life eternal. The Old Testament dispensation was the ministration of
death, but the New Testament of life. The law made known sin, and the
wrath and curse of God; it showed us a God above us, and a God against
us; but the gospel makes known grace, and Emmanuel, God with us. Therein
the righteousness of God by faith is revealed; and this shows us that
the just shall live by his faith; this makes known the grace and mercy
of God through Jesus Christ, for obtaining the forgiveness of sins and
eternal life. The gospel so much exceeds the law in glory, that it
eclipses the glory of the legal dispensation. But even the New Testament
will be a killing letter, if shown as a mere system or form, and without
dependence on God the Holy Spirit, to give it a quickening power.

[2 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 3:12</span></span>

It is the duty of the ministers of the gospel to use great plainness, or
clearness, of speech. The Old Testament believers had only cloudy and
passing glimpses of that glorious Saviour, and unbelievers looked no
further than to the outward institution. But the great precepts of the
gospel, believe, love, obey, are truths stated as clearly as possible.
And the whole doctrine of Christ crucified, is made as plain as human
language can make it. Those who lived under the law, had a veil upon
their hearts. This veil is taken away by the doctrines of the Bible
about Christ. When any person is converted to God, then the veil of
ignorance is taken away. The condition of those who enjoy and believe
the gospel is happy, for the heart is set at liberty to run the ways of
God's commandments. They have light, and with open face they behold the
glory of the Lord. Christians should prize and improve these privileges.
We should not rest contented without knowing the transforming power of
the gospel, by the working of the Spirit, bringing us to seek to be like
the temper and tendency of the glorious gospel of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, and into union with Him. We behold Christ, as in the glass
of his word; and as the reflection from a mirror causes the face to
shine, the faces of Christians shine also.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 4](co2004.md)

</div>
