<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Colossians Index](col.md)  
  [Previous](col003)  [Next](th1000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001.md)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 4:0</span></span>

([Col 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001).md) Masters to do their duty
towards servants.

([Col 4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002).md) Persons of all ranks to
persevere in prayer, and Christian prudence.

([Col 4:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007).md) The apostle refers to
others for an account of his affairs.

([Col 4:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010).md) Sends greetings; and
concludes with a blessing.

[Colossians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 4:1</span></span>

The apostle proceeds with the duty of masters to their servants. Not
only justice is required of them, but strict equity and kindness. Let
them deal with servants as they expect God should deal with themselves.

[Colossians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 4:2</span></span>

No duties can be done aright, unless we persevere in fervent prayer, and
watch therein with thanksgiving. The people are to pray particularly for
their ministers. Believers are exhorted to right conduct towards
unbelievers. Be careful in all converse with them, to do them good, and
recommend religion by all fit means. Diligence in redeeming time,
commends religion to the good opinion of others. Even what is only
carelessness may cause a lasting prejudice against the truth. Let all
discourse be discreet and seasonable, as becomes Christians. Though it
be not always of grace, it must always be with grace. Though our
discourse be of that which is common, yet it must be in a Christian
manner. Grace is the salt which seasons our discourse, and keeps it from
corrupting. It is not enough to answer what is asked, unless we answer
aright also.

[Colossians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">col 4:7</span></span>

Ministers are servants to Christ, and fellow-servants to one another.
They have one Lord, though they have different stations and powers for
service. It is a great comfort under the troubles and difficulties of
life, to have fellow Christians caring for us. Circumstances of life
make no difference in the spiritual relation among sincere Christians;
they partake of the same privileges, and are entitled to the same
regards. What amazing changes Divine grace makes! Faithless servants
become faithful and beloved brethren, and some who had done wrong,
become fellow-workers of good.

[Colossians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">col 4:10</span></span>

Paul had differed with Barnabas, on the account of this Mark, yet he is
not only reconciled, but recommends him to the churches; an example of a
truly Christian and forgiving spirit. If men have been guilty of a
fault, it must not always be remembered against them. We must forget as
well as forgive. The apostle had comfort in the communion of saints and
ministers. One is his fellow-servant, another his fellow-prisoner, and
all his fellow-workers, working out their own salvation, and
endeavouring to promote the salvation of others. The effectual, fervent
prayer is the prevailing prayer, and availeth much. The smiles,
flatteries, or frowns of the world, the spirit of error, or the working
of self-love, leads many to a way of preaching and living which comes
far short of fulfilling their ministry. But those who preach the same
doctrine as Paul, and follow his example, may expect the Divine favour
and blessing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Introduction](th1000.md)

</div>
