<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col001)  [Next](col003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 2:0</span></span>

([Col 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)) The apostle expresses his
love to, and joy in believers.

([Col 2:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)) He cautions against the
errors of heathen philosophy; also against Jewish traditions, and rites
which had been fulfilled in Christ.

([Col 2:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)) Against worshipping
angels; and against legal ordinances.

[Colossians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 2:1</span></span>

The soul prospers when we have clear knowledge of the truth as it is in
Jesus. When we not only believe with the heart, but are ready, when
called, to make confession with the mouth. Knowledge and faith make a
soul rich. The stronger our faith, and the warmer our love, the more
will our comfort be. The treasures of wisdom are hid, not from us, but
for us, in Christ. These were hid from proud unbelievers, but displayed
in the person and redemption of Christ. See the danger of enticing
words; how many are ruined by the false disguises and fair appearances
of evil principles and wicked practices! Be aware and afraid of those
who would entice to any evil; for they aim to spoil you. All Christians
have, in profession at least, received Jesus Christ the Lord, consented
to him, and taken him for theirs. We cannot be built up in Christ, or
grow in him, unless we are first rooted in him, or founded upon him.
Being established in the faith, we must abound therein, and improve in
it more and more. God justly withdraws this benefit from those who do
not receive it with thanksgiving; and gratitude for his mercies is
justly required by God.

[Colossians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">col 2:8</span></span>

There is a philosophy which rightly exercises our reasonable faculties;
a study of the works of God, which leads us to the knowledge of God, and
confirms our faith in him. But there is a philosophy which is vain and
deceitful; and while it pleases men's fancies, hinders their faith: such
are curious speculations about things above us, or no concern to us.
Those who walk in the way of the world, are turned from following
Christ. We have in Him the substance of all the shadows of the
ceremonial law. All the defects of it are made up in the gospel of
Christ, by his complete sacrifice for sin, and by the revelation of the
will of God. To be complete, is to be furnished with all things
necessary for salvation. By this one word "complete," is shown that we
have in Christ whatever is required. "In him," not when we look to
Christ, as though he were distant from us, but we are in him, when, by
the power of the Spirit, we have faith wrought in our hearts by the
Spirit, and we are united to our Head. The circumcision of the heart,
the crucifixion of the flesh, the death and burial to sin and to the
world, and the resurrection to newness of life, set forth in baptism,
and by faith wrought in our hearts, prove that our sins are forgiven,
and that we are fully delivered from the curse of the law. Through
Christ, we, who were dead in sins, are quickened. Christ's death was the
death of our sins; Christ's resurrection is the quickening of our souls.
The law of ordinances, which was a yoke to the Jews, and a
partition-wall to the Gentiles, the Lord Jesus took out of the way. When
the substance was come, the shadows fled. Since every mortal man is,
through the hand-writing of the law, guilty of death, how very dreadful
is the condition of the ungodly and unholy, who trample under foot that
blood of the Son of God, whereby alone this deadly hand-writing can be
blotted out! Let not any be troubled about bigoted judgments which
related to meats, or the Jewish solemnities. The setting apart a portion
of our time for the worship and service of God, is a moral and
unchangeable duty, but had no necessary dependence upon the seventh day
of the week, the sabbath of the Jews. The first day of the week, or the
Lord's day, is the time kept holy by Christians, in remembrance of
Christ's resurrection. All the Jewish rites were shadows of gospel
blessings.

[Colossians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">col 2:18</span></span>

It looked like humility to apply to angels, as if men were conscious of
their unworthiness to speak directly to God. But it is not warrantable;
it is taking that honour which is due to Christ only, and giving it to a
creature. There really was pride in this seeming humility. Those who
worship angels, disclaim Christ, who is the only Mediator between God
and man. It is an insult to Christ, who is the Head of the church, to
use any intercessors but him. When men let go their hold of Christ, they
catch at what will stand them in no stead. The body of Christ is a
growing body. And true believers cannot live in the fashions of the
world. True wisdom is, to keep close to the appointments of the gospel;
in entire subjection to Christ, who is the only Head of his church.
Self-imposed sufferings and fastings, might have a show of uncommon
spirituality and willingness for suffering, but this was not "in any
honour" to God. The whole tended, in a wrong manner, to satisfy the
carnal mind, by gratifying self-will, self-wisdom, self-righteousness,
and contempt of others. The things being such as carry not with them so
much as the show of wisdom; or so faint a show that they do the soul no
good, and provide not for the satisfying of the flesh. What the Lord has
left indifferent, let us regard as such, and leave others to the like
freedom; and remembering the passing nature of earthly things, let us
seek to glorify God in the use of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 3](col003)

</div>
