<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan003)  [Next](dan005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 4:0</span></span>

(v. 1-18) Nebuchadnezzar acknowledges the power of Jehovah.

([Dan 4:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)) Daniel interprets his
dream.

([Dan 4:28-37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028)) The fulfilment of it.

[Daniel 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 4:1</span></span>

The beginning and end of this chapter lead us to hope, that
Nebuchadnezzar was a monument of the power of Divine grace, and of the
riches of Divine mercy. After he was recovered from his madness, he told
to distant places, and wrote down for future ages, how God had justly
humbled and graciously restored him. When a sinner comes to himself, he
will promote the welfare of others, by making known the wondrous mercy
of God. Nebuchadnezzar, before he related the Divine judgments upon him
for his pride, told the warnings he had in a dream or vision. The
meaning was explained to him. The person signified, was to be put down
from honour, and to be deprived of the use of his reason seven years.
This is surely the sorest of all temporal judgments. Whatever outward
affliction God is pleased to lay upon us, we have cause to bear it
patiently, and to be thankful that he continues the use of our reason,
and the peace of our consciences. Yet if the Lord should see fit by such
means to keep a sinner from multiplying crimes, or a believer from
dishonouring his name, even the dreadful prevention would be far
preferable to the evil conduct. God has determined it, as a righteous
Judge, and the angels in heaven applaud. Not that the great God needs
the counsel or concurrence of the angels, but it denotes the solemnity
of this sentence. The demand is by the word of the holy ones, God's
suffering people: when the oppressed cry to God, he will hear. Let us
diligently seek blessings which can never be taken from us, and
especially beware of pride and forgetfulness of God.

[Daniel 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 4:19</span></span>

Daniel was struck with amazement and terror at so heavy a judgment
coming upon so great a prince, and gives advice with tenderness and
respect. It is necessary, in repentance, that we not only cease to do
evil, but learn to do good. Though it might not wholly prevent the
judgment, yet the trouble may be longer before it comes, or shorter when
it does come. And everlasting misery will be escaped by all who repent
and turn to God.

[Daniel 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 4:28</span></span>

Pride and self-conceit are sins that beset great men. They are apt to
take that glory to themselves which is due to God only. While the proud
word was in the king's mouth, the powerful word came from God. His
understanding and his memory were gone, and all the powers of the
rational soul were broken. How careful we ought to be, not to do any
thing which may provoke God to put us out of our senses! God resists the
proud. Nebuchadnezzar would be more than a man, but God justly makes him
less than a man. We may learn to believe concerning God, that the most
high God lives for ever, and that his kingdom is like himself,
everlasting, and universal. His power cannot be resisted. When men are
brought to honour God, by confession of sin and acknowledging his
sovereignty, then, and not till then, they may expect that God will
honour them; not only restore them to the dignity they lost by the sin
of the first Adam, but add excellent majesty to them, from the
righteousness and grace of the Second Adam. Afflictions shall last no
longer than till they have done the work for which they were sent. There
can be no reasonable doubt that Nebuchadnezzar was a true penitent, and
an accepted believer. It is thought that he did not live more than a
year after his restoration. Thus the Lord knows how to abase those that
walk in pride, but gives grace and consolation to the humble,
broken-hearted sinner who calls upon Him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 5](dan005)

</div>
