<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan011)  [Next](hos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 12:0</span></span>

([Dan 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)) The conclusion of the
vision of the Scriptures of truth.

([Dan 12:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)) The times of the
continuance of these events.

[Daniel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 12:1</span></span>

Michael signifies, "Who is like God," and his name, with the title of
"the great Prince," points out the Divine Saviour. Christ stood for the
children of our people in their stead as a sacrifice, bore the curse for
them, to bear it from them. He stands for them in pleading for them at
the throne of grace. And after the destruction of antichrist, the Lord
Jesus shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and He shall appear
for the complete redemption of all his people. When God works
deliverance from persecution for them, it is as life from the dead. When
his gospel is preached, many who sleep in the dust, both Jews and
Gentiles, shall be awakened by it out of their heathenism of Judaism.
And in the end the multitude that sleep in the dust shall awake; many
shall arise to life, and many to shame. There is glory reserved for all
the saints in the future state, for all that are wise, wise for their
souls and eternity. Those who turn many to righteousness, who turn
sinners from the errors of their ways, and help to save their souls from
death, [Jam 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020), will share in the
glory of those they have helped to heaven, which will add to their own
glory.

[Daniel 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 12:5</span></span>

One of the angels asking how long it should be to the end of these
wonders, a solemn reply is made, that it would be for a time, times, and
a half, the period mentioned [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025), and in the Revelation. It
signifies 1260 prophetic days or years, beginning from the time when the
power of the holy people should be scattered. The imposture of Mohammed,
and the papal usurpation, began about the same time; and these were a
twofold attack upon the church of God. But all will end well at last.
All opposing rule, principality, and power, shall be put down, and
holiness and love will triumph, and be in honour, to eternity. The end,
this end, shall come. What an amazing prophecy is this, of so many
varied events, and extending through so many successive ages, even to
the general resurrection! Daniel must comfort himself with the pleasing
prospect of his own happiness in death, in judgment, and to eternity. It
is good for us all to think much of going away from this world. That
must be our way; but it is our comfort that we shall not go till God
calls us to another world, and till he has done with us in this world;
till he says, Go thou thy way, thou hast done thy work, therefore now,
go thy way, and leave it to others to take thy place. It was a comfort
to Daniel, and is a comfort to all the saints, that whatever their lot
is in the days of their lives, they shall have a happy lot in the end of
the days. And it ought to be the great care and concern of every one of
us to secure this. Then we may well be content with our present lot, and
welcome the will of God. Believers are happy at all times; they rest in
God by faith now, and a rest is reserved for them in heaven at last.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Introduction](hos000)

</div>
