<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan000)  [Next](dan002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

([Dan 1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)) The captivity of Daniel
and his companions.

([Dan 1:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)) Their refusal to eat the
king's meat.

([Dan 1:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017)) Their improvement in
wisdom.

[Daniel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 1:1</span></span>

Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, took
Jerusalem, and carried whom and what he pleased away. From this first
captivity, most think the seventy years are to be dated. It is the
interest of princes to employ wise men; and it is their wisdom to find
out and train up such. Nebuchadnezzar ordered that these chosen youths
should be taught. All their Hebrew names had something of God in them;
but to make them forget the God of their fathers, the Guide of their
youth, the heathen gave them names that savoured of idolatry. It is
painful to reflect how often public education tends to corrupt the
principles and morals.

[Daniel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 1:8</span></span>

The interest we think we make for ourselves, we must acknowledge to be
God's gift. Daniel was still firm to his religion. Whatever they called
him, he still held fast the spirit of an Israelite. These youths
scrupled concerning the meat, lest it should be sinful. When God's
people are in Babylon they need take special care that they partake not
of her sins. It is much to the praise of young people, not to covet or
seek the delights of sense. Those who would excel in wisdom and piety,
must learn betimes to keep the body under. Daniel avoided defiling
himself with sin; and we should more fear that than any outward trouble.
It is easier to keep temptation at a distance, than to resist it when
near. And we cannot better improve our interest in any with whom we have
found favour, than to use it to keep us from sin. People will not
believe the benefit of avoiding excess, and of a spare diet, nor how
much they contribute to the health of the body, unless they try.
Conscientious temperance will always do more, even for the comfort of
this life, than sinful indulgence.

[Daniel 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 1:17</span></span>

Daniel and his fellows kept to their religion; and God rewarded them
with eminence in learning. Pious young persons should endeavour to do
better than their fellows in useful things; not for the praise of man,
but for the honour of the gospel, and that they may be qualified for
usefulness. And it is well for a country, and for the honour of a
prince, when he is able to judge who are best fitted to serve him, and
prefers them on that account. Let young men steadily attend to this
chapter; and let all remember that God will honour those who honour him,
but those who despise him shall be lightly esteemed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 2](dan002)

</div>
