<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu009)  [Next](deu011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 10:0</span></span>

([Deu 10:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001).md) God's mercies to Israel
after their rebellion.

([Deu 10:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012).md) An exhortation to
obedience.

[Deuteronomy 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 10:1</span></span>

Moses reminded the Israelites of God's great mercy to them,
notwithstanding their provocations. There were four things in and by
which the Lord showed himself reconciled to Israel. God gave them his
law. Thus God has intrusted us with Bibles, sabbaths, and sacraments, as
tokens of his presence and favour. God led them forward toward Canaan.
He appointed a standing ministry among them for holy things. And now,
under the gospel, when the pouring forth of the Spirit is more plentiful
and powerful, the succession is kept up by the Spirit's work on men's
hearts, qualifying and making some willing for that work in every age.
God accepted Moses as an advocate or intercessor for them, and therefore
appointed him to be their prince and leader. Moses was a type of Christ,
who ever lives, pleading for us, and has all power in heaven and in
earth.

[Deuteronomy 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 10:12</span></span>

We are here taught our duty to God in our principles and our practices.
We must fear the Lord our God. We must love him, and delight in
communion with him. We must walk in the ways in which he has appointed
us to walk. We must serve him with all our heart and soul. What we do in
his service we must do cheerfully, and with good will. We must keep his
commandments. There is true honour and pleasure in obedience. We must
give honour to God; and to him we must cleave, as one we love and
delight in, trust in, and from whom we have great expectations. We are
here taught our duty to our neighbour. God's common gifts to mankind
oblige us to honour all men. And those who have themselves been in
distress, and have found mercy with God, should be ready to show
kindness to those who are in the like distress. We are here taught our
duty to ourselves. Circumcise your hearts. Cast away all corrupt
affections and inclinations, which hinder you from fearing and loving
God. By nature we do not love God. This is original sin, the source
whence our wickedness proceeds; and the carnal mind is enmity against
God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; so
then they that are in the flesh cannot please God, [Rom
8:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005.md). Let us, without delay or
reserve, come and cleave to our reconciled God in Jesus Christ, that we
may love, serve, and obey him acceptably, and be daily changed into his
image, from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord. Consider the
greatness and glory of God; and his goodness and grace; these persuade
us to our duty. Blessed Spirit! Oh for thy purifying, persevering, and
renewing influences, that being called out of the state of strangers,
such as our fathers were, we may be found among the number of the
children of God, and that our lot may be among the saints.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 11](deu011.md)

</div>
