<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu006)  [Next](deu008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 7:0</span></span>

([Deu 7:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)) Intercourse with the
Canaanites forbidden.

([Deu 7:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#012)) Promises if they were
obedient.

[Deuteronomy 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 7:1</span></span>

Here is a strict caution against all friendship and fellowship with
idols and idolaters. Those who are in communion with God, must have no
communication with the unfruitful works of darkness. Limiting the orders
to destroy, to the nations here mentioned, plainly shows that after ages
were not to draw this into a precedent. A proper understanding of the
evil of sin, and of the mystery of a crucified Saviour, will enable us
to perceive the justice of God in all his punishments, temporal and
eternal. We must deal decidedly with our lusts that war against our
souls; let us not show them any mercy, but mortify, and crucify, and
utterly destroy them. Thousands in the world that now is, have been
undone by ungodly marriages; for there is more likelihood that the good
will be perverted, than that the bad will be converted. Those who, in
choosing yoke-fellows, keep not within the bounds of a profession of
religion, cannot promise themselves helps meet for them.

[Deuteronomy 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 7:12</span></span>

We are in danger of having fellowship with the works of darkness if we
take pleasure in fellowship with those who do such works. Whatever
brings us into a snare, brings us under a curse. Let us be constant to
our duty, and we cannot question the constancy of God's mercy. Diseases
are God's servants; they go where he sends them, and do what he bids
them. It is therefore good for the health of our bodies, thoroughly to
mortify the sin of our souls; which is our rule of duty. Yet sin is
never totally destroyed in this world; and it actually prevails in us
much more than it would do, if we were watchful and diligent. In all
this the Lord acts according to the counsel of his own will; but that
counsel being hid from us, forms no excuse for our sloth and negligence,
of which it is in no degree the cause. We must not think, that because
the deliverance of the church, and the destruction of the enemies of the
soul, are not done immediately, therefore they will never be done. God
will do his own work in his own method and time; and we may be sure that
they are always the best. Thus corruption is driven out of the hearts of
believers by little and little. The work of sanctification is carried on
gradually; but at length there will be a complete victory. Pride,
security, and other sins that are common effects of prosperity, are
enemies more dangerous than beasts of the field, and more apt to
increase upon us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 8](deu008)

</div>
