<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu005)  [Next](deu007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 6:0</span></span>

([Deu 6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)) A persuasive to
obedience.

([Deu 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004), [Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)) An exhortation to obedience.

([Deu 6:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006)) Obedience taught.

([Deu 6:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#017)) General precepts,
Instructions to be given to their children.

[Deuteronomy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 6:1</span></span>

In this and the like passages, the "commandments" seem to denote the
moral law, the "statues" the ceremonial law, and the "judgments" the law
by which the judges decided. Moses taught the people all that, and that
only, which God commanded him to teach. Thus Christ's ministers are to
teach his churches all he has commanded, neither more nor less, [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020). The fear of God in the heart
will be the most powerful principle of obedience. It is highly desirable
that not we only, but our children, and our children's children, may
fear the Lord. Religion and righteousness advance and secure the
prosperity of any people.

[Deuteronomy 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 6:4</span></span>

Here is a brief summary of religion, containing the first principles of
faith and obedience. Jehovah our God is the only living and true God; he
only is God, and he is but One God. Let us not desire to have any other.
The three-fold mention of the Divine names, and the plural number of the
word translated God, seem plainly to intimate a Trinity of persons, even
in this express declaration of the unity of the Godhead. Happy those who
have this one Lord for their God. It is better to have one fountain than
a thousand cisterns; one all-sufficient God than a thousand insufficient
friends. This is the first and great commandment of God's law, that we
love him; and that we do all parts of our duty to him from a principle
of love; My son, give me thine heart. We are to love God with all our
heart, and soul, and might. That is, 1. With a sincere love; not in word
and tongue only, but inwardly in truth. 2. With a strong love. He that
is our All, must have our all, and none but he. 3. With a superlative
love; we must love God above any creature whatever, and love nothing but
what we love for him. 4. With an intelligent love. To love him with all
the heart, and with all the understanding, we must see good cause to
love him. 5. With an entire love; he is ONE, our hearts must be united
in his love. Oh that this love of God may be shed abroad in our hearts!

[Deuteronomy 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 6:6</span></span>

Here are means for maintaining and keeping up religion in our hearts and
houses. 1. Meditation. God's words must be laid up in our hearts, that
our thoughts may be daily employed about them. 2. The religious
education of children. Often repeat these things to them. Be careful and
exact in teaching thy children. Teach these truths to all who are any
way under thy care. 3. Pious discourse. Thou shalt talk of these things
with due reverence and seriousness, for the benefit not only of thy
children, but of thy servants, thy friends and companions. Take all
occasions to discourse with those about thee, not of matters of doubtful
disputation, but of the plain truths and laws of God, and the things
that belong to our peace. 4. Frequent reading of the word. God appointed
them to write sentences of the law upon their walls, and in scrolls of
parchment to be worn about their wrists. This seems to have been binding
in the letter of it to the Jews, as it is to us in the intent of it;
which is, that we should by all means make the word of God familiar to
us; that we may have it ready to use upon all occasions, to restrain us
from sin, and direct us in duty. We must never be ashamed to own our
religion, nor to own ourselves under its check and government. Here is a
caution not to forget God in a day of prosperity and plenty. When they
came easily by the gift, they would be apt to grow secure, and unmindful
of the Giver. Therefore be careful, when thou liest safe and soft, lest
thou forget the Lord. When the world smiles, we are apt to make court to
it, and expect our happiness in it, and so we forget Him who is our only
portion and rest. There is need of great care and caution at such a
time. Then beware; being warned of your danger, stand upon your guard.
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God; neither by despairing of his
power and goodness, while we keep in the way of our duty; nor by
presuming upon it, when we turn aside out of that way.

[Deuteronomy 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 6:17</span></span>

Moses gives charge to keep God's commandments. Negligence will ruin us;
but we cannot be saved without diligence. It is our interest, as well as
our duty, to be religious. It will be our life. Godliness has the
promise of the continuance and comfort of the life that now is, as far
as it is for God's glory. It will be our righteousness. It is only
through the Mediator we can be righteous before God. The knowledge of
the spirituality and excellency of the holy law of God, is suited to
show sinful man his need of a Saviour, and to prepare his heart to
welcome a free salvation. The gospel honours the law, not only in the
perfect obedience of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ; but in that
it is a plan for bringing back apostate rebels and enemies, by
repentance, faith, forgiveness, and renewing grace, to love God above
all things, even in this world; and in the world above, to love him
perfectly, even as angels love him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 7](deu007)

</div>
