<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu013)  [Next](deu015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 14:0</span></span>

(v. 1-21) The Israelites to distinguish themselves from other nations.

([Deu 14:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022)) Respecting the
application of tithes.

[Deuteronomy 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 14:1</span></span>

Moses tells the people of Israel how God had given them three
distinguishing privileges, which were their honour, and figures of those
spiritual blessings in heavenly things, with which God has in Christ
blessed us. Here is election; "The Lord hath chosen thee." He did not
choose them because they were by their own acts a peculiar people to him
above other nations, but he chose them that they might be so by his
grace; and thus were believers chosen, [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004). Here is adoption; "Ye are the
children of the Lord your God;" not because God needed children, but
because they were orphans, and needed a father. Every spiritual
Israelite is indeed a child of God, a partaker of his nature and favour.
Here is sanctification; "Thou art a holy people." God's people are
required to be holy, and if they are holy, they are indebted to the
grace God which makes them so. Those whom God chooses to be his
children, he will form to be a holy people, and zealous of good works.
They must be careful to avoid every thing which might disgrace their
profession, in the sight of those who watch for their halting. Our
heavenly Father forbids nothing but for our welfare. Do thyself no harm;
do not ruin thy health, thy reputation, thy domestic comforts, thy peace
of mind. Especially do not murder thy soul. Do not be the vile slave of
thy appetites and passions. Do not render all around thee miserable, and
thyself wretched; but aim at that which is most excellent and useful.
The laws which regarded many sorts of flesh as unclean, were to keep
them from mingling with their idolatrous neighbours. It is plain in the
gospel, that these laws are now done away. But let us ask our own
hearts, Are we of the children of the Lord our God? Are we separate from
the ungodly world, in being set apart to God's glory, the purchase of
Christ's blood? Are we subjects of the work of the Holy Ghost? Lord,
teach us from these precepts how pure and holy all thy people ought to
live!

[Deuteronomy 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 14:22</span></span>

A second portion from the produce of their land was required. The whole
appointment evidently was against the covetousness, distrust, and
selfishness of the human heart. It promoted friendliness, liberality,
and cheerfulness, and raised a fund for the relief of the poor. They
were taught that their worldly portion was most comfortably enjoyed,
when shared with their brethren who were in want. If we thus serve God,
and do good with what we have, it is promised that the Lord our God will
bless us in all the works of our land. The blessing of God is all to our
outward prosperity; and without that blessing, the work of our hands
will bring nothing to pass. The blessing descends upon the working hand.
Expect not that God should bless thee in thy idleness and love of ease.
And it descends upon the giving hand. He who thus scatters, certainly
increases; and to be free and generous in the support of religion, and
any good work, is the surest and safest way of thriving.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 15](deu015)

</div>
