<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 27:0</span></span>

([Deu 27:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)) The law to be written
on stones in the promised land.

(v. 11-26) The curses to be pronounced on mount Ebal.

[Deuteronomy 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 27:1</span></span>

As soon as they were come into Canaan, they must set up a monument, on
which they must write the words of this law. They must set up an altar.
The word and prayer must go together. Though they might not, of their
own heads, set up any altar besides that at the tabernacle; yet, by the
appointment of God, they might, upon special occasion. This altar must
be made of unhewn stones, such as they found upon the field. Christ, our
Altar, is a stone cut out of the mountain without hands, refused by the
builders, as having no form or comeliness, but accepted of God the
Father, and made the Head of the corner. In the Old Testament the words
of the law are written, with the curse annexed; which would overcome us
with horror, if we had not, in the New Testament, an altar erected close
by, which gives consolation. Blessed be God, the printed copies of the
Scriptures among us, do away the necessity of such methods as were
presented to Israel. The end of the gospel ministry is, and the end of
preachers ought to be, to make the word of God as plain as possible.
Yet, unless the Spirit of God prosper such labours with Divine power, we
shall not, even by these means, be made wise unto salvation: for this
blessing we should therefore daily and earnestly pray.

[Deuteronomy 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 27:11</span></span>

The six tribes appointed for blessing, were all children of the free
women, for to such the promise belongs, [Gal
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#031). Levi is here among the rest.
Ministers should apply to themselves the blessing and curse they preach
to others, and by faith set their own Amen to it. And they must not only
allure people to their duty with the promises of a blessing, but awe
them with the threatenings of a curse, by declaring that a curse would
be upon those who do such things. To each of the curses the people were
to say, Amen. It professed their faith, that these, and the like curses,
were real declarations of the wrath of God against the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, not one jot of which shall fall to the ground.
It was acknowledging the equity of these curses. Those who do such
things deserve to fall, and lie under the curse. Lest those who were
guilty of other sins, not here mentioned, should think themselves safe
from the curse, the last reaches all. Not only those who do the evil
which the law forbids, but those also who omit the good which the law
requires. Without the atoning blood of Christ, sinners can neither have
communion with a holy God, nor do any thing acceptable to him; his
righteous law condemns every one who, at any time, or in any thing,
transgresses it. Under its awful curse we remain as transgressors, until
the redemption of Christ is applied to our hearts. Wherever the grace of
God brings salvation, it teaches the believer to deny ungodliness and
wordly lusts, to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world, consenting to, and delighting in the words of God's law, after
the inward man. In this holy walk, true peace and solid joy are to be
found.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
