<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu033)  [Next](jos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 34:0</span></span>

([Deu 34:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)) Moses views the promised
land from mount Nebo.

([Deu 34:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005)) The death and burial of
Moses, The mourning of the people.

([Deu 34:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009)) Joshua succeeds Moses,
The praise of Moses.

[Deuteronomy 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 34:1</span></span>

Moses seemed unwilling to leave his work; but that being finished, he
manifested no unwillingness to die. God had declared that he should not
enter Canaan. But the Lord also promised that Moses should have a view
of it, and showed him all that good land. Such a sight believers now
have, through grace, of the bliss and glory of their future state.
Sometimes God reserves the brightest discoveries of his grace to his
people to support their dying moments. Those may leave this world with
cheerfulness, who die in the faith of Christ, and in the hope of heaven.

[Deuteronomy 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 34:5</span></span>

Moses obeyed this command of God as willingly as any other, though it
seemed harder. In this he resembled our Lord Jesus Christ. But he died
in honour, in peace, and in the most easy manner; the Saviour died upon
the disgraceful and torturing cross. Moses died very easily; he died "at
the mouth of the Lord," according to the will of God. The servants of
the Lord, when they have done all their other work, must die at last,
and be willing to go home, whenever their Master sends for them, [Act
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013). The place of his burial was not
known. If the soul be at rest with God, it is of little consequence
where the body rests. There was no decay in the strength of his body,
nor in the vigour and activity of his mind; his understanding was as
clear, and his memory as strong as ever. This was the reward of his
services, the effect of his extraordinary meekness. There was solemn
mourning for him. Yet how great soever our losses have been, we must not
give ourselves up to sorrow. If we hope to go to heaven rejoicing, why
should we go to the grave mourning?

[Deuteronomy 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 34:9</span></span>

Moses brought Israel to the borders of Canaan, and then died and left
them. This signifies that the law made nothing perfect, [Heb
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019) It brings men into a wilderness
of conviction, but not into the Canaan of rest and settled peace. That
honour was reserved for Joshua, our Lord Jesus, of whom Joshua was a
type, (and the name is the same,) to do that for us which the law could
not do, [Rom 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003). Through him we enter
into the spiritual rest of conscience, and eternal rest in heaven. Moses
was greater than any other prophet of the Old Testament. But our Lord
Jesus went beyond him, far more than the other prophets came short of
him. And see a strong resemblance between the redeemer of the children
of Israel and the Redeemer of mankind. Moses was sent by God, to deliver
the Israelites form a cruel bondage; he led them out, and conquered
their enemies. He became not only their deliverer, but their lawgiver;
not only their lawgiver, but their judge; and, finally, leads them to
the border of the land of promise. Our blessed Saviour came to rescue us
out of the slavery of the devil, and to restore us to liberty and
happiness. He came to confirm every moral precept of the first lawgiver;
and to write them, not on tables of stone, but on fleshly tables of the
heart. He came to be our Judge also, inasmuch as he hath appointed a day
when he will judge all the secrets of men, and reward or punish
accordingly. This greatness of Christ above Moses, is a reason why
Christians should be obedient and faithful to the holy religion by which
they profess to be Christ's followers. God, by his grace, make us all
so!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Introduction](jos000)

</div>
