<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu001)  [Next](deu003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 2:0</span></span>

([Deu 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001).md) The Edomites to be
spared.

(v. 8-23) The Moabites and Ammonites to be spared.

([Deu 2:24-37](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024).md) The Amorites to be
destroyed.

[Deuteronomy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 2:1</span></span>

Only a short account of the long stay of Israel in the wilderness is
given. God not only chastised them for their murmuring and unbelief, but
prepared them for Canaan; by humbling them for sin, teaching them to
mortify their lusts, to follow God, and to comfort themselves in him.
Though Israel may be long kept waiting for deliverance and enlargement,
it will come at last. Before God brought Israel to destroy their enemies
in Canaan, he taught them to forgive their enemies in Edom. They must
not, under pretence of God's covenant and conduct, think to seize all
they could lay hands on. Dominion is not founded in grace. God's Israel
shall be well placed, but must not expect to be placed alone in the
midst of the earth. Religion must never be made a cloak for injustice.
Scorn to be beholden to Edomites, when thou hast an all-sufficient God
to depend upon. Use what thou hast, use it cheerfully. Thou hast
experienced the care of the Divine providence, never use any crooked
methods for thy supply. All this is equally to be applied to the
experience of the believer.

[Deuteronomy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 2:8</span></span>

We have the origin of the Moabites, Edomites, and Ammonites. Moses also
gives an instance older than any of these; the Caphtorims drove the
Avims out of their country. These revolutions show what uncertain things
wordly possessions are. It was so of old, and ever will be so. Families
decline, and from them estates are transferred to families that
increase; so little continuance is there in these things. This is
recorded to encourage the children of Israel. If the providence of God
has done this for Moabites and Ammonites, much more would his promise do
it for Israel, his peculiar people. Cautions are given not to meddle
with Moabites and Ammonites. Even wicked men must not be wronged. God
gives and preserves outward blessings to wicked men; these are not the
best things, he has better in store for his own children.

[Deuteronomy 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 2:24</span></span>

God tried his people, by forbidding them to meddle with the rich
countries of Moab and Ammon. He gives them possession of the country of
the Amorites. If we keep from what God forbids, we shall not lose by our
obedience. The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; and he gives
it to whom he pleases; but when there is no express direction, none can
plead his grant for such proceedings. Though God assured the Israelites
that the land should be their own, yet they must contend with the enemy.
What God gives we must endeavour to get. What a new world did Israel now
come into! Much more joyful will the change be, which holy souls will
experience, when they remove out of the wilderness of this world to the
better country, that is, the heavenly, to the city that has foundations.
Let us, by reflecting upon God's dealings with his people Israel, be led
to meditate upon our years spent in vanity, through our transgressions.
But happy are those whom Jesus has delivered from the wrath to come. To
whom he hath given the earnest of his Spirit in their hearts. Their
inheritance cannot be affected by revolutions of kingdoms, or changes in
earthly possessions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 3](deu003.md)

</div>
