<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu028)  [Next](deu030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 29:0</span></span>

([Deu 29:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)) Moses calls Israel's
mercies to remembrance.

([Deu 29:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010)) The Divine wrath on
those who flatter themselves in their wickedness.

([Deu 29:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022)) The ruin of the Jewish
nation.

([Deu 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)) Secret things belong unto
God.

[Deuteronomy 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 29:1</span></span>

Both former mercies, and fresh mercies, should be thought on by us as
motives to obedience. The hearing ear, and seeing eye, and the
understanding heart, are the gift of God. All that have them, have them
from him. God gives not only food and raiment, but wealth and large
possessions, to many to whom he does not give grace. Many enjoy the
gifts, who have not hearts to perceive the Giver, nor the true design
and use of the gifts. We are bound, in gratitude and interest, as well
as in duty and faithfulness, to keep the words of the covenant.

[Deuteronomy 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 29:10</span></span>

The national covenant made with Israel, not only typified the covenant
of grace made with true believers, but also represented the outward
dispensation of the gospel. Those who have been enabled to consent to
the Lord's new covenant of mercy and grace in Jesus Christ, and to give
up themselves to be his people, should embrace every opportunity of
renewing their open profession of relation to him, and their obligation
to him, as the God of salvation, walking according thereto. The sinner
is described as one whose heart turns away from his God; there the
mischief begins, in the evil heart of unbelief, which inclines men to
depart from the living God to dead idols. Even to this sin men are now
tempted, when drawn aside by their own lusts and fancies. Such men are
roots that bear gall and wormwood. They are weeds which, if let alone,
overspread the whole field. Satan may for a time disguise this bitter
morsel, so that thou shalt not have the natural taste of it, but at the
last day, if not before, the true taste shall be discerned. Notice the
sinner's security in sin. Though he hears the words of the curse, yet
even then he thinks himself safe from the wrath of God. There is
scarcely a threatening in all the book of God more dreadful than this.
Oh that presumptuous sinners would read it, and tremble! for it is a
real declaration of the wrath of God, against ungodliness and
unrighteousness of man.

[Deuteronomy 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 29:22</span></span>

Idolatry would be the ruin of their nation. It is no new thing for God
to bring desolating judgments on a people near to him in profession. He
never does this without good reason. It concerns us to seek for the
reason, that we may give glory to God, and take warning to ourselves.
Thus the law of Moses leaves sinners under the curse, and rooted out of
the Lord's land; but the grace of Christ toward penitent, believing
sinners, plants them again in their land; and they shall no more be
pulled up, being kept by the power of God.

[Deuteronomy 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 29:29</span></span>

Moses ends his prophecy of the Jews' rejection, just as St. Paul ends
his discourse on the same subject, when it began to be fulfilled, [Rom
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033). We are forbidden curiously to
inquire into the secret counsels of God, and to determine concerning
them. But we are directed and encouraged, diligently to seek into that
which God has made known. He has kept back nothing that is profitable
for us, but only that of which it is good for us to be ignorant. The end
of all Divine revelation is, not to furnish curious subjects of
speculation and discourse, but that we may do all the words of this law,
and be blessed in our deed. This, the Bible plainly reveals; further
than this, man cannot profitably go. By this light he may live and die
comfortably, and be happy for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 30](deu030)

</div>
