<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu004)  [Next](deu006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 5:0</span></span>

([Deu 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001).md) The covenant in Horeb.

(v. 6-22) The ten commandments repeated.

([Deu 5:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023).md) The request of the
people that the law might be delivered through Moses.

[Deuteronomy 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 5:1</span></span>

Moses demands attention. When we hear the word of God we must learn it;
and what we have learned we must put in practice, for that is the end of
hearing and learning; not to fill our heads with notions, or our mouths
with talk, but to direct our affections and conduct.

[Deuteronomy 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 5:6</span></span>

There is some variation here from Exodus 20 as between the Lord's prayer
in Matthew 6 and Luke 11. It is more necessary that we tie ourselves to
the things, than to the words unalterably. The original reason for
hallowing the sabbath, taken from God's resting from the work of
creation on the seventh day, is not here mentioned. Though this ever
remains in force, it is not the only reason. Here it is taken from
Israel's deliverance out of Egypt; for that was typical of our
redemption by Jesus Christ, in remembrance of which the Christian
sabbath was to be observed. In the resurrection of Christ we were
brought into the glorious liberty of the children of God, with a mighty
hand, and an outstretched arm. How sweet is it to a soul truly
distressed under the terrors of a broken law, to hear the mild and
soul-reviving language of the gospel!

[Deuteronomy 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 5:23</span></span>

Moses refers to the consternation caused by the terror with which the
law was given. God's appearances have always been terrible to man, ever
since the fall; but Christ, having taken away sin, invites us to come
boldly to the throne of grace. They were in a good mind, under the
strong convictions of the word they heard. Many have their consciences
startled by the law who have them not purified; fair promises are
extorted from them, but no good principles are fixed and rooted in them.
God commended what they said. He desires the welfare and salvation of
poor sinners. He has given abundant proof that he does so; he gives us
time and space to repent. He has sent his Son to redeem us, promised his
Spirit to those who pray for him, and has declared that he has no
pleasure in the ruin of sinners. It would be well with many, if there
were always such a heart in them, as there seems to be sometimes; when
they are under conviction of sin, or the rebukes of providence, or when
they come to look death in the face. The only way to be happy, is to be
holy. Say to the righteous, It shall be well with them. Let believers
make it more and more their study and delight, to do as the Lord God
hath commanded.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 6](deu006.md)

</div>
