<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu020)  [Next](deu022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 21:0</span></span>

([Deu 21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)) The expiation of
uncertain murder.

([Deu 21:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010)) Respecting a captive
taken to wife.

([Deu 21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)) The first-born not to
be disinherited for private affection.

([Deu 21:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)) A stubborn son to be
stoned.

([Deu 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022), [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)) Malefactors not to be left
hanging all night.

[Deuteronomy 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 21:1</span></span>

If a murderer could not be found out, great solemnity is provided for
putting away the guilt from the land, as an expression of dread and
detesting of that sin. The providence of God has often wonderfully
brought to light these hidden works of darkness, and the sin of the
guilty has often strangely found them out. The dread of murder should be
deeply impressed upon every heart, and all should join in detecting and
punishing those who are guilty. The elders were to profess that they had
not been any way aiding or abetting the sin. The priests were to pray to
God for the country and nation, that God would be merciful. We must
empty that measure by our prayers, which others are filling by their
sins. All would be taught by this solemnity, to use the utmost care and
diligence to prevent, discover, and punish murder. We may all learn from
hence to take heed of partaking in other men's sins. And we have
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, if we do not reprove
them.

[Deuteronomy 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 21:10</span></span>

By this law a soldier was allowed to marry his captive, if he pleased.
This might take place upon some occasions; but the law does not show any
approval of it. It also intimates how binding the laws of justice and
honour are in marriage; which is a sacred engagement.

[Deuteronomy 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 21:15</span></span>

This law restrains men from disinheriting their eldest sons without just
cause. The principle in this case as to children, is still binding to
parents; they must give children their right without partiality.

[Deuteronomy 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 21:18</span></span>

Observe how the criminal is here described. He is a stubborn and
rebellious son. No child was to fare the worse for weakness of capacity,
slowness, or dulness, but for wilfulness and obstinacy. Nothing draws
men into all manner of wickedness, and hardens them in it more certainly
and fatally, than drunkenness. When men take to drinking, they forget
the law of honouring parents. His own father and mother must complain of
him to the elders of the city. Children who forget their duty, must
thank themselves, and not blame their parents, if they are regarded with
less and less affection. He must be publicly stoned to death by the men
of his city. Disobedience to a parent's authority must be very evil,
when such a punishment was ordered; nor is it less provoking to God now,
though it escapes punishment in this world. But when young people early
become slaves to sensual appetites, the heart soon grows hard, and the
conscience callous; and we can expect nothing but rebellion and
destruction.

[Deuteronomy 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 21:22</span></span>

By the law of Moses, the touch of a dead body was defiling, therefore
dead bodies must not be left hanging, as that would defile the land.
There is one reason here which has reference to Christ; "He that is
hanged is accursed of God;" that is, it is the highest degree of
disgrace and reproach. Those who see a man thus hanging between heaven
and earth, will conclude him abandoned of both, and unworthy of either.
Moses, by the Spirit, uses this phrase of being accursed of God, when he
means no more than being treated most disgracefully, that it might
afterward be applied to the death of Christ, and might show that in it
he underwent the curse of the law for us; which proves his love, and
encourages to faith in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 22](deu022)

</div>
