<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu019)  [Next](deu021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 20:0</span></span>

([Deu 20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001).md) Exhortation and
proclamation respecting those who went to war.

([Deu 20:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010).md) Peace to be offered,
What cities were to be devoted.

[Deuteronomy 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 20:1</span></span>

In the wars wherein Israel engaged according to the will of God, they
might expect the Divine assistance. The Lord was to be their only
confidence. In these respects they were types of the Christian's
warfare. Those unwilling to fight, must be sent away. The unwillingness
might arise from a man's outward condition. God would not be served by
men forced against their will. Thy people shall be willing, [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003.md). In running the Christian race,
and fighting the good fight of faith, we must lay aside all that would
make us unwilling. If a man's unwillingness rose from weakness and fear,
he had leave to return from the war. The reason here given is, lest his
brethren's heart fail as well as his heart. We must take heed that we
fear not with the fear of them that are afraid, [Isa
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012.md).

[Deuteronomy 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 20:10</span></span>

The Israelites are here directed about the nations on whom they made
war. Let this show God's grace in dealing with sinners. He proclaims
peace, and beseeches them to be reconciled. Let it also show us our duty
in dealing with our brethren. Whoever are for war, we must be for peace.
Of the cities given to Israel, none of their inhabitants must be left.
Since it could not be expected that they should be cured of their
idolatry, they would hurt Israel. These regulations are not the rules of
our conduct, but Christ's law of love. The horrors of war must fill the
feeling heart with anguish upon every recollection; and are proofs of
the wickedness of man, the power of Satan, and the just vengeance of
God, who thus scourges a guilty world. But how dreadful their case who
are engaged in unequal conflict with their Maker, who will not submit to
render him the easy tribute of worship and praise! Certain ruin awaits
them. Let neither the number nor the power of the enemies of our souls
dismay us; nor let even our own weakness cause us to tremble or to
faint. The Lord will save us; but in this war let none engage whose
hearts are fond of the world, or afraid of the cross and the conflict.
Care is here taken that in besieging cities the fruit-trees should not
be destroyed. God is a better friend to man than he is to himself; and
God's law consults our interests and comforts; while our own appetites
and passions, which we indulge, are enemies to our welfare. Many of the
Divine precepts restrain us from destroying that which is for our life
and food. The Jews understand this as forbidding all wilful waste upon
any account whatsoever. Every creature of God is good; as nothing is to
be refused, so nothing is to be abused. We may live to want what we
carelessly waste.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 21](deu021.md)

</div>
