<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc.md)  
  [Previous](ecc004)  [Next](ecc006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001.md)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 5:0</span></span>

([Ecc 5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001).md) What renders devotion
vain.

([Ecc 5:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004).md) Of vows, and oppression.

([Ecc 5:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009).md) The vanity of riches
shown.

([Ecc 5:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018).md) The right use of
riches.

[Ecclesiastes 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 5:1</span></span>

Address thyself to the worship of God, and take time to compose thyself
for it. Keep thy thoughts from roving and wandering: keep thy affections
from running out toward wrong objects. We should avoid vain repetitions;
copious prayers are not here condemned, but those that are unmeaning.
How often our wandering thoughts render attendance on Divine ordinances
little better than the sacrifice of fools! Many words and hasty ones,
used in prayer, show folly in the heart, low thoughts of God, and
careless thoughts of our own souls.

[Ecclesiastes 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 5:4</span></span>

When a person made engagements rashly, he suffered his mouth to cause
his flesh to sin. The case supposes a man coming to the priest, and
pretending that his vow was made rashly, and that it would be wrong to
fulfil it. Such mockery of God would bring the Divine displeasure, which
might blast what was thus unduly kept. We are to keep down the fear of
man. Set God before thee; then, if thou seest the oppression of the
poor, thou wilt not find fault with Divine Providence; nor think the
worse of the institution of magistracy, when thou seest the ends of it
thus perverted; nor of religion, when thou seest it will not secure men
from suffering wrong. But though oppressors may be secure, God will
reckon for all.

[Ecclesiastes 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 5:9</span></span>

The goodness of Providence is more equally distributed than appears to a
careless observer. The king needs the common things of life, and the
poor share them; they relish their morsel better than he does his
luxuries. There are bodily desires which silver itself will not satisfy,
much less will worldly abundance satisfy spiritual desires. The more men
have, the better house they must keep, the more servants they must
employ, the more guests they must entertain, and the more they will have
hanging on them. The sleep of the labourer is sweet, not only because he
is tired, but because he has little care to break his sleep. The sleep
of the diligent Christian, and his long sleep, are sweet; having spent
himself and his time in the service of God, he can cheerfully repose in
God as his Rest. But those who have every thing else, often fail to
secure a good night's sleep; their abundance breaks their rest. Riches
do hurt, and draw away the heart from God and duty. Men do hurt with
their riches, not only gratifying their own lusts, but oppressing
others, and dealing hardly with them. They will see that they have
laboured for the wind, when, at death, they find the profit of their
labour is all gone like the wind, they know not whither. How ill the
covetous worldling bears the calamities of human life! He does not
sorrow to repentance, but is angry at the providence of God, angry at
all about him; which doubles his affliction.

[Ecclesiastes 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 5:18</span></span>

Life is God's gift. We must not view our calling as a drudgery, but take
pleasure in the calling where God puts us. A cheerful spirit is a great
blessing; it makes employments easy, and afflictions light. Having made
a proper use of riches, a man will remember the days of his past life
with pleasure. The manner in which Solomon refers to God as the Giver,
both of life and its enjoyments, shows they ought to be received and to
be used, consistently with his will, and to his glory. Let this passage
recommend to all the kind words of the merciful Redeemer, "Labour not
for the meat that perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto
everlasting life." Christ is the Bread of life, the only food of the
soul. All are invited to partake of this heavenly provision.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 6](ecc006.md)

</div>
