<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc002)  [Next](ecc004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 3:0</span></span>

([Ecc 3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)) The changes of human
affairs.

([Ecc 3:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011)) The Divine counsels
unchangeable.

([Ecc 3:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016)) The vanity of worldly
power.

[Ecclesiastes 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 3:1</span></span>

To expect unchanging happiness in a changing world, must end in
disappointment. To bring ourselves to our state in life, is our duty and
wisdom in this world. God's whole plan for the government of the world
will be found altogether wise, just, and good. Then let us seize the
favourable opportunity for every good purpose and work. The time to die
is fast approaching. Thus labour and sorrow fill the world. This is
given us, that we may always have something to do; none were sent into
the world to be idle.

[Ecclesiastes 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 3:11</span></span>

Every thing is as God made it; not as it appears to us. We have the
world so much in our hearts, are so taken up with thoughts and cares of
worldly things, that we have neither time nor spirit to see God's hand
in them. The world has not only gained possession of the heart, but has
formed thoughts against the beauty of God's works. We mistake if we
think we were born for ourselves; no, it is our business to do good in
this life, which is short and uncertain; we have but little time to be
doing good, therefore we should redeem time. Satisfaction with Divine
Providence, is having faith that all things work together for good to
them that love him. God doeth all, that men should fear before him. The
world, as it has been, is, and will be. There has no change befallen us,
nor has any temptation by it taken us, but such as is common to men.

[Ecclesiastes 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 3:16</span></span>

Without the fear of the Lord, man is but vanity; set that aside, and
judges will not use their power well. And there is another Judge that
stands before the door. With God there is a time for the redressing of
grievances, though as yet we see it not. Solomon seems to express his
wish that men might perceive, that by choosing this world as their
portion, they brought themselves to a level with the beasts, without
being free, as they are, from present vexations and a future account.
Both return to the dust from whence they were taken. What little reason
have we to be proud of our bodies, or bodily accomplishments! But as
none can fully comprehend, so few consider properly, the difference
between the rational soul of man, and the spirit or life of the beast.
The spirit of man goes upward, to be judged, and is then fixed in an
unchangeable state of happiness or misery. It is as certain that the
spirit of the beast goes downward to the earth; it perishes at death.
Surely their case is lamentable, the height of whose hopes and wishes
is, that they may die like beasts. Let our inquiry be, how an eternity
of existence may be to us an eternity of enjoyment? To answer this, is
the grand design of revelation. Jesus is revealed as the Son of God, and
the Hope of sinners.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 4](ecc004)

</div>
