<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc006)  [Next](ecc008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 7:0</span></span>

([Ecc 7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#001)) The benefit of a good
name; of death above life; of sorrow above vain mirth.

([Ecc 7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#007)) Concerning oppression,
anger, and discontent.

([Ecc 7:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011)) Advantages of wisdom.

([Ecc 7:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#023)) Experience of the evil
of sin.

[Ecclesiastes 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 7:1</span></span>

Reputation for piety and honesty is more desirable than all the wealth
and pleasure in this world. It will do more good to go to a funeral than
to a feast. We may lawfully go to both, as there is occasion; our
Saviour both feasted at the wedding of his friend in Cana, and wept at
the grave of his friend in Bethany. But, considering how apt we are to
be vain and indulge the flesh, it is best to go to the house of
mourning, to learn the end of man as to this world. Seriousness is
better than mirth and jollity. That is best for us which is best for our
souls, though it be unpleasing to sense. It is better to have our
corruptions mortified by the rebuke of the wise, than to have them
gratified by the song of fools. The laughter of a fool is soon gone, the
end of his mirth is heaviness.

[Ecclesiastes 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 7:7</span></span>

The event of our trials and difficulties is often better than at first
we thought. Surely it is better to be patient in spirit, than to be
proud and hasty. Be not soon angry, nor quick in resenting an affront.
Be not long angry; though anger may come into the bosom of a wise man,
it passes through it as a way-faring man; it dwells only in the bosom of
fools. It is folly to cry out upon the badness of our times, when we
have more reason to cry out for the badness of our own hearts; and even
in these times we enjoy many mercies. It is folly to cry up the goodness
of former times; as if former ages had not the like things to complain
of that we have: this arises from discontent, and aptness to quarrel
with God himself.

[Ecclesiastes 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 7:11</span></span>

Wisdom is as good as an inheritance, yea better. It shelters from the
storms and scorching heat of trouble. Wealth will not lengthen out the
natural life; but true wisdom will give spiritual life, and strengthen
men for services under their sufferings. Let us look upon the disposal
of our condition as the work of God, and at last all will appear to have
been for the best. In acts of righteousness, be not carried into heats
or passions, no, not by a zeal for God. Be not conceited of thine own
abilities; nor find fault with every thing, nor busy thyself in other
men's matters. Many who will not be wrought upon by the fear of God, and
the dread of hell, will avoid sins which ruin their health and estate,
and expose to public justice. But those that truly fear God, have but
one end to serve, therefore act steadily. If we say we have not sinned,
we deceive ourselves. Every true believer is ready to say, God be
merciful to me a sinner. Forget not at the same time, that personal
righteousness, walking in newness of life, is the only real evidence of
an interest by faith in the righteousness of the Redeemer. Wisdom
teaches us not to be quick in resenting affronts. Be not desirous to
know what people say; if they speak well of thee, it will feed thy
pride, if ill, it will stir up thy passion. See that thou approve
thyself to God and thine own conscience, and then heed not what men say
of thee; it is easier to pass by twenty affronts than to avenge one.
When any harm is done to us, examine whether we have not done as bad to
others.

[Ecclesiastes 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ecc 7:23</span></span>

Solomon, in his search into the nature and reason of things, had been
miserably deluded. But he here speaks with godly sorrow. He alone who
constantly aims to please God, can expect to escape; the careless sinner
probably will fall to rise no more. He now discovered more than ever the
evil of the great sin of which he had been guilty, the loving many
strange women, [Kg1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001). A woman
thoroughly upright and godly, he had not found. How was he likely to
find such a one among those he had collected? If any of them had been
well disposed, their situation would tend to render them all nearly of
the same character. He here warns others against the sins into which he
had been betrayed. Many a godly man can with thankfulness acknowledge
that he has found a prudent, virtuous woman in the wife of his bosom;
but those men who have gone in Solomon's track, cannot expect to find
one. He traces up all the streams of actual transgression to the
fountain. It is clear that man is corrupted and revolted, and not as he
was made. It is lamentable that man, whom God made upright, has found
out so many ways to render himself wicked and miserable. Let us bless
Him for Jesus Christ, and seek his grace, that we may be numbered with
his chosen people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 8](ecc008)

</div>
