<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ephesians Index](eph.md)  
  [Previous](eph001)  [Next](eph003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 2:0</span></span>

([Eph 2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001).md) The riches of God's
grace towards men, shown from their deplorable state by nature, and the
happy change Divine grace makes in them.

([Eph 2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011).md) The Ephesians called to
reflect on their state of heathenism.

([Eph 2:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014).md) And the privileges and
blessings of the gospel.

[Ephesians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 2:1</span></span>

Sin is the death of the soul. A man dead in trespasses and sins has no
desire for spiritual pleasures. When we look upon a corpse, it gives an
awful feeling. A never-dying spirit is now fled, and has left nothing
but the ruins of a man. But if we viewed things aright, we should be far
more affected by the thought of a dead soul, a lost, fallen spirit. A
state of sin is a state of conformity to this world. Wicked men are
slaves to Satan. Satan is the author of that proud, carnal disposition
which there is in ungodly men; he rules in the hearts of men. From
Scripture it is clear, that whether men have been most prone to sensual
or to spiritual wickedness, all men, being naturally children of
disobedience, are also by nature children of wrath. What reason have
sinners, then, to seek earnestly for that grace which will make them, of
children of wrath, children of God and heirs of glory! God's eternal
love or good-will toward his creatures, is the fountain whence all his
mercies flow to us; and that love of God is great love, and that mercy
is rich mercy. And every converted sinner is a saved sinner; delivered
from sin and wrath. The grace that saves is the free, undeserved
goodness and favour of God; and he saves, not by the works of the law,
but through faith in Christ Jesus. Grace in the soul is a new life in
the soul. A regenerated sinner becomes a living soul; he lives a life of
holiness, being born of God: he lives, being delivered from the guilt of
sin, by pardoning and justifying grace. Sinners roll themselves in the
dust; sanctified souls sit in heavenly places, are raised above this
world, by Christ's grace. The goodness of God in converting and saving
sinners heretofore, encourages others in after-time, to hope in his
grace and mercy. Our faith, our conversion, and our eternal salvation,
are not of works, lest any man should boast. These things are not
brought to pass by any thing done by us, therefore all boasting is shut
out. All is the free gift of God, and the effect of being quickened by
his power. It was his purpose, to which he prepared us, by blessing us
with the knowledge of his will, and his Holy Spirit producing such a
change in us, that we should glorify God by our good conversation, and
perseverance in holiness. None can from Scripture abuse this doctrine,
or accuse it of any tendency to evil. All who do so, are without excuse.

[Ephesians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 2:11</span></span>

Christ and his covenant are the foundation of all the Christian's hopes.
A sad and terrible description is here; but who is able to remove
himself out of it? Would that this were not a true description of many
baptized in the name of Christ. Who can, without trembling, reflect upon
the misery of a person, separated for ever from the people of God, cut
off from the body of Christ, fallen from the covenant of promise, having
no hope, no Saviour, and without any God but a God of vengeance, to all
eternity? To have no part in Christ! What true Christian can hear this
without horror? Salvation is far from the wicked; but God is a help at
hand to his people; and this is by the sufferings and death of Christ.

[Ephesians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 2:14</span></span>

Jesus Christ made peace by the sacrifice of himself; in every sense
Christ was their Peace, the author, centre, and substance of their being
at peace with God, and of their union with the Jewish believers in one
church. Through the person, sacrifice, and mediation of Christ, sinners
are allowed to draw near to God as a Father, and are brought with
acceptance into his presence, with their worship and services, under the
teaching of the Holy Spirit, as one with the Father and the Son. Christ
purchased leave for us to come to God; and the Spirit gives a heart to
come, and strength to come, and then grace to serve God acceptably.

[Ephesians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 2:19</span></span>

The church is compared to a city, and every converted sinner is free of
it. It is also compared to a house, and every converted sinner is one of
the family; a servant, and a child in God's house. The church is also
compared to a building, founded on the doctrine of Christ; delivered by
the prophets of the Old Testament, and the apostles of the New. God
dwells in all believers now; they become the temple of God through the
working of the blessed Spirit. Let us then ask if our hopes are fixed on
Christ, according to the doctrine of his word? Have we devoted ourselves
as holy temples to God through him? Are we habitations of God by the
Spirit, are we spiritually-minded, and do we bring forth the fruits of
the Spirit? Let us take heed not to grieve the holy Comforter. Let us
desire his gracious presence, and his influences upon our hearts. Let us
seek to discharge the duties allotted to us, to the glory of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 3](eph003.md)

</div>
