<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est002)  [Next](est004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 3:0</span></span>

([Est 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001).md) Haman seeks to destroy
the Jews.

([Est 3:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007).md) He obtains a decree
against the Jews.

[Esther 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 3:1</span></span>

Mordecai refused to reverence Haman. The religion of a Jew forbade him
to give honours to any mortal man which savoured of idolatry, especially
to so wicked a man as Haman. By nature all are idolaters; self is our
favourite idol, we are pleased to be treated as if every thing were at
our disposal. Though religion by no means destroys good manners, but
teaches us to render honour to whom honour is due, yet by a citizen of
Zion, not only in his heart, but in his eyes, such a vile person as
Haman was, is contemned, [Psa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004.md).
The true believer cannot obey edicts, or conform to fashions, which
break the law of God. He must obey God rather than man, and leave the
consequences to him. Haman was full of wrath. His device was inspired by
that wicked spirit, who has been a murderer from the beginning; whose
enmity to Christ and his church, governs all his children.

[Esther 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 3:7</span></span>

Without some acquaintance with the human heart, and the history of
mankind, we should not think that any prince could consent to a dreadful
proposal, so hurtful to himself. Let us be thankful for mild and just
government. Haman inquires, according to his own superstitions, how to
find a lucky day for the designed massacre! God's wisdom serves its own
purposes by men's folly. Haman has appealed to the lot, and the lot, by
delaying the execution, gives judgment against him. The event explains
the doctrine of a particular providence over all the affairs of men, and
the care of God over his church. Haman was afraid lest the king's
conscience should smite him for what he had done; to prevent which, he
kept him drinking. This cursed method many often take to drown
convictions, and to harden their own hearts, and the hearts of others,
in sin. All appeared in a favourable train to accomplish the project.
But though sinners are permitted to proceed to the point they aim at, an
unseen but almighty Power turns them back. How vain and contemptible are
the strongest assaults against Jehovah! Had Haman obtained his wish, and
the Jewish nation perished, what must have become of all the promises?
How could the prophecies concerning the great Redeemer of the world have
been fulfilled? Thus the everlasting covenant itself must have failed,
before this diabolical project could take place.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 4](est004.md)

</div>
