<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo027)  [Next](exo029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 28:0</span></span>

([Exo 28:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)) Aaron and his sons set
apart for the priest's office, Their garments.

([Exo 28:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)) The ephod.

(v. 15-30) The breastplate, The Urim and Thummim.

([Exo 28:31-39](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031)) The robe of the ephod,
The plate of the mitre.

([Exo 28:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)) The garments for
Aaron's sons.

[Exodus 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 28:1</span></span>

Hitherto the heads of families were the priests, and offered sacrifices;
but now this office was confined to the family of Aaron only; and so
continued till the gospel dispensation. The holy garments not only
distinguished the priests from the people, but were emblems of that holy
conduct which should ever be the glory and beauty, the mark of the
ministers of religion, without which their persons and ministrations
will be had in contempt. They also typified the glory of the Divine
majesty, and the beauty of complete holiness, which rendered Jesus
Christ the great High Priest. But our adorning under the gospel, is not
to be of gold and costly array, but the garments of salvation, the robe
of righteousness.

[Exodus 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 28:6</span></span>

This richly-wrought ephod was the outmost garment of the high priest;
plain linen ephods were worn by the inferior priests. It was a short
coat without sleeves, fastened close to the body with a girdle. The
shoulder-pieces were buttoned together with precious stones set in gold,
one on each shoulder, on which were engraven the names of the children
of Israel. Thus Christ, our High Priest, presents his people before the
Lord for a memorial. As Christ's coat had no seam, but was woven from
the top throughout, so it was with the ephod. The golden bells on this
ephod, by their preciousness and pleasant sound, well represent the good
profession that the saints make, and the pomegranates the fruit they
bring forth.

[Exodus 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 28:15</span></span>

The chief ornament of the high priest, was the breastplate, a rich piece
of cloth, curiously worked. The name of each tribe was graven in a
precious stone, fixed in the breastplate, to signify how precious, in
God's sight, believers are, and how honourable. How small and poor
soever the tribe was, it was as a precious stone in the breastplate of
the high priest; thus are all the saints dear to Christ, however men
esteem them. The high priest had the names of the tribes, both on his
shoulders and on his breast, which reminds us of the power and the love
with which our Lord Jesus pleads for those that are his. He not only
bears them up in his arms with almighty strength, but he carries them in
his bosom with tender affection. What comfort is this to us in all our
addresses to God! The Urim and Thummim, by which the will of God was
made known in doubtful cases, were put in this breastplate. Urim and
Thummim signify light and integrity. There are many conjectures what
these were; the most probable opinion seems to be, that they were the
twelve precious stones in the high priest's breastplate. Now, Christ is
our Oracle. By him God, in these last days, makes known himself and his
mind to us, [Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001), [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018). He is the true Light, the
faithful Witness, the Truth itself, and from him we receive the Spirit
of Truth, who leads into all truth.

[Exodus 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 28:31</span></span>

The robe of the ephod was under the ephod, and reached down to the
knees, without sleeves. Aaron must minister in the garments appointed.
We must serve the Lord with holy fear, as those who know they deserve to
die. A golden plate was fixed on Aaron's forehead, engraven with
"Holiness to the Lord." Aaron was hereby reminded that God is holy, and
that his priests must be holy, devoted to the Lord. This must appear in
their forehead, in open profession of their relation to God. It must be
engraven like the engravings of a signet; deep and durable; not painted
so as to be washed off, but firm and lasting; such must our holiness to
the Lord be. Christ is our High Priest; through him sins are forgiven to
us, and not laid to our charge. Our persons, our doings, are pleasing to
God upon the account of Christ, and not otherwise.

[Exodus 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 28:40</span></span>

The priest's garments typify the righteousness of Christ. If we appear
not before God in that, we shall bear our iniquity, and die. Blessed is
he, therefore, that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, [Rev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015). And blessed be God that we have
a High Priest, appointed of God, and set apart for his work; furnished
for his high office by the glory of his Divine majesty, and the beauty
of perfect holiness. Happy are we, if by the law spiritually understood,
we see that such a High Priest became us; that we cannot draw near to a
holy God, or be accepted, but by him. There is no light, no wisdom, no
perfection, but from him; no glory, no beauty, but in being like unto
him. Let us take encouragement from the power, love, and compassion of
our High Priest, to draw near with boldness to the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 29](exo029)

</div>
