<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo019)  [Next](exo021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 20:0</span></span>

([Exo 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001), [Exo
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002)) The preface to the ten
commandments.

([Exo 20:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)) The commandments of the
first table.

([Exo 20:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012)) Of the second table.

([Exo 20:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)) The fear of the
people.

([Exo 20:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#022)) Idolatry again
forbidden.

[Exodus 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 20:1</span></span>

God speaks many ways to the children of men; by conscience, by
providences, by his voice, to all which we ought carefully to attend;
but he never spake at any time so as he spake the TEN COMMANDMENTS. This
law God had given to man before; it was written in his heart; but sin so
defaced it, that it was necessary to revive the knowledge of it. The law
is spiritual, and takes knowledge of the secret thoughts, desires, and
dispositions of the heart. Its grand demand is love, without which
outward obedience is mere hypocrisy. It requires perfect, unfailing,
constant obedience; no law in the world admits disobedience to itself.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all, [Jam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010). Whether in
the heart or the conduct, in thought, word, or deed, to omit or to vary
any thing, is sin, and the wages of sin is death.

[Exodus 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 20:3</span></span>

The first four of the ten commandments, commonly called the FIRST table,
tell our duty to God. It was fit that those should be put first, because
man had a Maker to love, before he had a neighbour to love. It cannot be
expected that he should be true to his brother, who is false to his God.
The first commandment concerns the object of worship, JEHOVAH, and him
only. The worship of creatures is here forbidden. Whatever comes short
of perfect love, gratitude, reverence, or worship, breaks this
commandment. Whatsoever ye do, do all the glory of God. The second
commandment refers to the worship we are to render to the Lord our God.
It is forbidden to make any image or picture of the Deity, in any form,
or for any purpose; or to worship any creature, image, or picture. But
the spiritual import of this command extends much further. All kinds of
superstition are here forbidden, and the using of mere human inventions
in the worship of God. The third commandment concerns the manner of
worship, that it be with all possible reverence and seriousness. All
false oaths are forbidden. All light appealing to God, all profane
cursing, is a horrid breach of this command. It matters not whether the
word of God, or sacred things, all such-like things break this
commandment, and there is no profit, honour, or pleasure in them. The
Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. The form
of the fourth commandment, "Remember," shows that it was not now first
given, but was known by the people before. One day in seven is to be
kept holy. Six days are allotted to worldly business, but not so as to
neglect the service of God, and the care of our souls. On those days we
must do all our work, and leave none to be done on the sabbath day.
Christ allowed works of necessity, charity, and piety; for the sabbath
was made for man, and not man for the sabbath, [Mar
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#027); but all works of luxury, vanity,
or self-indulgence in any form, are forbidden. Trading, paying wages,
settling accounts, writing letters of business, worldly studies,
trifling visits, journeys, or light conversation, are not keeping this
day holy to the Lord. Sloth and indolence may be a carnal, but not a
holy rest. The sabbath of the Lord should be a day of rest from worldly
labour, and a rest in the service of God. The advantages from the due
keeping of this holy day, were it only to the health and happiness of
mankind, with the time it affords for taking care of the soul, show the
excellency of this commandment. The day is blessed; men are blessed by
it, and in it. The blessing and direction to keep holy are not limited
to the seventh day, but are spoken of the sabbath day.

[Exodus 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 20:12</span></span>

The laws of the SECOND table, that is, the last six of the ten
commandments, state our duty to ourselves and to one another, and
explain the great commandment, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,
[Luk 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027). Godliness and honesty must
go together. The fifth commandment concerns the duties we owe to our
relations. Honour thy father and thy mother, includes esteem of them,
shown in our conduct; obedience to their lawful commands; come when they
call you, go where they send you, do what they bid you, refrain from
what they forbid you; and this, as children, cheerfully, and from a
principle of love. Also submission to their counsels and corrections.
Endeavouring, in every thing, to comfort parents, and to make their old
age easy; maintaining them if they need support, which our Saviour makes
to be particularly intended in this commandment, [Mat
15:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004). Careful observers have noted a
peculiar blessing in temporal things on obedient, and the reverse on
disobedient children. The sixth commandment requires that we regard the
life and the safety of others as we do our own. Magistrates and their
officers, and witnesses testifying the truth, do not break this command.
Self-defence is lawful; but much which is not deemed murder by the laws
of man, is such before God. Furious passions, stirred up by anger or by
drunkenness, are no excuse: more guilty is murder in duels, which is a
horrible effect of a haughty, revengeful spirit. All fighting, whether
for wages, for renown, or out of anger and malice, breaks this command,
and the bloodshed therein is murder. To tempt men to vice and crimes
which shorten life, may be included. Misconduct, such as may break the
heart, or shorten the lives of parents, wives, or other relatives, is a
breach of this command. This command forbids all envy, malice, hatred,
or anger, all provoking or insulting language. The destruction of our
own lives is here forbidden. This commandment requires a spirit of
kindness, longsuffering, and forgiveness. The seventh commandment
concerns chastity. We should be as much afraid of that which defiles the
body, as of that which destroys it. Whatever tends to pollute the
imagination, or to raise the passions, falls under this law, as impure
pictures, books, conversation, or any other like matters. The eighth
commandment is the law of love as it respects the property of others.
The portion of worldly things allotted us, as far as it is obtained in
an honest way, is the bread which God hath given us; for that we ought
to be thankful, to be contented with it, and, in the use of lawful
means, to trust Providence for the future. Imposing upon the ignorance,
easiness, or necessity of others, and many other things, break God's
law, though scarcely blamed in society. Plunderers of kingdoms though
above human justice, will be included in this sentence. Defrauding the
public, contracting debts without prospect of paying them, or evading
payment of just debts, extravagance, all living upon charity when not
needful, all squeezing the poor in their wages; these, and such things,
break this command; which requires industry, frugality, and content, and
to do to others, about worldly property, as we would they should do to
us. The ninth commandment concerns our own and our neighbour's good
name. This forbids speaking falsely on any matter, lying, equivocating,
and any way devising or designing to deceive our neighbour. Speaking
unjustly against our neighbour, to hurt his reputation. Bearing false
witness against him, or in common conversation slandering, backbiting,
and tale-bearing; making what is done amiss, worse than it is, and in
any way endeavouring to raise our reputation upon the ruin of our
neighbour's. How much this command is every day broken among persons of
all ranks! The tenth commandment strikes at the root; Thou shalt not
covet. The others forbid all desire of doing what will be an injury to
our neighbour; this forbids all wrong desire of having what will gratify
ourselves.

[Exodus 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 20:18</span></span>

This law, which is so extensive that we cannot measure it, so spiritual
that we cannot evade it, and so reasonable that we cannot find fault
with it, will be the rule of the future judgment of God, as it is for
the present conduct of man. If tried by this rule, we shall find our
lives have been passed in transgressions. And with this holy law and an
awful judgment before us, who can despise the gospel of Christ? And the
knowledge of the law shows our need of repentance. In every believer's
heart sin is dethroned and crucified, the law of God is written, and the
image of God renewed. The Holy Spirit enables him to hate sin and flee
from it, to love and keep this law in sincerity and truth; nor will he
cease to repent.

[Exodus 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 20:22</span></span>

Moses having entered into the thick darkness, God there spake in his
hearing all that follows from hence to the end of Chapter 23, which is
mostly an exposition of the ten commandments. The laws in these verses
relate to God's worship. The Israelites are assured of God's gracious
acceptance of their devotions. Under the gospel, men are encouraged to
pray every where, and wherever God's people meet in his name to worship
him, he will be in the midst of them; there he will come unto them, and
will bless them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 21](exo021)

</div>
