<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo033)  [Next](exo035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 34:0</span></span>

([Exo 34:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001)) The tables of the law
renewed.

([Exo 34:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005)) The name of the Lord
proclaimed, The entreaty of Moses.

([Exo 34:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#010)) God's covenant.

([Exo 34:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#018)) The festivals.

([Exo 34:28-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028)) The vail of Moses.

[Exodus 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 34:1</span></span>

When God made man in his own image, the moral law was written in his
heart, by the finger of God, without outward means. But since the
covenant then made with man was broken, the Lord has used the ministry
of men, both in writing the law in the Scriptures, and in writing it in
the heart. When God was reconciled to the Israelites, he ordered the
tables to be renewed, and wrote his law in them. Even under the gospel
of peace by Christ, the moral law continues to bind believers. Though
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, yet not from the
commands of it. The first and the best evidence of the pardon of sin,
and peace with God, is the writing the law in the heart.

[Exodus 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 34:5</span></span>

The Lord descended by some open token of his presence and manifestation
of his glory in a cloud, and thence proclaimed his NAME; that is, the
perfections and character which are denoted by the name JEHOVAH. The
Lord God is merciful; ready to forgive the sinner, and to relieve the
needy. Gracious; kind, and ready to bestow undeserved benefits.
Long-suffering; slow to anger, giving time for repentance, only
punishing when it is needful. He is abundant in goodness and truth; even
sinners receive the riches of his bounty abundantly, though they abuse
them. All he reveals is infallible truth, all he promises is in
faithfulness. Keeping mercy for thousands; he continually shows mercy to
sinners, and has treasures, which cannot be exhausted, to the end of
time. Forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin; his mercy and
goodness reach to the full and free forgiveness of sin. And will by no
means clear the guilty; the holiness and justice of God are part of his
goodness and love towards all his creatures. In Christ's sufferings, the
Divine holiness and justice are fully shown, and the evil of sin is made
known. God's forgiving mercy is always attended by his converting,
sanctifying grace. None are pardoned but those who repent and forsake
the allowed practice of every sin; nor shall any escape, who abuse,
neglect, or despise this great salvation. Moses bowed down, and
worshipped reverently. Every perfection in the name of God, the believer
may plead with Him for the forgiveness of his sins, the making holy of
his heart, and the enlargement of the Redeemer's kingdom.

[Exodus 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 34:10</span></span>

The Israelites are commanded to destroy every monument of idolatry,
however curious or costly; to refuse all alliance, friendship, or
marriage with idolaters, and all idolatrous feasts; and they were
reminded not with idolaters, and all idolatrous feats; and they were
reminded not to repeat the crime of making molten images. Jealously is
called the rage of a man, [Pro 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#034);
but in God it is holy and just displeasure. Those cannot worship God
aright, who do not worship him only.

[Exodus 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 34:18</span></span>

Once a week they must rest, even in ploughing time, and in harvest. All
worldly business must give way to that holy rest; even harvest work will
prosper the better, for the religious observance of the sabbath day in
harvest time. We must show that we prefer our communion with God, and
our duty to him, before the business or the joy of harvest. Thrice a
year they must appear before the Lord God, the God of Israel. Canaan was
a desirable land, and the neighbouring nations were greedy; yet God
says, They shall not desire it. Let us check all sinful desires against
God and his glory, in our hearts, and then trust him to check all sinful
desires in the hearts of others against us. The way of duty is the way
of safety. Those who venture for him never lose by him. Three feasts are
here mentioned: 1. The Passover, in remembrance of the deliverance out
of Egypt. 2. The feast of weeks, or the feast of Pentecost; added to it
is the law of the first-fruits. 3. The feast of in-gathering, or the
feast of Tabernacles. Moses is to write these words, that the people
might know them better. We can never be enough thankful to God for the
written word. God would make a covenant with Israel, in Moses as a
mediator. Thus the covenant of grace is made with believers through
Christ.

[Exodus 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 34:28</span></span>

Near and spiritual communion with God improves the graces of a renewed
and holy character. Serious godliness puts a lustre upon a man's
countenance, such as commands esteem and affection. The vail which Moses
put on, marked the obscurity of that dispensation, compared with the
gospel dispensation of the New Testament. It was also an emblem of the
natural vail on the hearts of men respecting spiritual things. Also the
vail that was and is upon the nation of Israel, which can only be taken
away by the Spirit of the Lord showing to them Christ, as the end of the
law for righteousness to every one that believeth. Fear and unbelief
would put the vail before us, they would hinder our free approach to the
mercy-seat above. We should spread our wants, temporal and spiritual,
fully before our heavenly Father; we should tell him our hinderances,
struggles, trails, and temptations; we should acknowledge our offences.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 35](exo035)

</div>
