<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo014)  [Next](exo016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 15:0</span></span>

(v. 1-21) The song of Moses for the deliverance of Israel.

([Exo 15:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)) The bitter waters at
Marah, The Israelites come to Elim.

[Exodus 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 15:1</span></span>

This song is the most ancient we know of. It is a holy song, to the
honour of God, to exalt his name, and celebrate his praise, and his
only, not in the least to magnify any man. Holiness to the Lord is in
every part of it. It may be considered as typical, and prophetical of
the final destruction of the enemies of the church. Happy the people
whose God is the Lord. They have work to do, temptations to grapple
with, and afflictions to bear, and are weak in themselves; but his grace
is their strength. They are often in sorrow, but in him they have
comfort; he is their song. Sin, and death, and hell threaten them, but
he is, and will be their salvation. The Lord is a God of almighty power,
and woe to those that strive with their Maker! He is a God of matchless
perfection; he is glorious in holiness; his holiness is his glory. His
holiness appears in the hatred of sin, and his wrath against obstinate
sinners. It appears in the deliverance of Israel, and his faithfulness
to his own promise. He is fearful in praises; that which is matter of
praise to the servants of God, is very dreadful to his enemies. He is
doing wonders, things out of the common course of nature; wondrous to
those in whose favour they are wrought, who are so unworthy, that they
had no reason to expect them. There were wonders of power and wonders of
grace; in both, God was to be humbly adored.

[Exodus 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 15:22</span></span>

In the wilderness of Shur the Israelites had no water. At Marah they had
water, but it was bitter; so that they could not drink it. God can make
bitter to us that from which we promise ourselves most, and often does
so in the wilderness of this world, that our wants, and disappointments
in the creature, may drive us to the Creator, in whose favour alone true
comfort is to be had. In this distress the people fretted, and
quarrelled with Moses. Hypocrites may show high affections, and appear
earnest in religious exercises, but in the time of temptation they fall
away. Even true believers, in seasons of sharp trial, will be tempted to
fret, distrust, and murmur. But in every trial we should cast our care
upon the Lord, and pour out our hearts before him. We shall then find
that a submissive will, a peaceful conscience, and the comforts of the
Holy Ghost, will render the bitterest trial tolerable, yea, pleasant.
Moses did what the people had neglected to do; he cried unto the Lord.
And God provided graciously for them. He directed Moses to a tree which
he cast into the waters, when, at once, they were made sweet. Some make
this tree typical of the cross of Christ, which sweetens the bitter
waters of affliction to all the faithful, and enables them to rejoice in
tribulation. But a rebellious Israelite shall fare no better than a
rebellious Egyptian. The threatening is implied only, the promise is
expressed. God is the great Physician. If we are kept well, it is he
that keeps us; if we are made well, it is he that recovers us. He is our
life and the length of our days. Let us not forget that we are kept from
destruction, and delivered from our enemies, to be the Lord's servants.
At Elim they had good water, and enough of it. Though God may, for a
time, order his people to encamp by the bitter waters of Marah, that
shall not always be their lot. Let us not faint at tribulations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 16](exo016)

</div>
