<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo024)  [Next](exo026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 25:0</span></span>

([Exo 25:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001).md) What the Israelites were
to offer for making the tabernacle.

([Exo 25:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010).md) The ark.

([Exo 25:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023).md) The table, with its
furniture.

([Exo 25:31-40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031).md) The candlestick.

[Exodus 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 25:1</span></span>

God chose the people of Israel to be a peculiar people to himself, above
all people, and he himself would be their King. He ordered a royal
palace to be set up among them for himself, called a sanctuary, or holy
place, or habitation. There he showed his presence among them. And
because in the wilderness they dwelt in tents, this royal palace was
ordered to be a tabernacle, that it might move with them. The people
were to furnish Moses with the materials, by their own free will. The
best use we can make of our worldly wealth, is to honour God with it in
works of piety and charity. We should ask, not only, What must we do?
but, What may we do for God? Whatever they gave, they must give it
cheerfully, not grudgingly, for God loves a cheerful giver, [Co2
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md). What is laid out in the service
of God, we must reckon well bestowed; and whatsoever is done in God's
service, must be done by his direction.

[Exodus 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 25:10</span></span>

The ark was a chest, overlaid with gold, in which the two tables of the
law were to be kept. These tables are called the testimony; God in them
testified his will. This law was a testimony to the Israelites, to
direct them in their duty, and would be a testimony against them, if
they transgressed. This ark was placed in the holy of holies; the blood
of the sacrifices was sprinkled, and the incense burned, before it, by
the high priest; and above it appeared the visible glory, which was the
symbol of the Divine presence. This was a type of Christ in his sinless
nature, which saw no corruption, in personal union with his Divine
nature, atoning for our sins against it, by his death. The cherubim of
gold looked one towards another, and both looked downward toward the
ark. It denotes the angels' attendance on the Redeemer, their readiness
to do his will, their presence in the assemblies of saints, and their
desire to look into the mysteries of the gospel. It was covered with a
covering of gold, called the mercy-seat. God is said to dwell, or sit
between the cherubim, on the mercy-seat. There he would give his law,
and hear supplicants, as a prince on his throne.

[Exodus 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 25:23</span></span>

A table was to be made of wood, overlaid with gold, to stand in the
outer tabernacle, to be always furnished with the shew-bread. This
table, with the articles on it, and its use, seems to typify the
communion which the Lord holds with his redeemed people in his
ordinances, the provisions of his house, the feasts they are favoured
with. Also the food for their souls, which they always find when they
hunger after it; and the delight he takes in their persons and services,
as presented before him in Christ.

[Exodus 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 25:31</span></span>

The candlestick represents the light of God's word and Spirit, in and
through Christ Jesus, afforded in this dark world to his believing
people, to direct their worship and obedience, and to afford them
consolations. The church is still dark, as the tabernacle was, in
comparison with what it will be in heaven; but the word of God is a
light shining in a dark place, [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md), and a dark place indeed the
world would be without it. In vs. 40 is an express caution to Moses.
Nothing was left to his own fancy, or to that of the workmen, or the
people; but the will of God must be observed in every particular.
Christ's instruction to his disciples, [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md), is like this, Observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you. Let us remember that we are the
temples of the Holy Ghost, that we have the law of God in our hearts,
that we are to live a life of communion with God, feast on his
ordinances, and are the light of the world, if indeed we are followers
of Christ. May the Lord help us to try ourselves by this view of
religion, and to walk according thereto.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 26](exo026.md)

</div>
