<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo005)  [Next](exo007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 6:0</span></span>

([Exo 6:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001).md) God renews his promise.

([Exo 6:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#010).md) Moses and Aaron again
sent to Pharaoh.

(v. 14-30) The parentage of Moses and Aaron.

[Exodus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 6:1</span></span>

We are most likely to prosper in attempts to glorify God, and to be
useful to men, when we learn by experience that we can do nothing of
ourselves; when our whole dependence is placed on him, and our only
expectation is from him. Moses had been expecting what God would do; but
now he shall see what he will do. God would now be known by his name
Jehovah, that is, a God performing what he had promised, and finishing
his own work. God intended their happiness: I will take you to me for a
people, a peculiar people, and I will be to you a God. More than this we
need not ask, we cannot have, to make us happy. He intended his own
glory: Ye shall know that I am the Lord. These good words, and
comfortable words, should have revived the drooping Israelites, and have
made them forget their misery; but they were so taken up with their
troubles, that they did not heed God's promises. By indulging discontent
and fretfulness, we deprive ourselves of the comfort we might have, both
from God's word and from his providence, and go comfortless.

[Exodus 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 6:10</span></span>

The faith of Moses was so feeble that he could scarcely be kept to his
work. Ready obedience is always according to the strength of our faith.
Though our weaknesses ought to humble us, yet they ought not to
discourage us from doing our best in any service we have to do for God.
When Moses repeats his baffled arguments, he is argued with no longer,
but God gives him and Aaron a charge, both to the children of Israel,
and to Pharaoh. God's authority is sufficient to answer all objections,
and binds all to obey, without murmuring or disputing, [Phi
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014.md).

[Exodus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 6:14</span></span>

Moses and Aaron were Israelites; raised up unto them of their brethren,
as Christ also should be, who was to be the Prophet and Priest, the
Redeemer and Lawgiver of the people of Israel. Moses returns to his
narrative, and repeats the charge God had given him to deliver his
message to Pharaoh, and his objection against it. Those who have spoken
unadvisedly with their lips ought to reflect upon it with regret, as
Moses seems to do here. "Uncircumcised," is used in Scripture to note
the unsuitableness there may be in any thing to answer its proper
purpose; as the carnal heart and depraved nature of fallen man are
wholly unsuited to the services of God, and to the purposes of his
glory. It is profitable to place no confidence in ourselves, all our
sufficiency must be in the Lord. We never can trust ourselves too
little, or our God too much. I can do nothing by myself, said the
apostle, but I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 7](exo007.md)

</div>
