<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo006)  [Next](exo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 7:0</span></span>

([Exo 7:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)) Moses and Aaron
encouraged.

([Exo 7:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008)) The rods turned into
serpents, Pharaoh's heart is hardened.

([Exo 7:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014)) The river is turned
into blood, The distress of the Egyptians.

[Exodus 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 7:1</span></span>

God glorifies himself. He makes people know that he is Jehovah. Israel
is made to know it by the performance of his promises to them, and the
Egyptians by the pouring out of his wrath upon them. Moses, as the
ambassador of Jehovah, speaking in his name, laid commands upon Pharaoh,
denounced threatenings against him, and called for judgments upon him.
Pharaoh, proud and great as he was, could not resist. Moses stood not in
awe of Pharaoh, but made him tremble. This seems to be meant in the
words, Thou shalt be a god unto Pharaoh. At length Moses is delivered
from his fears. He makes no more objections, but, being strengthened in
faith, goes about his work with courage, and proceeds in it with
perseverance.

[Exodus 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 7:8</span></span>

What men dislike, because it opposes their pride and lusts, they will
not be convinced of; but it is easy to cause them to believe things they
wish to be true. God always sends with his word full proofs of its
Divine authority; but when men are bent to disobey, and willing to
object, he often permits a snare to be laid wherein they are entangled.
The magicians were cheats, trying to copy the real miracles of Moses by
secret sleights or jugglings, which to a small extent they succeeded in
doing, so as to deceive the bystanders, but they were at length obliged
to confess they could not any longer imitate the effects of Divine
power. None assist more in the destruction of sinners, than such as
resist the truth by amusing men with a counterfeit resemblance of it.
Satan is most to be dreaded when transformed into an angel of light.

[Exodus 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 7:14</span></span>

Here is the first of the ten plagues, the turning of the water into
blood. It was a dreadful plague. The sight of such vast rolling streams
of blood could not but strike horror. Nothing is more common than water:
so wisely has Providence ordered it, and so kindly, that what is so
needful and serviceable to the comfort of human life, should be cheap
and almost every where to be had; but now the Egyptians must either
drink blood, or die for thirst. Egypt was a pleasant land, but the dead
fish and blood now rendered it very unpleasant. It was a righteous
plague, and justly sent upon the Egyptians; for Nile, the river of
Egypt, was their idol. That creature which we idolize, God justly takes
from us, or makes bitter to us. They had stained the river with the
blood of the Hebrews' children, and now God made that river all blood.
Never any thirsted after blood, but sooner or later they had enough of
it. It was a significant plague; Egypt had great dependence upon their
river, [Zac 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018); so that in smiting
the river, they were warned of the destruction of all the produce of
their country. The love of Christ to his disciples changes all their
common mercies into spiritual blessings; the anger of God towards his
enemies, renders their most valued advantages a curse and a misery to
them. Aaron is to summon the plague by smiting the river with his rod.
It was done in the sight of Pharaoh and his attendants, for God's true
miracles were not performed as Satan's lying wonders; truth seeks no
corners. See the almighty power of God. Every creature is that to us
which he makes it to be water or blood. See what changes we may meet
with in the things of this world; what is always vain, may soon become
vexatious. See what mischievous work sin makes. If the things that have
been our comforts prove our crosses, we must thank ourselves. It is sin
that turns our waters into blood. The plague continued seven days; and
in all that time Pharaoh's proud heart would not let him desire Moses to
pray for the removal of it. Thus the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath.
No wonder that God's anger is not turned away, but that his hand is
stretched out still.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 8](exo008)

</div>
