<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo011)  [Next](exo013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 12:0</span></span>

(v. 1-20) The beginning of the year changed, The passover instituted.

([Exo 12:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)) The people instructed
how to observe the passover.

([Exo 12:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)) The death of the
first-born of the Egyptians The Israelites urged to leave the land of
Egypt.

([Exo 12:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)) The Israelites' first
journey to Succoth.

([Exo 12:43-51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043)) Ordinance respecting
the passover.

[Exodus 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 12:1</span></span>

The Lord makes all things new to those whom he delivers from the bondage
of Satan, and takes to himself to be his people. The time when he does
this is to them the beginning of a new life. God appointed that, on the
night wherein they were to go out of Egypt, each family should kill a
lamb, or that two or three families, if small, should kill one lamb.
This lamb was to be eaten in the manner here directed, and the blood to
be sprinkled on the door-posts, to mark the houses of the Israelites
from those of the Egyptians. The angel of the Lord, when destroying the
first-born of the Egyptians, would pass over the houses marked by the
blood of the lamb: hence the name of this holy feast or ordinance. The
passover was to be kept every year, both as a remembrance of Israel's
preservation and deliverance out of Egypt, and as a remarkable type of
Christ. Their safety and deliverance were not a reward of their own
righteousness, but the gift of mercy. Of this they were reminded, and by
this ordinance they were taught, that all blessings came to them through
the shedding and sprinkling of blood. Observe, 1. The paschal lamb was
typical. Christ is our passover, [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007). Christ is the Lamb of God, [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029); often in the Revelation he is
called the Lamb. It was to be in its prime; Christ offered up himself in
the midst of his days, not when a babe at Bethlehem. It was to be
without blemish; the Lord Jesus was a Lamb without spot: the judge who
condemned Christ declared him innocent. It was to be set apart four days
before, denoting the marking out of the Lord Jesus to be a Saviour, both
in the purpose and in the promise. It was to be slain, and roasted with
fire, denoting the painful sufferings of the Lord Jesus, even unto
death, the death of the cross. The wrath of God is as fire, and Christ
was made a curse for us. Not a bone of it must be broken, which was
fulfilled in Christ, [Joh 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033),
denoting the unbroken strength of the Lord Jesus. 2. The sprinkling of
the blood was typical. The blood of the lamb must be sprinkled, denoting
the applying of the merits of Christ's death to our souls; we must
receive the atonement, [Rom 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011).
Faith is the bunch of hyssop, by which we apply the promises, and the
benefits of the blood of Christ laid up in them, to ourselves. It was to
be sprinkled on the door-posts, denoting the open profession we are to
make of faith in Christ. It was not to be sprinkled upon the threshold;
which cautions us to take heed of trampling under foot the blood of the
covenant. It is precious blood, and must be precious to us. The blood,
thus sprinkled, was a means of preserving the Israelites from the
destroying angel, who had nothing to do where the blood was. The blood
of Christ is the believer's protection from the wrath of God, the curse
of the law, and the damnation of hell, [Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001). 3. The solemn eating of the lamb
was typical of our gospel duty to Christ. The paschal lamb was not to be
looked upon only, but to be fed upon. So we must by faith make Christ
our own; and we must receive spiritual strength and nourishment from
him, as from our food, see [Joh 6:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053),
[Joh 6:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055). It was all to be eaten;
those who by faith feed upon Christ, must feed upon a whole Christ; they
must take Christ and his yoke, Christ and his cross, as well as Christ
and his crown. It was to be eaten at once, not put by till morning.
To-day Christ is offered, and is to be accepted while it is called
to-day, before we sleep the sleep of death. It was to be eaten with
bitter herbs, in remembrance of the bitterness of their bondage in
Egypt; we must feed upon Christ with sorrow and brokenness of heart, in
remembrance of sin. Christ will be sweet to us, if sin be bitter. It was
to be eaten standing, with their staves in their hands, as being ready
to depart. When we feed upon Christ by faith, we must forsake the rule
and the dominion of sin; sit loose to the world, and every thing in it;
forsake all for Christ, and reckon it no bad bargain, [Heb
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#013), [Heb
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014). 4. The feast of unleavened
bread was typical of the Christian life, [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007), [Co1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008). Having received Christ Jesus the
Lord, we must continually delight ourselves in Christ Jesus. No manner
of work must be done, that is, no care admitted and indulged, which does
not agree with, or would lessen this holy joy. The Jews were very strict
as to the passover, so that no leaven should be found in their houses.
It must be a feast kept in charity, without the leaven of malice; and in
sincerity, without the leaven of hypocrisy. It was by an ordinance for
ever; so long as we live we must continue feeding upon Christ, rejoicing
in him always, with thankful mention of the great things he has done for
us.

[Exodus 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 12:21</span></span>

That night, when the first-born were to be destroyed, no Israelite must
stir out of doors till called to march out of Egypt. Their safety was
owing to the blood of sprinkling. If they put themselves from under the
protection of that, it was at their peril. They must stay within, to
wait for the salvation of the Lord; it is good to do so. In after-times
they should carefully teach their children the meaning of this service.
It is good for children to ask about the things of God; they that ask
for the way will find it. The keeping of this solemnity every year was,
1. To look backward, that they might remember what great things God had
done for them and their fathers. Old mercies, to ourselves, or to our
fathers, must not be forgotten, that God may be praised, and our faith
in him encouraged. 2. It was designed to look forward, as an earnest of
the great sacrifice of the Lamb of God in the fulness of time. Christ
our passover was sacrificed for us; his death was our life.

[Exodus 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 12:29</span></span>

The Egyptians had been for three days and nights kept in anxiety and
horror by the darkness; now their rest is broken by a far more terrible
calamity. The plague struck their first-born, the joy and hope of their
families. They had slain the Hebrews' children, now God slew theirs. It
reached from the throne to the dungeon: prince and peasant stand upon
the same level before God's judgments. The destroying angel entered
every dwelling unmarked with blood, as the messenger of woe. He did his
dreadful errand, leaving not a house in which there was not one dead.
Imagine then the cry that rang through the land of Egypt, the long, loud
shriek of agony that burst from every dwelling. It will be thus in that
dreadful hour when the Son of man shall visit sinners with the last
judgment. God's sons, his first-born, were now released. Men had better
come to God's terms at first, for he will never come to theirs. Now
Pharaoh's pride is abased, and he yields. God's word will stand; we get
nothing by disputing, or delaying to submit. In this terror the
Egyptians would purchase the favour and the speedy departure of Israel.
Thus the Lord took care that their hard-earned wages should be paid, and
the people provided for their journey.

[Exodus 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 12:37</span></span>

The children of Israel set forward without delay. A mixed multitude went
with them. Some, perhaps, willing to leave their country, laid waste by
plagues; others, out of curiosity; perhaps a few out of love to them and
their religion. But there were always those among the Israelites who
were not Israelites. Thus there are still hypocrites in the church. This
great event was 430 years from the promise made to Abraham: see [Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017). So long the promise of a
settlement was unfulfilled. But though God's promises are not performed
quickly, they will be, in their season. This is that night of the Lord,
that remarkable night, to be celebrated in all generations. The great
things God does for his people, are to be not only a few days' wonder,
but to be remembered throughout all ages; especially the work of our
redemption by Christ. This first passover-night was a night of the Lord,
much to be observed; but the last passover-night, in which Christ was
betrayed and in which the first passover, with the rest of the Jewish
ceremonies, was done away, was a night of the Lord, much more to be
observed. Then a yoke, heavier than that of Egypt, was broken from off
our necks, and a land, better than that of Canaan, set before us. It was
a redemption to be celebrated in heaven, for ever and ever.

[Exodus 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">exo 12:43</span></span>

In times to come, all the congregation of Israel must keep the passover.
All that share in God's mercies should join in thankful praises for
them. The New Testament passover, the Lord's supper, ought not to be
neglected by any. Strangers, if circumcised, might eat of the passover.
Here is an early indication of favour to the gentiles. This taught the
Jews that their being a nation favoured by God, entitled them to their
privileges, not their descent from Abraham. Christ our passover is
sacrificed for us, [Co1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007); his blood
is the only ransom for our souls; without the shedding of it there is no
remission; without the sprinkling of it there can be no salvation. Have
we, by faith in him, sheltered our souls from deserved vengeance under
the protection of his atoning blood? Do we keep close to him, constantly
depending upon him? Do we so profess our faith in the Redeemer, and our
obligations to him, that all who pass by may know to whom we belong? Do
we stand prepared for his service, ready to walk in his ways, and to
separate ourselves from his enemies? These are questions of vast
importance to the soul; may the Lord direct our consciences honestly to
answer them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 13](exo013)

</div>
