<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo032)  [Next](exo034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 33:0</span></span>

([Exo 33:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)) The Lord refuses to go
with Israel.

([Exo 33:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007)) The tabernacle of Moses
removed without the camp.

([Exo 33:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#012)) Moses desires to see
the glory of God.

[Exodus 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 33:1</span></span>

Those whom God pardons, must be made to know what their sin deserved.
"Let them go forward as they are;" this was very expressive of God's
displeasure. Though he promises to make good his covenant with Abraham,
in giving them Canaan, yet he denies them the tokens of his presence
they had been blessed with. The people mourned for their sin. Of all the
bitter fruits and consequences of sin, true penitents most lament, and
dread most, God's departure from them. Canaan itself would be no
pleasant land without the Lord's presence. Those who parted with
ornaments to maintain sin, could do no less than lay aside ornaments, in
token of sorrow and shame for it.

[Exodus 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 33:7</span></span>

Moses took the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp. This seems
to have been a temporary building, set up for worship, and at which he
judged disputes among the people. The people looked after him; they were
very desirous to be at peace with God, and concerned to know what would
come to pass. The cloudy pillar which had withdrawn from the camp when
it was polluted with idolatry, now returned. If our hearts go forth
toward God to meet him, he will graciously come to meet us.

[Exodus 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 33:12</span></span>

Moses is very earnest with God. Thus, by the intercession of Christ, we
are not only saved from ruin, but become entitled to everlasting
happiness. Observe here how he pleads. We find grace in God's sight, if
we find grace in our hearts to guide and quicken us in the way of our
duty. Moses speaks as one who dreaded the thought of going forward
without the Lord's presence. God's gracious promises, and mercy towards
us, should not only encourage our faith, but also excite our fervency in
prayer. Observe how he speeds. See, in a type, Christ's intercession,
which he ever lives to make for all that come to God by him; and that it
is not by any thing in those for whom he intercedes. Moses then entreats
a sight of God's glory, and is heard in that also. A full discovery of
the glory of God, would overwhelm even Moses himself. Man is mean, and
unworthy of it; weak, and could not bear it; guilty, and could not but
dread it. The merciful display which is made in Christ Jesus, alone can
be borne by us. The Lord granted that which would abundantly satisfy.
God's goodness is his glory; and he will have us to know him by the
glory of his mercy, more than by the glory of his majesty. Upon the rock
there was a fit place for Moses to view the goodness and glory of God.
The rock in Horeb was typical of Christ the Rock; the Rock of refuge,
salvation, and strength. Happy are they who stand upon this Rock. The
cleft may be an emblem of Christ, as smitten, crucified, wounded, and
slain. What follows, denotes the imperfect knowledge of God in the
present state, even as revealed in Christ; for this, when compared with
the heavenly sight of him. is but like seeing a man that is gone by,
whose back only is to be seen. God in Christ, as he is, even the fullest
and brightest displays of his glory, grace, and goodness, are reserved
to another state.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 34](exo034)

</div>
