<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo004)  [Next](exo006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 5:0</span></span>

([Exo 5:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001).md) Pharaoh's displeasure, He
increases the tasks of the Israelites.

([Exo 5:10-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#010).md) The sufferings of the
Israelites, Moses' complaint to God.

[Exodus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 5:1</span></span>

God will own his people, though poor and despised, and will find a time
to plead their cause. Pharaoh treated all he had heard with contempt. He
had no knowledge of Jehovah, no fear of him, no love to him, and
therefore refused to obey him. Thus Pharaoh's pride, ambition,
covetousness, and political knowledge, hardened him to his own
destruction. What Moses and Aaron ask is very reasonable, only to go
three days' journey into the desert, and that on a good errand. We will
sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Pharaoh was very unreasonable, in
saying that the people were idle, and therefore talked of going to
sacrifice. He thus misrepresents them, that he might have a pretence to
add to their burdens. To this day we find many who are more disposed to
find fault with their neighbours, for spending in the service of God a
few hours spared from their wordly business, than to blame others, who
give twice the time to sinful pleasures. Pharaoh's command was
barbarous. Moses and Aaron themselves must get to the burdens.
Persecutors take pleasure in putting contempt and hardship upon
ministers. The usual tale of bricks must be made, without the usual
allowance of straw to mix with the clay. Thus more work was to be laid
upon the men, which, if they performed, they would be broken with
labour; and if not, they would be punished.

[Exodus 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 5:10</span></span>

The Egyptian task-masters were very severe. See what need we have to
pray that we may be delivered from wicked men. The head-workmen justly
complained to Pharaoh: but he taunted them. The malice of Satan has
often represented the service and worship of God, as fit employment only
for those who have nothing else to do, and the business only of the
idle; whereas, it is the duty of those who are most busy in the world.
Those who are diligent in doing sacrifice to the Lord, will, before God,
escape the doom of the slothful servant, though with men they do not.
The Israelites should have humbled themselves before God, and have taken
to themselves the shame of their sin; but instead of that, they quarrel
with those who were to be their deliverers. Moses returned to the Lord.
He knew that what he had said and done, was by God's direction; and
therefore appeals to him. When we find ourselves at any time perplexed
in the way of our duty, we ought to go to God, and lay open our case
before him by fervent prayer. Disappointments in our work must not drive
us from our God, but still we must ponder why they are sent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 6](exo006.md)

</div>
