<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo002)  [Next](exo004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 3:0</span></span>

([Exo 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001).md) God appears to Moses in a
burning bush.

([Exo 3:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007).md) God sends Moses to
deliver Israel.

([Exo 3:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#011).md) The name Jehovah.

([Exo 3:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016).md) The deliverance of the
Israelites promised.

[Exodus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 3:1</span></span>

The years of the life of Moses are divided into three forties; the first
forty he spent as a prince in Pharaoh's court, the second as a shepherd
in Midian, the third as a king in Jeshurun. How changeable is the life
of man! The first appearance of God to Moses, found him tending sheep.
This seems a poor employment for a man of his parts and education, yet
he rests satisfied with it; and thus learns meekness and contentment,
for which he is more noted in sacred writ, than for all his learning.
Satan loves to find us idle; God is pleased when he finds us employed.
Being alone, is a good friend to our communion with God. To his great
surprise, Moses saw a bush burning without fire to kindle it. The bush
burned, and yet did not burn away; an emblem of the church in bondage in
Egypt. And it fitly reminds us of the church in every age, under its
severest persecutions kept by the presence of God from being destroyed.
Fire is an emblem, in Scripture, of the Divine holiness and justice,
also of the afflictions and trials with which God proves and purifies
his people, and even of that baptism of the Holy Ghost, by which sinful
affections are consumed, and the soul changed into the Divine nature and
image. God gave Moses a gracious call, to which he returned a ready
answer. Those that would have communion with God, must attend upon him
in the ordinances wherein he is pleased to manifest himself and his
glory, though it be in a bush. Putting off the shoe was a token of
respect and submission. We ought to draw nigh to God with a solemn pause
and preparation, carefully avoiding every thing that looks light and
rude, and unbecoming his service. God does not say, I was the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but I am. The patriarchs still live, so many
years after their bodies have been in the grave. No length of time can
separate the souls of the just from their Maker. By this, God instructed
Moses as to another world, and strengthened his belief of a future
state. Thus it is interpreted by our Lord Jesus, who, from hence, proves
that the dead are raised, [Luk 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#037.md).
Moses hid his face, as if both ashamed and afraid to look upon God. The
more we see of God, and his grace, and covenant love, the more cause we
shall see to worship him with reverence and godly fear.

[Exodus 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 3:7</span></span>

God notices the afflictions of Israel. Their sorrows; even the secret
sorrows of God's people are known to him. Their cry; God hears the cries
of his afflicted people. The oppression they endured; the highest and
greatest of their oppressors are not above him. God promises speedy
deliverance by methods out of the common ways of providence. Those whom
God, by his grace, delivers out of a spiritual Egypt, he will bring to a
heavenly Canaan.

[Exodus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 3:11</span></span>

Formerly Moses thought himself able to deliver Israel, and set himself
to the work too hastily. Now, when the fittest person on earth for it,
he knows his own weakness. This was the effect of more knowledge of God
and of himself. Formerly, self-confidence mingled with strong faith and
great zeal, now sinful distrust of God crept in under the garb of
humility; so defective are the strongest graces and the best duties of
the most eminent saints. But all objections are answered in, Certainly I
will be with thee. That is enough. Two names God would now be known by.
A name that denotes what he is in himself, I AM THAT I AM. This explains
his name Jehovah, and signifies, 1. That he is self-existent: he has his
being of himself. 2. That he is eternal and unchangeable, and always the
same, yesterday, to-day, and forever. 3. That he is incomprehensible; we
cannot by searching find him out: this name checks all bold and curious
inquiries concerning God. 4. That he is faithful and true to all his
promises, unchangeable in his word as well as in his nature; let Israel
know this, I AM hath sent me unto you. I am, and there is none else
besides me. All else have their being from God, and are wholly dependent
upon him. Also, here is a name that denotes what God is to his people.
The Lord God of your fathers sent me unto you. Moses must revive among
them the religion of their fathers, which was almost lost; and then they
might expect the speedy performance of the promises made unto their
fathers.

[Exodus 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 3:16</span></span>

Moses' success with the elders of Israel would be good. God, who, by his
grace, inclines the heart, and opens the ear, could say beforehand, They
shall hearken to thy voice; for he would make them willing in this day
of power. As to Pharaoh, Moses is here told that petitions and
persuasions, and humble complaints, would not prevail with him; nor a
mighty hand stretched out in signs and wonders. But those will certainly
be broken by the power of God's hand, who will not bow to the power of
his word. Pharaoh's people should furnish Israel with riches at their
departure. In Pharaoh's tyranny and Israel's oppression, we see the
miserable, abject state of sinners. However galling the yoke, they
drudge on till the Lord sends redemption. With the invitations of the
gospel, God sends the teaching of his Spirit. Thus are men made willing
to seek and to strive for deliverance. Satan loses his power to hold
them, they come forth with all they have and are, and apply all to the
glory of God and the service of his church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 4](exo004.md)

</div>
