<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo018)  [Next](exo020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 19:0</span></span>

([Exo 19:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)) The people come to
Sinai, God's message to them, and their answer.

([Exo 19:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)) The people directed to
prepare to hear the law.

([Exo 19:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)) The presence of God on
Sinai.

[Exodus 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 19:1</span></span>

Moses was called up the mountain, and was employed as the messenger of
this covenant. The Maker and first Mover of the covenant, is God
himself. This blessed charter was granted out of God's own free grace.
The covenant here mentioned was the national covenant, by which the
Israelites were a people under the government of Jehovah. It was a type
of the new covenant made with true believers in Christ Jesus; but, like
other types, it was only a shadow of good things to come. As a nation
they broke this covenant; therefore the Lord declared that he would make
a new covenant with Israel, writing his law, not upon tables of stone,
but in their hearts, [Jer 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033); [Heb
8:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007). The covenant spoken of in
these places as ready to vanish away, is the national covenant with
Israel, which they forfeited by their sins. Unless we carefully attend
to this, we shall fall into mistakes while reading the Old Testament. We
must not suppose that the nation of the Jews were under the covenant of
works, which knows nothing of repentance, faith in a Mediator,
forgiveness of sins, or grace; nor yet that the whole nation of Israel
bore the character, and possessed the privileges of true believers, as
being actually sharers in the covenant of grace. They were all under a
dispensation of mercy; they had outward privileges and advantages for
salvation; but, like professing Christians, most rested therein, and
went no further. Israel consented to the conditions. They answered as
one man, All that the Lord hath spoken we will do. Oh that there had
been such a heart in them! Moses, as a mediator, returned the words of
the people to God. Thus Christ, the Mediator, as a Prophet, reveals
God's will to us, his precepts and promises; and then, as a Priest,
offers up to God our spiritual sacrifices, not only of prayer and
praise, but of devout affections, and pious resolutions, the work of his
own Spirit in us.

[Exodus 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 19:9</span></span>

The solemn manner in which the law was delivered, was to impress the
people with a right sense of the Divine majesty. Also to convince them
of their own guilt, and to show that they could not stand in judgment
before God by their own obedience. In the law, the sinner discovers what
he ought to be, what he is, and what he wants. There he learns the
nature, necessity, and glory of redemption, and of being made holy.
Having been taught to flee to Christ, and to love him, the law is the
rule of his obedience and faith.

[Exodus 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 19:16</span></span>

Never was there such a sermon preached, before or since, as this which
was preached to the church in the wilderness. It might be supposed that
the terrors would have checked presumption and curiosity in the people;
but the hard heart of an unawakened sinner can trifle with the most
terrible threatenings and judgments. In drawing near to God, we must
never forget his holiness and greatness, nor our own meanness and
pollution. We cannot stand in judgment before him according to his
righteous law. The convinced transgressor asks, What must I do to be
saved? and he hears the voice, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved. The Holy Ghost, who made the law to convince of
sin, now takes of the things of Christ, and shows them to us. In the
gospel we read, Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
made a curse for us. We have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins. Through him we are justified from all things, from
which we could not be justified by the law of Moses. But the Divine law
is binding as a rule of life. The Son of God came down from heaven, and
suffered poverty, shame, agony, and death, not only to redeem us from
its curse, but to bind us more closely to keep its commands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 20](exo020)

</div>
