<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo008)  [Next](exo010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 9:0</span></span>

([Exo 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001).md) The murrain of beasts.

([Exo 9:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008).md) The plague of boils and
blains.

([Exo 9:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013).md) The plague of hail
threatened.

([Exo 9:22-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#022).md) The plague of hail
inflicted.

[Exodus 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 9:1</span></span>

God will have Israel released, Pharaoh opposes it, and the trial is,
whose word shall stand. The hand of the Lord at once is upon the cattle,
many of which, some of all kinds, die by a sort of murrain. This was
greatly to the loss of the owners; they had made Israel poor, and now
God would make them poor. The hand of God is to be seen, even in the
sickness and death of cattle; for a sparrow falls not to the ground
without our Father. None of the Israelites' cattle should die; the Lord
shall sever. The cattle died. The Egyptians worshipped their cattle.
What we make an idol of, it is just with God to remove from us. This
proud tyrant and cruel oppressor deserved to be made an example by the
just Judge of the universe. None who are punished according to what they
deserve, can have any just cause to complain. Hardness of heart denotes
that state of mind upon which neither threatenings nor promise, neither
judgements nor mercies, make any abiding impression. The conscience
being stupified, and the heart filled with pride and presumption, they
persist in unbelief and disobedience. This state of mind is also called
the stony heart. Very different is the heart of flesh, the broken and
contrite heart. Sinners have none to blame but themselves, for that
pride and ungodliness which abuse the bounty and patience of God. For,
however the Lord hardens the hearts of men, it is always as a punishment
of former sins.

[Exodus 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 9:8</span></span>

When the Egyptians were not wrought upon by the death of their cattle,
God sent a plague that seized their own bodies. If lesser judgments do
not work, God will send greater. Sometimes God shows men their sin in
their punishment. They had oppressed Israel in the furnaces, and now the
ashes of the furnace are made a terror to them. The plague itself was
very grievous. The magicians themselves were struck with these boils.
Their power was restrained before; but they continued to withstand
Moses, and to confirm Pharaoh in his unbelief, till they were forced to
give way. Pharaoh continued obstinate. He had hardened his own heart,
and now God justly gave him up to his own heart's lusts, permitting
Satan to blind and harden him. If men shut their eyes against the light,
it is just with God to close their eyes. This is the sorest judgment a
man can be under out of hell.

[Exodus 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 9:13</span></span>

Moses is here ordered to deliver a dreadful message to Pharaoh.
Providence ordered it, that Moses should have a man of such a fierce and
stubborn spirit as this Pharaoh to deal with; and every thing made it a
most signal instance of the power of God has to humble and bring down
the proudest of his enemies. When God's justice threatens ruin, his
mercy at the same time shows a way of escape from it. God not only
distinguished between Egyptians and Israelites, but between some
Egyptians and others. If Pharaoh will not yield, and so prevent the
judgment itself, yet those that will take warning, may take shelter.
Some believed the things which were spoken, and they feared, and housed
their servants and cattle, and it was their wisdom. Even among the
servants of Pharaoh, some trembled at God's word; and shall not the sons
of Israel dread it? But others believed not, and left their cattle in
the field. Obstinate unbelief is deaf to the fairest warnings, and the
wisest counsels, which leaves the blood of those that perish upon their
own heads.

[Exodus 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 9:22</span></span>

Woful havoc this hail made: it killed both men and cattle; the corn
above ground was destroyed, and that only preserved which as yet was not
come up. The land of Goshen was preserved. God causes rain or hail on
one city and not on another, either in mercy or in judgment. Pharaoh
humbled himself to Moses. No man could have spoken better: he owns
himself wrong; he owns that the Lord is righteous; and God must be
justified when he speaks, though he speaks in thunder and lightning. Yet
his heart was hardened all this while. Moses pleads with God: though he
had reason to think Pharaoh would repent of his repentance, and he told
him so, yet he promises to be his friend. Moses went out of the city,
notwithstanding the hail and lightning which kept Pharaoh and his
servants within doors. Peace with God makes men thunder-proof. Pharaoh
was frightened by the tremendous judgment; but when that was over, his
fair promises were forgotten. Those that are not bettered by judgments
and mercies, commonly become worse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 10](exo010.md)

</div>
