<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo000)  [Next](exo002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

([Exo 1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001).md) The children of Israel
increase in Egypt after the death of Joseph.

([Exo 1:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008).md) They are oppressed, but
multiply exceedingly.

([Exo 1:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015).md) The men-children
destroyed.

[Exodus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 1:1</span></span>

During more than 200 years, while Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob lived at
liberty, the Hebrews increased slowly; only about seventy persons went
down into Egypt. There, in about the same number of years, though under
cruel bondage, they became a large nation. This wonderful increase was
according to the promise long before made unto the fathers. Though the
performance of God's promises is sometimes slow, it is always sure.

[Exodus 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 1:8</span></span>

The land of Egypt became to Israel a house of bondage. The place where
we have been happy, may soon become the place of our affliction; and
that may prove the greatest cross to us, of which we said, This same
shall comfort us. Cease from man, and say not of any place on this side
heaven, This is my rest. All that knew Joseph, loved him, and were kind
to his brethren for his sake; but the best and most useful services a
man does to others, are soon forgotten after his death. Our great care
should be, to serve God, and to please him who is not unrighteous,
whatever men are, to forget our work and labour of love. The offence of
Israel is, that he prospers. There is no sight more hateful to a wicked
man than the prosperity of the righteous. The Egyptians feared lest the
children of Israel should join their enemies, and get them up out of the
land. Wickedness is ever cowardly and unjust; it makes a man fear, where
no fear is, and flee, when no one pursues him. And human wisdom often is
foolishness, and very sinful. God's people had task-masters set over
them, not only to burden them, but to afflict them with their burdens.
They not only made them serve for Pharaoh's profit, but so that their
lives became bitter. The Israelites wonderfully increased. Christianity
spread most when it was persecuted: the blood of the martyrs was the
seed of the church. They that take counsel against the Lord and his
Israel, do but imagine a vain thing, and create greater vexation to
themselves.

[Exodus 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 1:15</span></span>

The Egyptians tried to destroy Israel by the murder of their children.
The enmity that is in the seed of the serpent, against the Seed of the
woman, makes men forget all pity. It is plain that the Hebrews were now
under an uncommon blessing. And we see that the services done for God's
Israel are often repaid in kind. Pharaoh gave orders to drown all the
male children of the Hebrews. The enemy who, by Pharaoh, attempted to
destroy the church in this its infant state, is busy to stifle the rise
of serious reflections in the heart of man. Let those who would escape,
be afraid of sinning, and cry directly and fervently to the Lord for
assistance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 2](exo002.md)

</div>
