<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr000)  [Next](ezr002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

([Ezr 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)) The proclamation of Cyrus
for the rebuilding of the temple.

([Ezr 1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005)) The people provide for
their return.

[Ezra 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 1:1</span></span>

The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus. The hearts of kings are in the
hand of the Lord. God governs the world by his influence on the spirits
of men; whatever good they do, God stirs up their spirits to do it. It
was during the captivity of the Jews, that God principally employed them
as the means of calling the attention of the heathen to him. Cyrus took
it for granted, that those among the Jews who were able, would offer
free-will offerings for the house of God. He would also have them
supplied out of his kingdom. Well-wishers to the temple should be
well-doers for it.

[Ezra 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 1:5</span></span>

The same God that raised up the spirit of Cyrus to proclaim liberty to
the Jews, raised up their spirits to take the benefit. The temptation
was to some to stay in Babylon; but some feared not to return, and they
were those whose spirits God raised, by his Spirit and grace. Whatever
good we do, is owing to the grace of God. Our spirits naturally bow down
to this earth and the things of it; if they move upward in any good
affections or good actions, it is God who raises them. The calls and
offers of the gospel are like the proclamation of Cyrus. Those bound
under the power of sin, may be made free by Jesus Christ. Whosoever
will, by repentance and faith, return to God, Jesus Christ has opened
the way for him, and raises him out of the slavery of sin into the
glorious liberty of the children of God. Many that hear this joyful
sound, choose to sit still in Babylon, are in love with their sins, and
will not venture upon a holy life; but some break through all
discouragements, whatever it cost them; they are those whose spirit God
has raised above the world and the flesh, whom he has made willing. Thus
will the heavenly Canaan be filled, though many perish in Babylon; and
the gospel offer will not have been made in vain. The bringing back the
Jews from captivity, represents the redemption of sinners by Jesus
Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 2](ezr002)

</div>
