<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](gal001)  [Next](gal003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 2:0</span></span>

([Gal 2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001).md) The apostle declares his
being owned as an apostle of the Gentiles.

([Gal 2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011).md) He had publicly opposed
Peter for judaizing.

([Gal 2:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015).md) And from thence he
enters upon the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ, without
the works of the law.

[Galatians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 2:1</span></span>

Observe the apostle's faithfulness in giving a full account of the
doctrine he had preached among the Gentiles, and was still resolved to
preach, that of Christianity, free from all mixture of Judaism. This
doctrine would be ungrateful to many, yet he was not afraid to own it.
His care was, lest the success of his past labours should be lessened,
or his future usefulness be hindered. While we simply depend upon God
for success to our labours, we should use every proper caution to remove
mistakes, and against opposers. There are things which may lawfully be
complied with, yet, when they cannot be done without betraying the
truth, they ought to be refused. We must not give place to any conduct,
whereby the truth of the gospel would be reflected upon. Though Paul
conversed with the other apostles, yet he did not receive any addition
to his knowledge, or authority, from them. Perceiving the grace given to
him, they gave unto him and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship,
whereby they acknowledged that he was designed to the honour and office
of an apostle as well as themselves. They agreed that these two should
go to the heathen, while they continued to preach to the Jews; judging
it agreeable to the mind of Christ, so to divide their work. Here we
learn that the gospel is not ours, but God's; and that men are but the
keepers of it; for this we are to praise God. The apostle showed his
charitable disposition, and how ready he was to own the Jewish converts
as brethren, though many would scarcely allow the like favour to the
converted Gentiles; but mere difference of opinion was no reason to him
why he should not help them. Herein is a pattern of Christian charity,
which we should extend to all the disciples of Christ.

[Galatians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 2:11</span></span>

Notwithstanding Peter's character, yet, when Paul saw him acting so as
to hurt the truth of the gospel and the peace of the church, he was not
afraid to reprove him. When he saw that Peter and the others did not
live up to that principle which the gospel taught, and which they
professed, namely, That by the death of Christ the partition wall
between Jew and Gentile was taken down, and the observance of the law of
Moses was no longer in force; as Peter's offence was public, he publicly
reproved him. There is a very great difference between the prudence of
St. Paul, who bore with, and used for a time, the ceremonies of the law
as not sinful, and the timid conduct of St. Peter, who, by withdrawing
from the Gentiles, led others to think that these ceremonies were
necessary.

[Galatians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 2:15</span></span>

Paul, having thus shown he was not inferior to any apostle, not to Peter
himself, speaks of the great foundation doctrine of the gospel. For what
did we believe in Christ? Was it not that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ? If so, is it not foolish to go back to the law, and to
expect to be justified by the merit of moral works, or sacrifices, or
ceremonies? The occasion of this declaration doubtless arose from the
ceremonial law; but the argument is quite as strong against all
dependence upon the works of the moral law, as respects justification.
To give the greater weight to this, it is added, But if, while we seek
to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is
Christ the minister of sin? This would be very dishonourable to Christ,
and also very hurtful to them. By considering the law itself, he saw
that justification was not to be expected by the works of it, and that
there was now no further need of the sacrifices and cleansings of it,
since they were done away in Christ, by his offering up himself a
sacrifice for us. He did not hope or fear any thing from it; any more
than a dead man from enemies. But the effect was not a careless, lawless
life. It was necessary, that he might live to God, and be devoted to him
through the motives and grace of the gospel. It is no new prejudice,
though a most unjust one, that the doctrine of justification by faith
alone, tends to encourage people in sin. Not so, for to take occasion
from free grace, or the doctrine of it, to live in sin, is to try to
make Christ the minister of sin, at any thought of which all Christian
hearts would shudder.

[Galatians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 2:20</span></span>

Here, in his own person, the apostle describes the spiritual or hidden
life of a believer. The old man is crucified, [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md), but the new man is living; sin is
mortified, and grace is quickened. He has the comforts and the triumphs
of grace; yet that grace is not from himself, but from another.
Believers see themselves living in a state of dependence on Christ.
Hence it is, that though he lives in the flesh, yet he does not live
after the flesh. Those who have true faith, live by that faith; and
faith fastens upon Christ's giving himself for us. He loved me, and gave
himself for me. As if the apostle said, The Lord saw me fleeing from him
more and more. Such wickedness, error, and ignorance were in my will and
understanding, that it was not possible for me to be ransomed by any
other means than by such a price. Consider well this price. Here notice
the false faith of many. And their profession is accordingly; they have
the form of godliness without the power of it. They think they believe
the articles of faith aright, but they are deceived. For to believe in
Christ crucified, is not only to believe that he was crucified, but also
to believe that I am crucified with him. And this is to know Christ
crucified. Hence we learn what is the nature of grace. God's grace
cannot stand with man's merit. Grace is no grace unless it is freely
given every way. The more simply the believer relies on Christ for every
thing, the more devotedly does he walk before Him in all his ordinances
and commandments. Christ lives and reigns in him, and he lives here on
earth by faith in the Son of God, which works by love, causes obedience,
and changes into his holy image. Thus he neither abuses the grace of
God, nor makes it in vain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 3](gal003.md)

</div>
