<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Galatians Index](gal.md)  
  [Previous](gal000)  [Next](gal002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

([Gal 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001).md) The apostle Paul asserts
his apostolic character against such as lessened it.

([Gal 1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006).md) He reproves the Galatians
for revolting from the gospel of Christ under the influence of evil
teachers.

([Gal 1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010).md) He proves the Divine
authority of his doctrine and mission; and declares what he was before
his conversion and calling.

([Gal 1:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015).md) And how he proceeded
after it.

[Galatians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 1:1</span></span>

St. Paul was an apostle of Jesus Christ; he was expressly appointed by
him, consequently by God the Father, who is one with him in respect of
his Divine nature, and who appointed Christ as Mediator. Grace, includes
God's good-will towards us, and his good work upon us; and peace, all
that inward comfort, or outward prosperity, which is really needful for
us. They come from God the Father, as the Fountain, through Jesus
Christ. But observe, first grace, and then peace; there can be no true
peace without grace. Christ gave himself for our sins, to make atonement
for us: this the justice of God required, and to this he freely
submitted. Here is to be observed the infinite greatness of the price
bestowed, and then it will appear plainly, that the power of sin is so
great, that it could by no means be put away except the Son of God be
given for it. He that considers these things well, understands that sin
is a thing the most horrible that can be expressed; which ought to move
us, and make us afraid indeed. Especially mark well the words, "for our
sins." For here our weak nature starts back, and would first be made
worthy by her own works. It would bring him that is whole, and not him
that has need of a physician. Not only to redeem us from the wrath of
God, and the curse of the law; but also to recover us from wicked
practices and customs, to which we are naturally enslaved. But it is in
vain for those who are not delivered from this present evil world by the
sanctification of the Spirit, to expect that they are freed from its
condemnation by the blood of Jesus.

[Galatians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 1:6</span></span>

Those who would establish any other way to heaven than what the gospel
of Christ reveals, will find themselves wretchedly mistaken. The apostle
presses upon the Galatians a due sense of their guilt in forsaking the
gospel way of justification; yet he reproves with tenderness, and
represents them as drawn into it by the arts of some that troubled them.
In reproving others, we should be faithful, and yet endeavour to restore
them in the spirit of meekness. Some would set up the works of the law
in the place of Christ's righteousness, and thus they corrupted
Christianity. The apostle solemnly denounces, as accursed, every one who
attempts to lay so false a foundation. All other gospels than that of
the grace of Christ, whether more flattering to self-righteous pride, or
more favourable to worldly lusts, are devices of Satan. And while we
declare that to reject the moral law as a rule of life, tends to
dishonour Christ, and destroy true religion, we must also declare, that
all dependence for justification on good works, whether real or
supposed, is as fatal to those who persist in it. While we are zealous
for good works, let us be careful not to put them in the place of
Christ's righteousness, and not to advance any thing which may betray
others into so dreadful a delusion.

[Galatians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 1:10</span></span>

In preaching the gospel, the apostle sought to bring persons to the
obedience, not of men, but of God. But Paul would not attempt to alter
the doctrine of Christ, either to gain their favour, or to avoid their
fury. In so important a matter we must not fear the frowns of men, nor
seek their favour, by using words of men's wisdom. Concerning the manner
wherein he received the gospel, he had it by revelation from Heaven. He
was not led to Christianity, as many are, merely by education.

[Galatians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 1:15</span></span>

St. Paul was wonderfully brought to the knowledge and faith of Christ.
All who are savingly converted, are called by the grace of God; their
conversion is wrought by his power and grace working in them. It will
but little avail us to have Christ revealed to us, if he is not also
revealed in us. He instantly prepared to obey, without hesitating as to
his worldly interest, credit, ease, or life itself. And what matter of
thanksgiving and joy is it to the churches of Christ, when they hear of
such instances to the praise of the glory of his grace, whether they
have ever seen them or not! They glorify God for his power and mercy in
saving such persons, and for all the service to his people and cause
that is done, and may be further expected from them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 2](gal002.md)

</div>
