<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen024)  [Next](gen026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 25:0</span></span>

([Gen 25:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)) Abraham's family by
Keturah, His death and burial.

([Gen 25:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011)) God blesses Isaac The
descendants of Ishmael.

([Gen 25:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019)) The birth of Esau and
Jacob.

([Gen 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027), [Gen
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028)) The different characters of
Esau and Jacob.

([Gen 25:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029)) Esau despises and
sells his birth-right.

[Genesis 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 25:1</span></span>

All the days, even of the best and greatest saints, are not remarkable
days; some slide on silently; such were these last days of Abraham. Here
is an account of Abraham's children by Keturah, and the disposition
which he made of his estate. After the birth of these sons, he set his
house in order, with prudence and justice. He did this while he yet
lived. It is wisdom for men to do what they find to do while they live,
as far as they can. Abraham lived 175 years; just one hundred years
after he came to Canaan; so long he was a sojourner in a strange
country. Whether our stay in this life be long or short, it matters but
little, provided we leave behind us a testimony to the faithfulness and
goodness of the Lord, and a good example to our families. We are told
that his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him. It seems that Abraham had
himself brought them together while he lived. Let us not close the
history of the life of Abraham without blessing God for such a testimony
of the triumph of faith.

[Genesis 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 25:11</span></span>

Ishmael had twelve sons, whose families became distinct tribes. They
peopled a very large country that lay between Egypt and Assyria, called
Arabia. The number and strength of this family were the fruit of the
promise, made to Hagar and to Abraham, concerning Ishmael.

[Genesis 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 25:19</span></span>

Isaac seems not to have been much tried, but to have spent his days in
quietness. Jacob and Esau were prayed for; their parents, after being
long childless, obtained them by prayer. The fulfilment of God's promise
is always sure, yet it is often slow. The faith of believers is tried,
their patience exercised, and mercies long waited for are more welcome
when they come. Isaac and Rebekah kept in view the promise of all
nations being blessed in their posterity, therefore were not only
desirous of children, but anxious concerning every thing which seemed to
mark their future character. In all our doubts we should inquire of the
Lord by prayer. In many of our conflicts with sin and temptation, we may
adopt Rebekah's words, "If it be so, why am I thus?" If a child of God,
why so careless or carnal? If not a child of God, why so afraid of, or
so burdened with sin?

[Genesis 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 25:27</span></span>

Esau hunted the beasts of the field with dexterity and success, till he
became a conqueror, ruling over his neighbours. Jacob was a plain man,
one that liked the true delights of retirement, better than all
pretended pleasures. He was a stranger and a pilgrim in his spirit, and
a shepherd all his days. Isaac and Rebekah had but these two children,
one was the father's darling, and the other the mother's. And though
godly parents must feel their affections most drawn over towards a godly
child, yet they will not show partiality. Let their affections lead them
to do what is just and equal to every child, or evils will arise.

[Genesis 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 25:29</span></span>

We have here the bargain made between Jacob and Esau about the right,
which was Esau's by birth, but Jacob's by promise. It was for a
spiritual privilege; and we see Jacob's desire of the birth-right, but
he sought to obtain it by crooked courses, not like his character as a
plain man. He was right, that he coveted earnestly the best gifts; he
was wrong, that he took advantage of his brother's need. The inheritance
of their father's worldly goods did not descend to Jacob, and was not
meant in this proposal. But it includeth the future possession of the
land of Canaan by his children's children, and the covenant made with
Abraham as to Christ the promised Seed. Believing Jacob valued these
above all things; unbelieving Esau despised them. Yet although we must
be of Jacob's judgment in seeking the birth-right, we ought carefully to
avoid all guile, in seeking to obtain even the greatest advantages.
Jacob's pottage pleased Esau's eye. "Give me some of that red;" for this
he was called Edom, or Red. Gratifying the sensual appetite ruins
thousands of precious souls. When men's hearts walk after their own
eyes, [Job 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007), and when they serve
their own bellies, they are sure to be punished. If we use ourselves to
deny ourselves, we break the force of most temptations. It cannot be
supposed that Esau was dying of hunger in Isaac's house. The words
signify, I am going towards death; he seems to mean, I shall never live
to inherit Canaan, or any of those future supposed blessings; and what
signifies it who has them when I am dead and gone. This would be the
language of profaneness, with which the apostle brands him, [Heb
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016); and this contempt of the
birth-right is blamed, ver. [Gen
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034). It is the greatest folly to
part with our interest in God, and Christ, and heaven, for the riches,
honours, and pleasures of this world; it is as bad a bargain as his who
sold a birth-right for a dish of pottage. Esau ate and drank, pleased
his palate, satisfied his appetite, and then carelessly rose up and went
his way, without any serious thought, or any regret, about the bad
bargain he had made. Thus Esau despised his birth-right. By his neglect
and contempt afterwards, and by justifying himself in what he had done,
he put the bargain past recall. People are ruined, not so much by doing
what is amiss, as by doing it and not repenting of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 26](gen026)

</div>
