<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen032)  [Next](gen034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 33:0</span></span>

(v. 1-16) The friendly meeting of Jacob and Esau.

([Gen 33:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017)) Jacob comes to Succoth
and Shalem, He builds an altar.

[Genesis 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 33:1</span></span>

Jacob, having by prayer committed his case to God, went on his way. Come
what will, nothing can come amiss to him whose heart is fixed, trusting
in God. Jacob bowed to Esau. A humble, submissive behaviour goes far
towards turning away wrath. Esau embraced Jacob. God has the hearts of
all men in his hands, and can turn them when and how he pleases. It is
not in vain to trust in God, and to call upon him in the day of trouble.
And when a man's ways please the Lord he maketh even his enemies to be
at peace with him. Esau receives Jacob as a brother, and much tenderness
passes between them. Esau asks, Who are those with thee? To this common
question, Jacob spoke like himself, like a man whose eyes are ever
directed towards the Lord. Jacob urged Esau, though his fear was over,
and he took his present. It is well when men's religion makes them
generous, free-hearted, and open-handed. But Jacob declined Esau's offer
to accompany him. It is not desirable to be too intimate with superior
ungodly relations, who will expect us to join in their vanities, or at
least to wink at them, though they blame, and perhaps mock at, our
religion. Such will either be a snare to us, or offended with us. We
shall venture the loss of all things, rather than endanger our souls, if
we know their value; rather than renounce Christ, if we truly love him.
And let Jacob's care and tender attention to his family and flocks
remind us of the good Shepherd of our souls, who gathers the lambs with
his arm, and carries them in his bosom, and gently leads those that are
with young, [Isa 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011). As parents,
teachers or pastors, we should all follow his example.

[Genesis 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 33:17</span></span>

Jacob did not content himself with words of thanks for God's favour to
him, but gave real thanks. Also he kept up religion, and the worship of
God in his family. Where we have a tent, God must have an altar. Jacob
dedicated this altar to the honour of El-elohe-Israel, God, the God of
Israel; to the honour of God, the only living and true God; and to the
honour of the God of Israel, as a God in covenant with him. Israel's God
is Israel's glory. Blessed be his name, he is still the mighty God, the
God of Israel. May we praise his name, and rejoice in his love, through
our pilgrimage here on earth, and for ever in the heavenly Canaan.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 34](gen034)

</div>
