<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen000)  [Next](gen002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

([Gen 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)) God creates heaven and earth.

([Gen 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)) The creation of light.

([Gen 1:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)) God separates the earth
from the waters, and makes it fruitful.

([Gen 1:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)) God forms the sun,
moon, and stars.

([Gen 1:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)) Animals created.

([Gen 1:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)) Man created in the
image of God.

([Gen 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029), [Gen
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#030)) Food appointed.

([Gen 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031)) The work of creation ended
and approved.

[Genesis 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 1:1</span></span>

The first verse of the Bible gives us a satisfying and useful account of
the origin of the earth and the heavens. The faith of humble Christians
understands this better than the fancy of the most learned men. From
what we see of heaven and earth, we learn the power of the great
Creator. And let our make and place as men, remind us of our duty as
Christians, always to keep heaven in our eye, and the earth under our
feet. The Son of God, one with the Father, was with him when he made the
world; nay, we are often told that the world was made by him, and
nothing was made without him. Oh, what high thoughts should there be in
our minds, of that great God whom we worship, and of that great Mediator
in whose name we pray! And here, at the beginning of the sacred volume,
we read of that Divine Spirit, whose work upon the heart of man is so
often mentioned in other parts of the Bible. Observe, that at first
there was nothing desirable to be seen, for the world was without form,
and void; it was confusion, and emptiness. In like manner the work of
grace in the soul is a new creation: and in a graceless soul, one that
is not born again, there is disorder, confusion, and every evil work: it
is empty of all good, for it is without God; it is dark, it is darkness
itself: this is our condition by nature, till Almighty grace works a
change in us.

[Genesis 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 1:3</span></span>

God said, Let there be light; he willed it, and at once there was light.
Oh, the power of the word of God! And in the new creation, the first
thing that is wrought in the soul is light: the blessed Spirit works
upon the will and affections by enlightening the understanding. Those
who by sin were darkness, by grace become light in the Lord. Darkness
would have been always upon fallen man, if the Son of God had not come
and given us understanding, [Jo1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020).
The light which God willed, he approved of. God divided the light from
the darkness; for what fellowship has light with darkness? In heaven
there is perfect light, and no darkness at all; in hell, utter darkness,
and no gleam of light. The day and the night are the Lord's; let us use
both to his honour, by working for him every day, and resting in him
every night, meditating in his law both day and night.

[Genesis 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 1:6</span></span>

The earth was emptiness, but by a word spoken, it became full of God's
riches, and his they are still. Though the use of them is allowed to
man, they are from God, and to his service and honour they must be used.
The earth, at his command, brings forth grass, herbs, and fruits. God
must have the glory of all the benefit we receive from the produce of
the earth. If we have, through grace, an interest in Him who is the
Fountain, we may rejoice in him when the streams of temporal mercies are
dried up.

[Genesis 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 1:14</span></span>

In the fourth day's work, the creation of the sun, moon, and stars is
accounted for. All these are the works of God. The stars are spoken of
as they appear to our eyes, without telling their number, nature, place,
size, or motions; for the Scriptures were written, not to gratify
curiosity, or make us astronomers, but to lead us to God, and make us
saints. The lights of heaven are made to serve him; they do it
faithfully, and shine in their season without fail. We are set as lights
in this world to serve God; but do we in like manner answer the end of
our creation? We do not: our light does not shine before God, as his
lights shine before us. We burn our Master's candles, but do not mind
our Master's work.

[Genesis 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 1:20</span></span>

God commanded the fish and fowl to be produced. This command he himself
executed. Insects, which are more numerous than the birds and beasts,
and as curious, seem to have been part of this day's work. The Creator's
wisdom and power are to be admired as much in an ant as in an elephant.
The power of God's providence preserves all things, and fruitfulness is
the effect of his blessing.

[Genesis 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 1:26</span></span>

Man was made last of all the creatures: this was both an honour and a
favour to him. Yet man was made the same day that the beasts were; his
body was made of the same earth with theirs; and while he is in the
body, he inhabits the same earth with them. God forbid that by indulging
the body, and the desires of it, we should make ourselves like the
beasts that perish! Man was to be a creature different from all that had
been hitherto made. Flesh and spirit, heaven and earth, must be put
together in him. God said, "Let us make man." Man, when he was made, was
to glorify the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Into that great name we are
baptized, for to that great name we owe our being. It is the soul of man
that especially bears God's image. Man was made upright, [Ecc
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#029). His understanding saw Divine
things clearly and truly; there were no errors or mistakes in his
knowledge; his will consented at once, and in all things, to the will of
God. His affections were all regular, and he had no bad appetites or
passions. His thoughts were easily brought and fixed to the best
subjects. Thus holy, thus happy, were our first parents in having the
image of God upon them. But how is this image of God upon man defaced!
May the Lord renew it upon our souls by his grace!

[Genesis 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 1:29</span></span>

Herbs and fruits must be man's food, including corn, and all the
products of the earth. Let God's people cast their care upon him, and
not be troubled about what they shall eat, and what they shall drink. He
that feeds his birds will not starve his babes.

[Genesis 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 1:31</span></span>

When we come to think about our works, we find, to our shame, that much
has been very bad; but when God saw his work, all was very good. Good,
for it was all just as the Creator would have it to be. All his works,
in all places of his dominion, bless him; and therefore, bless thou the
Lord, O my soul. Let us bless God for the gospel of Christ, and when we
consider his almighty power, let us sinners flee from the wrath to come.
If new-created unto the image of God in holiness, we shall at length
enter the "new heavens and new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 2](gen002)

</div>
