<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen015)  [Next](gen017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 16:0</span></span>

([Gen 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001).md) Sarai gives Hagar to
Abram.

([Gen 16:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#004).md) Hagar's misbehaviour to
Sarai.

([Gen 16:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007).md) The Angel commands
Hagar to return, The promise to her Birth of Ishmael.

[Genesis 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 16:1</span></span>

Sarai, no longer expecting to have children herself, proposed to Abram
to take another wife, whose children she might; her slave, whose
children would be her property. This was done without asking counsel of
the Lord. Unbelief worked, God's almighty power was forgotten. It was a
bad example, and a source of manifold uneasiness. In every relation and
situation in life there is some cross for us to bear: much of the
exercise of faith consists in patiently submitting, in waiting the
Lord's time, and using only those means which he appoints for the
removal of the cross. Foul temptations may have very fair pretences, and
be coloured with that which is very plausible. Fleshly wisdom puts us
out of God's way. This would not be the case, if we would ask counsel of
God by his word and by prayer, before we attempt that which is doubtful.

[Genesis 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 16:4</span></span>

Abram's unhappy marriage to Hagar very soon made a great deal of
mischief. We may thank ourselves for the guilt and grief that follow us,
when we go out of the way of our duty. See it in this case, Passionate
people often quarrel with others, for things of which they themselves
must bear the blame. Sarai had given her maid to Abram, yet she cries
out, My wrong be upon thee. That is never said wisely, which pride and
anger put into our mouths. Those are not always in the right, who are
most loud and forward in appealing to God: such rash and bold
imprecations commonly speak guilt and a bad cause. Hagar forgot that she
herself had first given the provocation, by despising her mistress.
Those that suffer for their faults, ought to bear it patiently, [Pe1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020.md).

[Genesis 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 16:7</span></span>

Hagar was out of her place, and out of the way of her duty, and going
further astray, when the Angel found her. It is a great mercy to be
stopped in a sinful way, either by conscience or by providence. Whence
comest thou? Consider that thou art running from duty, and the
privileges thou wast blest with in Abram's tent. It is good to live in a
religious family, which those ought to consider who have this advantage.
Whither wilt thou go? Thou art running into sin; if Hagar return to
Egypt, she will return to idol gods, and into danger in the wilderness
through which she must travel. Recollecting who we are, would often
teach us our duty. Inquiring whence we came, would show us our sin and
folly. Considering whither we shall go, discovers our danger and misery.
And those who leave their space and duty, must hasten their return, how
mortifying soever it be. The declaration of the Angel, "I will," shows
this Angel was the eternal Word and Son of God. Hagar could not but
admire the Lord's mercy, and feel, Have I, who am so unworthy, been
favoured with a gracious visit from the Lord? She was brought to a
better temper, returned, and by her behaviour softened Sarai, and
received more gentle treatment. Would that we were always suitably
impressed with this thought, Thou God seest me!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 17](gen017.md)

</div>
