<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen044)  [Next](gen046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 45:0</span></span>

([Gen 45:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)) Joseph comforts his
brethren, and sends for his father.

([Gen 45:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016)) Pharaoh confirms
Joseph's invitation, Joseph's gifts to his brethren.

([Gen 45:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025)) Jacob receives the
news of Joseph's being alive.

[Genesis 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 45:1</span></span>

Joseph let Judah go on, and heard all he had to say. He found his
brethren humbled for their sins, mindful of himself, for Judah had
mentioned him twice in his speech, respectful to their father, and very
tender of their brother Benjamin. Now they were ripe for the comfort he
designed, by making himself known. Joseph ordered all his attendants to
withdraw. Thus Christ makes himself and his loving-kindness known to his
people, out of the sight and hearing of the world. Joseph shed tears of
tenderness and strong affection, and with these threw off that austerity
with which he had hitherto behaved toward his brethren. This represents
the Divine compassion toward returning penitents. "I am Joseph, your
brother." This would humble them yet more for their sin in selling him,
but would encourage them to hope for kind treatment. Thus, when Christ
would convince Paul, he said, I am Jesus; and when he would comfort his
disciples, he said, It is I, be not afraid. When Christ manifests
himself to his people, he encourages them to draw near to him with a
true heart. Joseph does so, and shows them, that whatever they thought
to do against him, God had brought good out of it. Sinners must grieve
and be angry with themselves for their sins, though God brings good out
of it, for that is no thanks to them. The agreement between all this,
and the case of a sinner, on Christ's manifesting himself to his soul,
is very striking. He does not, on this account, think sin a less, but a
greater evil; and yet he is so armed against despair, as even to rejoice
in what God hath wrought, while he trembles in thinking of the dangers
and destruction from which he has escaped. Joseph promises to take care
of his father and all the family. It is the duty of children, if the
necessity of their parents at any time require it, to support and supply
them to the utmost of their ability; this is showing piety at home, [Ti1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#004). After Joseph had embraced
Benjamin, he caressed them all, and then his brethren talked with him
freely of all the affairs of their father's house. After the tokens of
true reconciliation with the Lord Jesus, sweet communion with him
follows.

[Genesis 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 45:16</span></span>

Pharaoh was kind to Joseph, and to his relations for his sake. Egypt
would make up the losses of their removal. Thus those for whom Christ
intends his heavenly glory, ought not to regard the things of this
world. The best of its enjoyments are but lumber; we cannot make sure of
them while here, much less can we carry them away with us. Let us not
set our eyes or hearts upon the world; there are better things for us in
that blessed land, whither Christ, our Joseph, is gone to prepare a
place. Joseph dismissed his brethren with a seasonable caution, "See
that ye fall not out by the way." He knew they were too apt to be
quarrelsome; and having forgiven them all, he lays this charge upon
them, not to upbraid one another. This command our Lord Jesus has given
to us, that we love one another, and that whatever happens, or has
happened, we fall not out. For we are brethren, we have all one Father.
We are all guilty, and instead of quarrelling with one another, have
reason to fall out with ourselves. We are, or hope to be, forgiven of
God, whom we have all offended, and, therefore, should be ready to
forgive one another. We are "by the way," a way through the land of
Egypt, where we have many eyes upon us, that seek advantage against us;
a way that leads to the heavenly Canaan, where we hope to be for ever in
perfect peace.

[Genesis 45:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 45:25</span></span>

To hear that Joseph is alive, is too good news to be true; Jacob faints,
for he believes it not. We faint, because we do not believe. At length,
Jacob is convinced of the truth. Jacob was old, and did not expect to
live long. He says, Let my eyes be refreshed with this sight before they
are closed, and then I need no more to make me happy in this world.
Behold Jesus manifesting himself as a Brother and a Friend to those who
once were his despisers, his enemies. He assures them of his love and
the riches of his grace. He commands them to lay aside envy, anger,
malice, and strife, and to live in peace with each other. He teaches
them to give up the world for him and his fulness. He supplies all that
is needful to bring them home to himself, that where he is they may be
also. And though, when he at last sends for his people, they may for a
time feel some doubts and fears, yet the thought of seeing his glory and
of being with him, will enable them to say, It is enough, I am willing
to die; and I go to see, and to be with the Beloved of my soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 46](gen046)

</div>
