<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen045)  [Next](gen047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 46:0</span></span>

([Gen 46:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)) God's promises to Jacob.

(v. 5-27) Jacob and his family go to Egypt.

([Gen 46:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)) Joseph meets his
father and his brethren.

[Genesis 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 46:1</span></span>

Even as to those events and undertakings which appear most joyful, we
should seek counsel, assistance, and a blessing from the Lord. Attending
on his ordinances, and receiving the pledges of his covenant love, we
expect his presence, and that peace which it confers. In all removals we
should be reminded of our removal out of this world. Nothing can
encourage us to fear no evil when passing through the valley of the
shadow of death, but the presence of Christ.

[Genesis 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 46:5</span></span>

We have here a particular account of Jacob's family. Though the
fulfilling of promises is always sure, yet it is often slow. It was now
215 years since God had promised Abraham to make of him a great nation,
[Gen 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002); yet that branch of his
seed, to which the promise was made sure, had only increased to seventy,
of whom this particular account is kept, to show the power of God in
making these seventy become a vast multitude.

[Genesis 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 46:28</span></span>

It was justice to Pharaoh to let him know that such a family was come to
settle in his dominions. If others put confidence in us, we must not be
so base as to abuse it by imposing upon them. But how shall Joseph
dispose of his brethren? Time was, when they were contriving to be rid
of him; now he is contriving to settle them to their advantage; this is
rendering good for evil. He would have them live by themselves, in the
land of Goshen, which lay nearest to Canaan. Shepherds were an
abomination to the Egyptians. Yet Joseph would have them not ashamed to
own this as their occupation before Pharaoh. He might have procured
places for them at court or in the army. But such preferments would have
exposed them to the envy of the Egyptians, and might have tempted them
to forget Canaan and the promise made unto their fathers. An honest
calling is no disgrace, nor ought we to account it so, but rather reckon
it a shame to be idle, or to have nothing to do. It is generally best
for people to abide in the callings they have been bred to and used to.
Whatever employment and condition God in his providence has allotted for
us, let us suit ourselves to it, satisfy ourselves with it, and not mind
high things. It is better to be the credit of a mean post, than the
shame of a high one. If we wish to destroy our souls, or the souls of
our children, then let us seek for ourselves, and for them, great
things; but if not, it becomes us, having food and raiment, therewith to
be content.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 47](gen047)

</div>
