<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 8:0</span></span>

([Gen 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)) God remembers Noah, and
dries up the waters.

([Gen 8:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004)) The ark rests on Ararat,
Noah sends forth a raven and a dove.

([Gen 8:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013)) Noah being commanded,
goes out of the ark.

([Gen 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)) Noah offers sacrifice,
God promises to curse the earth no more.

[Genesis 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 8:1</span></span>

The whole race of mankind, except Noah and his family, were now dead, so
that God's remembering Noah, was the return of his mercy to mankind, of
whom he would not make a full end. The demands of Divine justice had
been answered by the ruin of sinners. God sent his wind to dry the
earth, and seal up his waters. The same hand that brings the desolation,
must bring the deliverance; to that hand, therefore, we must ever look.
When afflictions have done the work for which they are sent, whether
killing work or curing work, they will be taken away. As the earth was
not drowned in a day, so it was not dried in a day. God usually works
deliverance for his people gradually, that the day of small things may
not be despised, nor the day of great things despaired of.

[Genesis 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 8:4</span></span>

The ark rested upon a mountain, whither it was directed by the wise and
gracious providence of God, that might rest the sooner. God has times
and places of rest for his people after their tossing; and many times he
provides for their seasonable and comfortable settlement, without their
own contrivance, and quite beyond their own foresight. God had told Noah
when the flood would come, yet he did not give him an account by
revelation, at what times and by what steps it should go away. The
knowledge of the former was necessary to his preparing the ark; but the
knowledge of the latter would serve only to gratify curiosity; and
concealing it from him would exercise his faith and patience. Noah sent
forth a raven from the ark, which went flying about, and feeding on the
carcasses that floated. Noah then sent forth a dove, which returned the
first time without good news; but the second time, she brought an olive
leaf in her bill, plucked off, plainly showing that trees, fruit trees,
began to appear above water. Noah sent forth the dove the second time,
seven days after the first, and the third time was after seven days
also; probably on the sabbath day. Having kept the sabbath with his
little church, he expected especial blessings from Heaven, and inquired
concerning them. The dove is an emblem of a gracious soul, that, finding
no solid peace of satisfaction in this deluged, defiling world, returns
to Christ as to its ark, as to its Noah, its rest. The defiling world,
returns to Christ as to its ark, as to its Noah, its rest. The carnal
heart, like the raven, takes up with the world, and feeds on the carrion
it finds there; but return thou to my rest, O my soul; to thy Noah, so
the word is, [Psa 116:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#007). And as Noah
put forth his hand, and took the dove, and pulled her to him, into the
ark, so Christ will save, and help, and welcome those that flee to him
for rest.

[Genesis 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 8:13</span></span>

God consults our benefit, rather than our desires; he knows what is good
for us better than we do for ourselves, and how long it is fit our
restraints should continue, and desired mercies should be delayed. We
would go out of the ark before the ground is dried; and perhaps, if the
door, is shut, are ready to thrust off the covering, and to climb up
some other way; but God's time of showing mercy is the best time. As
Noah had a command to go into the ark, so, how tedious soever his
confinement there was, he would wait for a command to go out of it
again. We must in all our ways acknowledge God, and set him before us in
all our removals. Those only go under God's protection, who follow God's
direction, and submit to him.

[Genesis 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 8:20</span></span>

Noah was now gone out into a desolate world, where, one might have
thought, his first care would have been to build a house for himself,
but he begins with an alter for God. He begins well, that begins with
God. Though Noah's stock of cattle was small, and that saved at great
care and pains, yet he did not grudge to serve God out of it. Serving
God with our little is the way to make it more; we must never think that
is wasted with which God is honoured. The first thing done in the new
world was an act of worship. We are now to express our thankfulness, not
by burnt-offerings, but by praise, and pious devotions and conversation.
God was well pleased with what was done. But the burning flesh could no
more please God, than the blood of bulls and goats, except as typical of
the sacrifice of Christ, and expressing Noah's humble faith and
devotedness to God. The flood washed away the race of wicked men, but it
did not remove sin from man's nature, who being conceived and born in
sin, thinks, devises, and loves wickedness, even from his youth, and
that as much since the flood as before. But God graciously declared he
never would drown the world again. While the earth remains, and man upon
it, there shall be summer and winter. It is plain that this earth is not
to remain always. It, and all the works in it, must shortly be burned
up; and we look for new heavens and a new earth, when all these things
shall be dissolved. But as long as it does remain, God's providence will
cause the course of times and seasons to go on, and makes each to know
its place. And on this word we depend, that thus it shall be. We see
God's promises to the creatures made good, and may infer that his
promises to all believers shall be so.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009)

</div>
