<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen014)  [Next](gen016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 15:0</span></span>

([Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)) God encourages Abram.

([Gen 15:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002)) The Divine promise,
Abraham is justified by faith.

([Gen 15:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007)) God promises Canaan to
Abraham for an inheritance.

([Gen 15:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#012)) The promise confirmed
in a vision.

([Gen 15:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017)) The promise confirmed
by a sign.

[Genesis 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 15:1</span></span>

God assured Abram of safety and happiness; that he should for ever be
safe. I am thy shield; or, I am a shield to thee, present with thee,
actually caring for thee. The consideration that God himself is, and
will be a shield to his people, to secure them from all evils, a shield
ready to them, and a shield round about them, should silence all
perplexing, tormenting fears.

[Genesis 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 15:2</span></span>

Though we must never complain of God, yet we have leave to complain to
him; and to state all our grievances. It is ease to a burdened spirit,
to open its case to a faithful and compassionate friend. Abram's
complaint is, that he had no child; that he was never likely to have
any; that the want of a son was so great a trouble to him, that it took
away all his comfort. If we suppose that Abram looked no further than
outward comfort, this complaint was to be blamed. But if we suppose that
Abram herein had reference to the promised Seed, his desire was very
commendable. Till we have evidence of our interest in Christ, we should
not rest satisfied; what will all avail me, if I go Christless? If we
continue instant in prayer, yet pray with humble submission to the
Divine will, we shall not seek in vain. God gave Abram an express
promise of a son. Christians may believe in God with respect to the
common concerns of this life; but the faith by which they are justified,
always has respect to the person and work of Christ. Abram believed in
God as promising Christ; they believe in him as having raised him from
the dead, [Rom 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#024). Through faith in
his blood they obtain forgiveness of sins.

[Genesis 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 15:7</span></span>

Assurance was given to Abram of the land of Canaan for an inheritance.
God never promises more than he is able to perform, as men often do.
Abram did as God commanded him. He divided the beasts in the midst,
according to the ceremony used in confirming covenants, [Jer
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018), [Jer
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#019). Having prepared according to
God's appointment, he set himself to wait for the sign God might give
him. A watch must be kept upon our spiritual sacrifices. When vain
thoughts, like these fowls, come down upon our sacrifices, we must drive
them away, and seek to attend on God without distraction.

[Genesis 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 15:12</span></span>

A deep sleep fell upon Abram; with this sleep a horror of great darkness
fell upon him: a sudden change. The children of light do not always walk
in the light. Several things were then foretold. 1. The suffering state
of Abram's seed for a long time. They shall be strangers. The heirs of
heaven are strangers on earth. They shall be servants; but Canaanites
serve under a curse, the Hebrews under a blessing. They shall be
suffers. Those that are blessed and beloved of God, are often sorely
afflicted by wicked men. 2. The judgment of the enemies of Abram's seed.
Though God may allow persecutors and oppressors to trample upon his
people a great while, he will certainly reckon with them at last. 3.
That great event, the deliverance of Abram's seed out of Egypt, is here
foretold. 4. Their happy settlement in Canaan. They shall come hither
again. The measure of sin fills gradually. Some people's measure of sin
fills slowly. The knowledge of future events would seldom add to our
comfort. In the most favoured families, and most happy lives, there are
so many afflictions, that it is merciful in God to conceal what will
befall us and ours.

[Genesis 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 15:17</span></span>

The smoking furnace and the burning lamp, probably represented the
Israelites' severe trials and joyful deliverance, with their gracious
supports in the mean time. It is probable that this furnace and lamp,
which passed between the pieces, burned and consumed them, and so
completed the sacrifice, and testified God's acceptance of it. So it
intimates that God's covenants with man are made by sacrifice, [Psa
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#005). And we may know that he accepts
our sacrifices, if he kindles in our souls pious and devout affections.
The bounds of the land granted are stated. Several nations, or tribes,
are spoken of, that must be cast out to make room for the seed of Abram.
In this chapter we perceive in Abram faith struggling against, and
triumphing over, unbelief. Wonder not, believers, if you meet with
seasons of darkness and distress. But it is not the will of God that you
should be cast down: fear not; for all that he was to Abram he will be
to you.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 16](gen016)

</div>
