<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen030)  [Next](gen032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 31:0</span></span>

(v. 1-21) Jacob departs secretly.

([Gen 31:23-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#023).md) Laban pursues Jacob.

([Gen 31:36-42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#036).md) Jacob's complaint of
Laban's conduct.

([Gen 31:43-55](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#043).md) Their covenant at
Galeed.

[Genesis 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 31:1</span></span>

The affairs of these families are related very minutely, while (what are
called) the great events of states and kingdoms at that period, are not
mentioned. The Bible teaches people the common duties of life, how to
serve God, how to enjoy the blessings he bestows, and to do good in the
various stations and duties of life. Selfish men consider themselves
robbed of all that goes past them, and covetousness will even swallow up
natural affection. Men's overvaluing worldly wealth is that error which
is the root of covetousness, envy, and all evil. The men of the world
stand in each other's way, and every one seems to be taking away from
the rest; hence discontent, envy, and discord. But there are possessions
that will suffice for all; happy they who seek them in the first place.
In all our removals we should have respect to the command and promise of
God. If He be with us, we need not fear. The perils which surround us
are so many, that nothing else can really encourage our hearts. To
remember favoured seasons of communion with God, is very refreshing when
in difficulties; and we should often recollect our vows, that we fail
not to fulfil them.

[Genesis 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 31:22</span></span>

God can put a bridle in the mouth of wicked men, to restrain their
malice, though he do not change their hearts. Though they have no love
to God's people, they will pretend to it, and try to make a merit of
necessity. Foolish Laban! to call those things his gods which could be
stolen! Enemies may steal our goods, but not our God. Here Laban lays to
Jacob's charge things that he knew not. Those who commit their cause to
God, are not forbidden to plead it themselves with meekness and fear.
When we read of Rachel's stealing her father's images, what a scene of
iniquity opens! The family of Nahor, who left the idolatrous Chaldees;
is this family itself become idolatrous? It is even so. The truth seems
to be, that they were like some in after-times, who sware by the Lord
and by Malcham, [Zep 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005.md); and like
others in our times, who wish to serve both God and mammon. Great
numbers will acknowledge the true God in words, but their hearts and
houses are the abodes of spiritual idolatry. When a man gives himself up
to covetousness, like Laban, the world is his god; and he has only to
reside among gross idolaters in order to become one, or at least a
favourer of their abominations.

[Genesis 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">gen 31:36</span></span>

If Jacob were willingly consumed with heat in the day, and frost by
night, to become the son-in-law of Laban, what should we refuse to
endure, to become the sons of God? Jacob speaks of God as the God of his
father; he thought himself unworthy to be regarded, but was beloved for
his father's sake. He calls him the God of Abraham, and the fear of
Isaac; for Abraham was dead, and gone to that world where perfect love
casts out fear; but Isaac was yet alive, sanctifying the Lord in his
heart, as his fear and his dread.

[Genesis 31:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">gen 31:43</span></span>

Laban could neither justify himself nor condemn Jacob, therefore desires
to hear no more of that matter. He is not willing to own himself in
fault, as he ought to have done. But he proposes a covenant of
friendship between them, to which Jacob readily agrees. A heap of stones
was raised, to keep up the memory of the event, writing being then not
known or little used. A sacrifice of peace offerings was offered. Peace
with God puts true comfort into our peace with our friends. They did eat
bread together, partaking of the feast upon the sacrifice. In ancient
times covenants of friendship were ratified by the parties eating and
drinking together. God is judge between contending parties, and he will
judge righteously; whoever do wrong, it is at their peril. They gave a
new name to the place, The heap of witness. After this angry parley,
they part friends. God is often better to us than our fears, and
overrules the spirits of men in our favour, beyond what we could have
expected; for it is not in vain to trust in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 32](gen032.md)

</div>
