<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen017)  [Next](gen019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 18:0</span></span>

([Gen 18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)) The Lord appears to
Abraham.

([Gen 18:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009)) Sarah's unbelief
reproved.

([Gen 18:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016)) God reveals to Abraham
the destruction of Sodom.

([Gen 18:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)) Abraham's intercession
for Sodom.

[Genesis 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 18:1</span></span>

Abraham was waiting to entertain any weary traveller, for inns were not
to be met with as among us. While Abraham was thus sitting, he saw three
men coming. These were three heavenly beings in human bodies. Some think
they were all created angels; others, that one of them was the Son of
God, the Angel of the covenant. Washing the feet is customary in those
hot climates, where only sandals are worn. We should not be forgetful to
entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained angels unawares,
[Heb 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#002); nay, the Lord of angels
himself; as we always do, when for his sake we entertain the least of
his brethren. Cheerful and obliging manners in showing kindness, are
great ornaments to piety. Though our condescending Lord vouchsafes not
personal visits to us, yet still by his Spirit he stands at the door and
knocks; when we are inclined to open, he deigns to enter; and by his
gracious consolations he provides a rich feast, of which we partake with
him, [Rev 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#020).

[Genesis 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 18:9</span></span>

Where is Sarah thy wife? was asked. Note the answer, In the tent. Just
at hand, in her proper place, occupied in her household concerns. There
is nothing got by gadding. Those are most likely to receive comfort from
God and his promises, who are in their proper place, and in the way of
their duty, [Luk 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008). We are slow of
heart to believe, and need line upon line to the same purport. The
blessings others have from common providence, believers have from the
Divine promise, which makes them very sweet, and very sure. The
spiritual seed of Abraham owe their life, and joy, and hope, and all, to
the promise. Sarah thinks this too good news to be true; she laughed,
and therefore cannot as yet find in her heart to believe it. Sarah
laughed. We might not have thought there was a difference between
Sarah's laughter and Abraham's, [Luk
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#017); but He who searches the heart,
saw that the one sprung from unbelief, and the other from faith. She
denied that she had laughed. One sin commonly brings in another, and it
is not likely we shall strictly keep to truth, when we question the
Divine truth. But whom the Lord loves he will rebuke, convict, silence,
and bring to repentance, and if they sin before him.

[Genesis 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 18:16</span></span>

The two who are supposed to have been created angels went toward Sodom.
The one who is called Jehovah throughout the chapter, continued with
Abraham, and would not hide from him the thing he intended to do. Though
God long forbears with sinners, from which they fancy that the Lord does
not see, and does not regard; yet when the day of his wrath comes, he
will look toward them. The Lord will give Abraham an opportunity to
intercede with him, and shows him the reason of his conduct. Consider,
as a very bright part of Abraham's character and example, that he not
only prayed with his family, but he was very careful to teach and rule
them well. Those who expect family blessings must make conscience of
family duty. Abraham did not fill their heads with matters of doubtful
dispute; but he taught them to be serious and devout in the worship of
God, and to be honest in their dealings with all men. Of how few may
such a character be given in our days! How little care is taken by
masters of families to ground those under them in the principles of
religion! Do we watch from sabbath to sabbath whether they go forward or
backward?

[Genesis 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 18:23</span></span>

Here is the first solemn prayer upon record in the Bible; and it is a
prayer for the sparing of Sodom. Abraham prayed earnestly that Sodom
might be spared, if but a few righteous persons should be found in it.
Come and learn from Abraham what compassion we should feel for sinners,
and how earnestly we should pray for them. We see here that the
effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Abraham,
indeed, failed in his request for the whole place, but Lot was
miraculously delivered. Be encouraged then to expect, by earnest prayer,
the blessing of God upon your families, your friends, your
neighbourhood. To this end you must not only pray, but you must live
like Abraham. He knew the Judge of all the earth would do right. He does
not plead that the wicked may be spared for their own sake, or because
it would be severe to destroy them, but for the sake of the righteous
who might be found among them. And righteousness only can be made a plea
before God. How then did Christ make intercession for transgressors? Not
by blaming the Divine law, nor by alleging ought in extenuation or
excuse of human guilt; but by pleading HIS OWN obedience unto death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 19](gen019)

</div>
