<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen011)  [Next](gen013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 12:0</span></span>

([Gen 12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001).md) God calls Abram, and
blesses him with a promise of Christ.

([Gen 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004.md), [Gen
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#005).md) Abram departs from Haran.

([Gen 12:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006).md) He journeys through
Canaan, and worships God in that land.

([Gen 12:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010).md) Abram is driven by a
famine into Egypt, He feigns his wife to be his sister.

[Genesis 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 12:1</span></span>

God made choice of Abram, and singled him out from among his
fellow-idolaters, that he might reserve a people for himself, among whom
his true worship might be maintained till the coming of Christ. From
henceforward Abram and his seed are almost the only subject of the
history in the Bible. Abram was tried whether he loved God better than
all, and whether he could willingly leave all to go with God. His
kindred and his father's house were a constant temptation to him, he
could not continue among them without danger of being infected by them.
Those who leave their sins, and turn to God, will be unspeakable gainers
by the change. The command God gave to Abram, is much the same with the
gospel call, for natural affection must give way to Divine grace. Sin,
and all the occasions of it, must be forsaken; particularly bad company.
Here are many great and precious promises. All God's precepts are
attended with promises to the obedient. 1. I will make of thee a great
nation. When God took Abram from his own people, he promised to make him
the head of another people. 2. I will bless thee. Obedient believers
shall be sure to inherit the blessing. 3. I will make thy name great.
The name of obedient believers shall certainly be made great. 4. Thou
shalt be a blessing. Good men are the blessings of their country. 5. I
will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that curseth thee. God
will take care that none are losers, by any service done for his people.
6. In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed. Jesus Christ
is the great blessing of the world, the greatest that ever the world
possessed. All the true blessedness the world is now, or ever shall be
possessed of, is owing to Abram and his posterity. Through them we have
a Bible, a Saviour, and a gospel. They are the stock on which the
Christian church is grafted.

[Genesis 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 12:4</span></span>

Abram believed that the blessing of the Almighty would make up for all
he could lose or leave behind, supply all his wants, and answer and
exceed all his desires; and he knew that nothing but misery would follow
disobedience. Such believers, being justified by faith in Christ, have
peace with God. They hold on their way to Canaan. They are not
discouraged by the difficulties in their way, nor drawn aside by the
delights they meet with. Those who set out for heaven must persevere to
the end. What we undertake, in obedience to God's command, and in humble
attendance on his providence, will certainly succeed, and end with
comfort at last. Canaan was not, as other lands, a mere outward
possession, but a type of heaven, and in this respect the patriarchs so
earnestly prized it.

[Genesis 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 12:6</span></span>

Abram found the country peopled by Canaanites, who were bad neighbours.
He journeyed, going on still. Sometimes it is the lot of good men to be
unsettled, and often to remove into various states. Believers must look
on themselves as strangers and sojourners in this world, [Heb
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008.md), [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md), [Heb
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014.md). But observe how much comfort
Abram had in God. When he could have little satisfaction in converse
with the Canaanites whom he found there, he had abundance of pleasure in
communion with that God, who brought him thither, and did not leave him.
Communion with God is kept up by the word and by prayer. God reveals
himself and his favours to his people by degrees; before, he had
promised to show Abram this land, now, to give it to him: as grace is
growing, so is comfort. It should seem, Abram understood it also as a
grant of a better land, of which this was a type; for he looked for a
heavenly country, [Heb 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016.md). As soon
as Abram was got to Canaan, though he was but a stranger and sojourner
there, yet he set up, and kept up, the worship of God in his family. He
not only minded the ceremonial part of religion, the offering of
sacrifice; but he made conscience of seeking his God, and calling on his
name; that spiritual sacrifice with which God is well pleased. He
preached concerning the name of the Lord; he taught his family and
neighbours the knowledge of the true God, and his holy religion. The way
of family worship is a good old way, no new thing, but the ancient usage
of the saints. Abram was rich, and had a numerous family, was now
unsettled, and in the midst of enemies; yet, wherever he pitched his
tent, he built an altar: wherever we go, let us not fail to take our
religion along with us.

[Genesis 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 12:10</span></span>

There is no state on earth free from trials, nor any character free from
blemishes. There was famine in Canaan, the glory of all lands, and
unbelief, with the evils it ever brings, in Abram the father of the
faithful. Perfect happiness and perfect purity dwell only in heaven.
Abram, when he must for a time quit Canaan, goes to Egypt, that he might
not seem to look back, and meaning to tarry there no longer than
needful. There Abram dissembled his relation to Sarai, equivocated, and
taught his wife and his attendants to do so too. He concealed a truth,
so as in effect to deny it, and exposed thereby both his wife and the
Egyptians to sin. The grace Abram was most noted for, was faith; yet he
thus fell through unbelief and distrust of the Divine providence, even
after God had appeared to him twice. Alas, what will become of weak
faith, when strong faith is thus shaken! If God did not deliver us, many
a time, out of straits and distresses which we bring ourselves into, by
our own sin and folly, we should be ruined. He deals not with us
according to our deserts. Those are happy chastisements that hinder us
in a sinful way, and bring us to our duty, particularly to the duty of
restoring what we have wrongfully taken or kept. Pharaoh's reproof of
Abram was very just: What is this that thou hast done? How unbecoming a
wise and good man! If those who profess religion, do that which is
unfair and deceptive, especially if they say that which borders upon a
lie, they must expect to hear of it; and they have reason to thank those
who will tell them of it. The sending away was kind. Pharaoh was so far
from any design to kill Abram, as he feared, that he took particular
care of him. We often perplex ourselves with fears which are altogether
groundless. Many a time we fear where no fear is. Pharaoh charged his
men not to hurt Abram in any thing. It is not enough for those in
authority, that they do not hurt themselves; they must keep their
servants and those about them from doing hurt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 13](gen013.md)

</div>
