<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen010)  [Next](gen012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 11:0</span></span>

([Gen 11:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)) One language in the
world, The building of Babel.

([Gen 11:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005)) The confusion of
tongues, The builders of Babel dispersed.

(v. 10-26) The descendants of Shem.

([Gen 11:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#027)) Terah, father of
Abram, grandfather of Lot, they remove to Haran.

[Genesis 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 11:1</span></span>

How soon men forget the most tremendous judgments, and go back to their
former crimes! Though the desolations of the deluge were before their
eyes, though they sprang from the stock of righteous Noah, yet even
during his life-time, wickedness increases exceedingly. Nothing but the
sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit can remove the sinful lusts of the
human will, and the depravity of the human heart. God's purpose was,
that mankind should form many nations, and people all lands. In contempt
of the Divine will, and against the counsel of Noah, the bulk of mankind
united to build a city and a tower to prevent their separating. Idolatry
was begun, and Babel became one of its chief seats. They made one
another more daring and resolute. Let us learn to provoke one another to
love and to good works, as sinners stir up and encourage one another to
wicked works.

[Genesis 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 11:5</span></span>

Here is an expression after the manner of men; The Lord came down to see
the city. God is just and fair in all he does against sin and sinners,
and condemns none unheard. Pious Eber is not found among this ungodly
crew; for he and his are called the children of God; their souls joined
not themselves to the assembly of these children of men. God suffered
them to go on some way, that the works of their hands, from which they
promised themselves lasting honour, might turn to their lasting
reproach. God has wise and holy ends, in allowing the enemies of his
glory to carry on their wicked projects a great way, and to prosper
long. Observe the wisdom and mercy of God, in the methods taken for
defeating this undertaking. And the mercy of God in not making the
penalty equal to the offence; for he deals not with us according to our
sins. The wisdom of God, in fixing upon a sure way to stop these
proceedings. If they could not understand one another, they could not
help one another; this would take them off from their building. God has
various means, and effectual ones, to baffle and defeat the projects of
proud men that set themselves against him, and particularly he divides
them among themselves. Notwithstanding their union and obstinacy God was
above them; for who ever hardened his heart against him, and prospered?
Their language was confounded. We all suffer by it to this day: in all
the pains and trouble used to learn the languages we have occasion for,
we suffer for the rebellion of our ancestors at Babel. Nay, and those
unhappy disputes, which are strifes of words, and arise from
misunderstanding one another's words, for ought we know, are owing to
this confusion of tongues. They left off to build the city. The
confusion of their tongues not only unfitted them for helping one
another, but they saw the hand of the Lord gone out against them. It is
wisdom to leave off that which we see God fights against. God is able to
blast and bring to nought all the devices and designs of Babel-builders:
there is no wisdom nor counsel against the Lord. The builders departed
according to their families, and the tongue they spake, to the countries
and places allotted to them. The children of men never did, nor ever
will, come all together again, till the great day, when the Son of man
shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and all nations shall be
gathered before him.

[Genesis 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 11:10</span></span>

Here is a genealogy, or list of names, ending in Abram, the friend of
God, and thus leading towards Christ, the promised Seed, who was the son
of Abram. Nothing is left upon record but their names and ages; the Holy
Ghost seeming to hasten through them to the history of Abram. How little
do we know of those that are gone before us in this world, even of those
that lived in the same places where we live, as we likewise know little
of those who now live in distant places! We have enough to do to mind
our own work. When the earth began to be peopled, men's lives began to
shorten; this was the wise disposal of Providence.

[Genesis 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 11:27</span></span>

Here begins the story of Abram, whose name is famous in both Testaments.
Even the children of Eber had become worshippers of false gods. Those
who are through grace, heirs of the land of promise, ought to remember
what was the land of their birth; what was their corrupt and sinful
state by nature. Abram's brethren were, Nahor, out of whose family both
Isaac and Jacob had their wives; and Haran, the father of Lot, who died
before his father. Children cannot be sure that they shall outlive their
parents. Haran died in Ur, before the happy removal of the family out of
that idolatrous country. It concerns us to hasten out of our natural
state, lest death surprise us in it. We here read of Abram's departure
out of Ur of the Chaldees, with his father Terah, his nephew Lot, and
the rest of his family, in obedience to the call of God. This chapter
leaves them about mid-way between Ur and Canaan, where they dwelt till
Terah's death. Many reach to Charran, and yet fall short of Canaan; they
are not far from the kingdom of God, and yet never come thither.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 12](gen012)

</div>
