<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen028)  [Next](gen030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 29:0</span></span>

([Gen 29:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)) Jacob comes to the well
of Haran.

([Gen 29:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#009)) His interview with
Rachel, Laban entertains him.

(v. 15-30) Jacob's covenant for Rachel, Laban's deceit.

([Gen 29:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031)) Leah's sons.

[Genesis 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 29:1</span></span>

Jacob proceeded cheerfully in his journey, after the sweet communion he
had with God at Beth-el. Providence brought him to the field where his
uncle's flocks were to be watered. What is said of the care of the
shepherds for their sheep, may remind us of the tender concern which our
Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep, has for his flock the
church; for he is the good Shepherd, that knows his sheep, and is known
of them. The stone at the well's mouth was to secure it; water was
scarce, it was not there for every one's use: but separate interests
should not take us from helping one another. When all the shepherds came
together with their flocks, then, like loving neighbours, they watered
their flocks together. The law of kindness in the tongue has a
commanding power, [Pro 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#026). Jacob
was civil to these strangers, and he found them civil to him.

[Genesis 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 29:9</span></span>

See Rachel's humility and industry. Nobody needs to be ashamed of
honest, useful labour, nor ought it to hinder any one's preferment. When
Jacob understood that this was his kinswoman, he was very ready to serve
her. Laban, though not the best humoured, bade him welcome, and was
satisfied with the account Jacob gave of himself. While we avoid being
foolishly ready to believe every thing which is told us, we must take
heed of being uncharitably suspicious.

[Genesis 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 29:15</span></span>

During the month that Jacob spent as a guest, he was not idle. Wherever
we are, it is good to employ ourselves in some useful business. Laban
was desirous that Jacob should continue with him. Inferior relations
must not be imposed upon; it is our duty to reward them. Jacob made
known to Laban the affection he had for his daughter Rachel. And having
no wordly goods with which to endow her, he promises seven years'
service Love makes long and hard services short and easy; hence we read
of the labour of love, [Heb 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010). If
we know how to value the happiness of heaven, the sufferings of this
present time will be as nothing to us. An age of work will be but as a
few days to those that love God, and long for Christ's appearing. Jacob,
who had imposed upon his father, is imposed upon by Laban, his
father-in-law, by a like deception. Herein, how unrighteous soever Laban
was, the Lord was righteous: see [Jdg
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007). Even the righteous, if they take
a false step, are sometimes thus recompensed in the earth. And many who
are not, like Jacob, in their marriage, disappointed in person, soon
find themselves, as much to their grief, disappointed in the character.
The choice of that relation ought to be made with good advice and
thought on both sides. There is reason to believe that Laban's excuse
was not true. His way of settling the matter made bad worse. Jacob was
drawn into the disquiet of multiplying wives. He could not refuse
Rachel, for he had espoused her; still less could he refuse Leah. As yet
there was no express command against marrying more than one wife. It was
in the patriarchs a sin of ignorance; but it will not justify the like
practice now, when God's will is plainly made known by the Divine law,
[Lev 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#018), and more fully since, by
our Saviour, that one man and woman only must be joined together, [Co1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002).

[Genesis 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 29:31</span></span>

The names Leah gave her children, expressed her respect and regard, both
to God and to her husband. Reuben, or See a son, with this thought, Now
will my husband love me; Levi, or joined, expecting, Now will my husband
be joined unto me. Mutual affection is both the duty and comfort of the
married relation; and yoke-fellows should study to recommend themselves
to each other, [Co1 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#033), [Co1
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034). She thankfully acknowledges the
kind providence of God in hearing her. Whatever supports and comforts us
under afflictions, or tends to our deliverance from them, God must be
owned in it. Her fourth son she called Judah, or praise, saying, Now
will I praise the Lord. This was he, of whom, as concerning the flesh,
Christ came. Whatever is the matter of our rejoicing, ought to be the
matter of our thanksgiving. Fresh favours should quicken us to praise
God for former favours; Now will I praise the Lord more and better than
I have done. All our praises must centre in Christ, both as the matter
of them, and as the Mediator of them. He descended after the flesh from
him whose name was "Praise," and He is our praise. Is Christ formed in
my heart? Now will I praise the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 30](gen030)

</div>
