<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen043)  [Next](gen045.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 44:0</span></span>

(v. 1-17) Joseph's policy to stay his brethren, and try their affection
for Benjamin.

(v. 18-34) Judah's supplication to Joseph.

[Genesis 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 44:1</span></span>

Joseph tried how his brethren felt towards Benjamin. Had they envied and
hated the other son of Rachel as they had hated him, and if they had the
same want of feeling towards their father Jacob as heretofore, they
would now have shown it. When the cup was found upon Benjamin, they
would have a pretext for leaving him to be a slave. But we cannot judge
what men are now, by what they have been formerly; nor what they will
do, by what they have done. The steward charged them with being
ungrateful, rewarding evil for good; with folly, in taking away the cup
of daily use, which would soon be missed, and diligent search made for
it; for so it may be read, Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, as
having a particular fondness for it, and for which he would search
thoroughly? Or, By which, leaving it carelessly at your table, he would
make trial whether you were honest men or not? They throw themselves
upon Joseph's mercy, and acknowledge the righteousness of God, perhaps
thinking of the injury they had formerly done to Joseph, for which they
thought God was now reckoning with them. Even in afflictions wherein we
believe ourselves wronged by men, we must own that God is righteous, and
finds out our sin.

[Genesis 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 44:18</span></span>

Had Joseph been, as Judah supposed him, an utter stranger to the family,
he could not but be wrought upon by his powerful reasonings. But neither
Jacob nor Benjamin need an intercessor with Joseph; for he himself loved
them. Judah's faithful cleaving to Benjamin, now, in his distress, was
recompensed long afterwards by the tribe of Benjamin keeping with the
tribe of Judah, when the other tribes deserted it. The apostle, when
discoursing of the mediation of Christ, observes, that our Lord sprang
out of Judah, [Heb 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#014.md); and he not
only made intercession for the transgressors, but he became a Surety for
them, testifying therein tender concern, both for his Father and for his
brethren. Jesus, the great antitype of Joseph, humbles and proves his
people, even after they have had some tastes of his loving-kindness. He
brings their sins to their remembrance, that they may exercise and show
repentance, and feel how much they owe to his mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 45](gen045.md)

</div>
