<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen048)  [Next](gen050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 49:0</span></span>

([Gen 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001), [Gen
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#002)) Jacob calls his sons to bless
them.

([Gen 49:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)) Reuben, Simeon, Levi.

([Gen 49:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)) Judah.

([Gen 49:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)) Zebulun, Issachar,
Dan.

([Gen 49:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019)) Gad, Asher, Naphtali.

([Gen 49:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)) Joseph and Benjamin.

([Gen 49:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#028)) Jacob's charge
respecting his burial, his death.

[Genesis 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 49:1</span></span>

All Jacob's sons were living. His calling them together was a precept
for them to unite in love, not to mingle with the Egyptians; and
foretold that they should not be separated, as Abraham's sons and
Isaac's were, but should all make one people. We are not to consider
this address as the expression of private feelings of affection,
resentment, or partiality; but as the language of the Holy Ghost,
declaring the purpose of God respecting the character, circumstances,
and situation of the tribes which descended from the sons of Jacob, and
which may be traced in their histories.

[Genesis 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 49:3</span></span>

Reuben was the first-born; but by gross sin, he forfeited the
birthright. The character of Reuben is, that he was unstable as water.
Men do not thrive, because they do not fix. Reuben's sin left a lasting
infamy upon his family. Let us never do evil, then we need not fear
being told of it. Simeon and Levi were passionate and revengeful. The
murder of the Shechemites is a proof of this. Jacob protested against
that barbarous act. Our soul is our honour; by its powers we are
distinguished from, and raised above, the beasts that perish. We ought,
from our hearts, to abhor all bloody and mischievous men. Cursed be
their anger. Jacob does not curse their persons, but their lusts. I will
divide them. The sentence as it respects Levi was turned into a
blessing. This tribe performed an acceptable service in their zeal
against the worshippers of the golden calf, Exodus 32. Being set apart
to God as priests, they were in that character scattered through the
nation of Israel.

[Genesis 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 49:8</span></span>

Judah's name signifies praise. God was praised for him, [Gen
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#035), praised by him, and praised in
him; therefore his brethren shall praise him. Judah should be a strong
and courageous tribe. Judah is compared, not to a lion raging and
ranging, but to a lion enjoying the satisfaction of his power and
success, without creating vexation to others; this is to be truly great.
Judah should be the royal tribe, the tribe from which Messiah the Prince
should come. Shiloh, that promised Seed in whom the earth should be
blessed, "that peaceable and prosperous One," or "Saviour," he shall
come of Judah. Thus dying Jacob at a great distance saw Christ's day,
and it was his comfort and support on his death-bed. Till Christ's
coming, Judah possessed authority, but after his crucifixion this was
shortened, and according to what Christ foretold, Jerusalem was
destroyed, and all the poor harassed remnant of Jews were confounded
together. Much which is here said concerning Judah, is to be applied to
our Lord Jesus. In him there is plenty of all which is nourishing and
refreshing to the soul, and which maintains and cheers the Divine life
in it. He is the true Vine; wine is the appointed symbol of his blood,
which is drink indeed, as shed for sinners, and applied in faith; and
all the blessings of his gospel are wine and milk, without money and
without price, to which every thirsty soul is welcome. [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001).

[Genesis 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 49:13</span></span>

Concerning Zebulun: if prophecy says, Zebulun shall be a haven of ships,
be sure Providence will so plant him. God appoints the bounds of our
habitation. It is our wisdom and duty to accommodate ourselves to our
lot, and to improve it; if Zebulun dwell at the heaven of the sea, let
him be for a haven of ships. Concerning Issachar: he saw that the land
was pleasant, yielding not only pleasant prospects, but pleasant fruits
to recompense his toils. Let us, with an eye of faith, see the heavenly
rest to be good, and that land of promise to be pleasant; this will make
our present services easy. Dan should, by art, and policy, and surprise,
gain advantages against his enemies, like a serpent biting the heel of
the traveller. Jacob, almost spent, and ready to faint, relieves himself
with those words, "I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord!" The
salvation he waited for was Christ, the promised Seed; now that he was
going to be gathered to his people, he breathes after Him to whom the
gathering of the people shall be. He declared plainly that he sought
heaven, the better country, [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013), [Heb
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#014). Now he is going to enjoy the
salvation, he comforts himself that he had waited for the salvation.
Christ, as our way to heaven, is to be waited on; and heaven, as our
rest in Christ, is to be waited for. It is the comfort of a dying saint
thus to have waited for the salvation of the Lord; for then he shall
have what he has been waiting for.

[Genesis 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 49:19</span></span>

Concerning Gad, Jacob alludes to his name, which signifies a troop, and
foresees the character of that tribe. The cause of God and his people,
though for a time it may seem to be baffled and run down, will be
victorious at last. It represents the Christian's conflict. Grace in the
soul is often foiled in its conflicts; troops of corruption overcome it,
but the cause is God's, and grace will in the end come off conqueror,
yea, more than conqueror, [Rom 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037).
Asher should be a rich tribe. His inheritance bordered upon Carmel,
which was fruitful to a proverb. Naphtali, is a hind let loose. We may
consider it as a description of the character of this tribe. Unlike the
laborious ox and ass; desirous of ease and liberty; active, but more
noted for quick dispatch than steady labour and perseverance. Like the
suppliant who, with goodly words, craves mercy. Let not those of
different tempers and gifts censure or envy one another.

[Genesis 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 49:22</span></span>

The blessing of Joseph is very full. What Jacob says of him, is history
as well as prophecy. Jacob reminds him of the difficulties and fiery
darts of temptations he had formerly struggled through. His faith did
not fail, but through his trials he bore all his burdens with firmness,
and did not do anything unbecoming. All our strength for resisting
temptations, and bearing afflictions, comes from God; his grace is
sufficient. Joseph became the shepherd of Israel, to take care of his
father and family; also the stone of Israel, their foundation and strong
support. In this, as in many other things, Joseph was a remarkable type
of the Good Shepherd, and tried Corner Stone of the whole church of God.
Blessings are promised to Joseph's posterity, typical of the vast and
everlasting blessings which come upon the spiritual seed of Christ.
Jacob blessed all his sons, but especially Joseph, "who was separated
from his brethren." Not only separated in Egypt, but, possessing eminent
dignity, and more devoted to God. Of Benjamin it is said, He shall ravin
as a wolf. Jacob was guided in what he said by the Spirit of prophecy,
and not by natural affection; else he would have spoken with more
tenderness of his beloved son Benjamin. Concerning him he only foresees
and foretells, that his posterity should be a warlike tribe, strong and
daring, and that they should enrich themselves with the spoils of their
enemies; that they should be active. Blessed Paul was of this tribe,
[Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001); [Phi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005); he, in the morning of his day,
devoured the prey as a persecutor, but in the evening divided the spoils
as a preacher; he shared the blessings of Judah's Lion, and assisted in
his victories.

[Genesis 49:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 49:28</span></span>

Jacob blessed every one according to the blessings God in after-times
intended to bestow upon them. He spoke about his burial-place, from a
principle of faith in the promise of God, that Canaan should be the
inheritance of his seed in due time. When he had finished both his
blessing and his charge, and so had finished his testimony, he addressed
himself to his dying work. He gathered up his feet into the bed, not
only as one patiently submitting to the stroke, but as one cheerfully
composing himself to rest, now that he was weary. He freely gave up his
spirit into the hand of God, the Father of spirits. If God's people be
our people, death will gather us to them. Under the care of the Shepherd
of Israel, we shall lack nothing for body or soul. We shall remain
unmoved until our work is finished; then, breathing out our souls into
His hands for whose salvation we have waited, we shall depart in peace,
and leave a blessing for our children after us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 50](gen050)

</div>
