<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Habakkuk Index](hab)  
  [Previous](hab001)  [Next](hab003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Habakkuk Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)

[Habakkuk](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hab 2:0</span></span>

([Hab 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)) Habakkuk must wait in
faith.

([Hab 2:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)) Judgments upon the
Chaldeans.

([Hab 2:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)) Also upon drunkenness
and idolatry.

[Habakkuk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hab 2:1</span></span>

When tossed and perplexed with doubts about the methods of Providence,
we must watch against temptations to be impatient. When we have poured
out complaints and requests before God, we must observe the answers God
gives by his word, his Spirit, and providences; what the Lord will say
to our case. God will not disappoint the believing expectations of those
who wait to hear what he will say unto them. All are concerned in the
truths of God's word. Though the promised favour be deferred long, it
will come at last, and abundantly recompense us for waiting. The humble,
broken-hearted, repenting sinner, alone seeks to obtain an interest in
this salvation. He will rest his soul on the promise, and on Christ, in
and through whom it is given. Thus he walks and works, as well as lives
by faith, perseveres to the end, and is exalted to glory; while those
who distrust or despise God's all-sufficiency will not walk uprightly
with him. The just shall live by faith in these precious promises, while
the performance of them is deferred. Only those made just by faith,
shall live, shall be happy here and for ever.

[Habakkuk 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hab 2:5</span></span>

The prophet reads the doom of all proud and oppressive powers that bear
hard upon God's people. The lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and
the pride of life, are the entangling snares of men; and we find him
that led Israel captive, himself led captive by each of these. No more
of what we have is to be reckoned ours, than what we come honestly by.
Riches are but clay, thick clay; what are gold and silver but white and
yellow earth? Those who travel through thick clay, are hindered and
dirtied in their journey; so are those who go through the world in the
midst of abundance of wealth. And what fools are those that burden
themselves with continual care about it; with a great deal of guilt in
getting, saving, and spending it, and with a heavy account which they
must give another day! They overload themselves with this thick clay,
and so sink themselves down into destruction and perdition. See what
will be the end hereof; what is gotten by violence from others, others
shall take away by violence. Covetousness brings disquiet and uneasiness
into a family; he that is greedy of gain troubles his own house; what is
worse, it brings the curse of God upon all the affairs of it. There is a
lawful gain, which, by the blessing of God, may be a comfort to a house;
but what is got by fraud and injustice, will bring poverty and ruin upon
a family. Yet that is not the worst; Thou hast sinned against thine own
soul, hast endangered it. Those who wrong their neighbours, do much
greater wrong to their own souls. If the sinner thinks he has managed
his frauds and violence with art and contrivance, the riches and
possessions he heaped together will witness against him. There are not
greater drudges in the world than those who are slaves to mere wordly
pursuits. And what comes of it? They find themselves disappointed of it,
and disappointed in it; they will own it is worse than vanity, it is
vexation of spirit. By staining and sinking earthly glory, God manifests
and magnifies his own glory, and fills the earth with the knowledge of
it, as plentifully as waters cover the sea, which are deep, and spread
far and wide.

[Habakkuk 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hab 2:15</span></span>

A severe woe is pronounced against drunkenness; it is very fearful
against all who are guilty of drunkenness at any time, and in any place,
from the stately palace to the paltry ale-house. To give one drink who
is in want, who is thirsty and poor, or a weary traveller, or ready to
perish, is charity; but to give a neighbour drink, that he may expose
himself, may disclose secret concerns, or be drawn into a bad bargain,
or for any such purpose, this is wickedness. To be guilty of this sin,
to take pleasure in it, is to do what we can towards the murder both of
soul and body. There is woe to him, and punishment answering to the sin.
The folly of worshipping idols is exposed. The Lord is in his holy
temple in heaven, where we have access to him in the way he has
appointed. May we welcome his salvation, and worship him in his earthly
temples, through Christ Jesus, and by the influence of the Holy Spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk Chapter 3](hab003)

</div>
