<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Haggai Index](hag.md)  
  [Previous](hag000)  [Next](hag002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Haggai Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001.md)

([Hag 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001).md) Haggai reproves the Jews
for neglecting the temple.

([Hag 1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012).md) He promises God's
assistance to them.

[Haggai 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hag 1:1</span></span>

Observe the sin of the Jews, after their return from captivity in
Babylon. Those employed for God may be driven from their work by a
storm, yet they must go back to it. They did not say that they would not
build a temple, but, Not yet. Thus men do not say they will never repent
and reform, and be religious, but, Not yet. And so the great business we
were sent into the world to do, is not done. There is a proneness in us
to think wrongly of discouragements in our duty, as if they were a
discharge from our duty, when they are only for the trial of our courage
and faith. They neglected the building of God's house, that they might
have more time and money for worldly affairs. That the punishment might
answer to the sin, the poverty they thought to prevent by not building
the temple, God brought upon them for not building it. Many good works
have been intended, but not done, because men supposed the proper time
was not come. Thus believers let slip opportunities of usefulness, and
sinners delay the concerns of their souls, till too late. If we labour
only for the meat that perishes, as the Jews here, we are in danger of
losing our labour; but we are sure it shall not be in vain in the Lord,
if we labour for the meat which lasts to eternal life. If we would have
the comfort and continuance of temporal enjoyments, we must have God as
our Friend. See also [Luk 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033.md). When
God crosses our temporal affairs, and we meet with trouble and
disappointment, we shall find the cause is, that the work we have to do
for God and our own souls is left undone, and we seek our own things
more than the things of Christ. How many, who plead that they cannot
afford to give to pious or charitable designs, often lavish ten times as
much in needless expenses on their houses and themselves! But those are
strangers to their own interests, who are full of care to adorn and
enrich their own houses, while God's temple in their hearts lies waste.
It is the great concern of every one, to apply to the necessary duty of
self-examination and communion with our own hearts concerning our
spiritual state. Sin is what we must answer for; duty is what we must
do. But many are quick-sighted to pry into other people's ways, who are
careless of their own. If any duty has been neglected, that is no reason
why it should still be so. Whatever God will take pleasure in when done,
we ought to take pleasure in doing. Let those who have put off their
return to God, return with all their heart, while there is time.

[Haggai 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hag 1:12</span></span>

The people returned to God in the way of duty. In attending to God's
ministers, we must have respect to him that sent them. The word of the
Lord has success, when by his grace he stirs up our spirits to comply
with it. It is in the day of Divine power we are made willing. When God
has work to be done, he will either find or make men fit to do it. Every
one helped, as his ability was; and this they did with a regard to the
Lord as their God. Those who have lost time, need to redeem time; and
the longer we have loitered in folly, the more haste we should make. God
met them in a way of mercy. Those who work for him, have him with them;
and if he be for us, who can be against us? This should stir us up to be
diligent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Chapter 2](hag002.md)

</div>
