<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb007)  [Next](heb009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 8:0</span></span>

([Heb 8:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001).md) The excellence of
Christ's priesthood above that of Aaron is shown.

([Heb 8:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007).md) The great excellence of
the new covenant above the former.

[Hebrews 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 8:1</span></span>

The substance, or summary, of what had been declared was, that
Christians had such a High Priest as they needed. He took upon himself
human nature, appeared on earth, and there gave himself as a sacrifice
to God for the sins of his people. We must not dare to approach God, or
to present any thing to him, but in and through Christ, depending upon
his merits and mediation; for we are accepted only in the Beloved. In
all obedience and worship, we should keep close to God's word, which is
the only and perfect standard. Christ is the substance and end of the
law of righteousness. But the covenant here referred to, was that made
with Israel as a nation, securing temporal benefits to them. The
promises of all spiritual blessings, and of eternal life, revealed in
the gospel, and made sure through Christ, are of infinitely greater
value. Let us bless God that we have a High Priest that suits our
helpless condition.

[Hebrews 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 8:7</span></span>

The superior excellence of the priesthood of Christ, above that of
Aaron, is shown from that covenant of grace, of which Christ was
Mediator. The law not only made all subject to it, liable to be
condemned for the guilt of sin, but also was unable to remove that
guilt, and clear the conscience from the sense and terror of it.
Whereas, by the blood of Christ, a full remission of sins was provided,
so that God would remember them no more. God once wrote his laws to his
people, now he will write his laws in them; he will give them
understanding to know and to believe his laws; he will give them
memories to retain them; he will give them hearts to love them, courage
to profess them, and power to put them in practice. This is the
foundation of the covenant; and when this is laid, duty will be done
wisely, sincerely, readily, easily, resolutely, constantly, and with
comfort. A plentiful outpouring of the Spirit of God will make the
ministration of the gospel so effectual, that there shall be a mighty
increase and spreading of Christian knowledge in persons of all sorts.
Oh that this promise might be fulfilled in our days, that the hand of
God may be with his ministers so that great numbers may believe, and be
turned to the Lord! The pardon of sin will always be found to accompany
the true knowledge of God. Notice the freeness of this pardon; its
fulness; its fixedness. This pardoning mercy is connected with all other
spiritual mercies: unpardoned sin hinders mercy, and pulls down
judgments; but the pardon of sin prevents judgment, and opens a wide
door to all spiritual blessings. Let us search whether we are taught by
the Holy Spirit to know Christ, so as uprightly to love, fear, trust,
and obey him. All worldly vanities, outward privileges, or mere notions
of religion, will soon vanish away, and leave those who trust in them
miserable for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 9](heb009.md)

</div>
