<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb003)  [Next](heb005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 4:0</span></span>

([Heb 4:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)) Humble, cautious fear is
urged, lest any should come short of the promised rest, through
unbelief.

([Heb 4:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011)) Arguments and motives
to faith and hope in our approaches to God.

[Hebrews 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 4:1</span></span>

The privileges we have under the gospel, are greater than any had under
the law of Moses, though the same gospel for substance was preached
under both Testaments. There have been in all ages many unprofitable
hearers; and unbelief is at the root of all unfruitfulness under the
word. Faith in the hearer is the life of the word. But it is a painful
consequence of partial neglect, and of a loose and wavering profession,
that they often cause men to seem to come short. Let us then give
diligence, that we may have a clear entrance into the kingdom of God. As
God finished his work, and then rested from it, so he will cause those
who believe, to finish their work, and then to enjoy their rest. It is
evident, that there is a more spiritual and excellent sabbath remaining
for the people of God, than that of the seventh day, or that into which
Joshua led the Jews. This rest is, a rest of grace, and comfort, and
holiness, in the gospel state. And a rest in glory, where the people of
God shall enjoy the end of their faith, and the object of all their
desires. The rest, or sabbatism, which is the subject of the apostle's
reasoning, and as to which he concludes that it remains to be enjoyed,
is undoubtedly the heavenly rest, which remains to the people of God,
and is opposed to a state of labour and trouble in this world. It is the
rest they shall obtain when the Lord Jesus shall appear from heaven. But
those who do not believe, shall never enter into this spiritual rest,
either of grace here or glory hereafter. God has always declared man's
rest to be in him, and his love to be the only real happiness of the
soul; and faith in his promises, through his Son, to be the only way of
entering that rest.

[Hebrews 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 4:11</span></span>

Observe the end proposed: rest spiritual and eternal; the rest of grace
here, and glory hereafter; in Christ on earth, with Christ in heaven.
After due and diligent labour, sweet and satisfying rest shall follow;
and labour now, will make that rest more pleasant when it comes. Let us
labour, and quicken each other to be diligent in duty. The Holy
Scriptures are the word of God. When God sets it home by his Spirit, it
convinces powerfully, converts powerfully, and comforts powerfully. It
makes a soul that has long been proud, to be humble; and a perverse
spirit, to be meek and obedient. Sinful habits, that are become as it
were natural to the soul, and rooted deeply in it, are separated and cut
off by this sword. It will discover to men their thoughts and purposes,
the vileness of many, the bad principles they are moved by, the sinful
ends they act to. The word will show the sinner all that is in his
heart. Let us hold fast the doctrines of Christian faith in our heads,
its enlivening principles in our hearts, the open profession of it in
our lips, and be subject to it in our lives. Christ executed one part of
his priesthood on earth, in dying for us; the other he executes in
heaven, pleading the cause, and presenting the offerings of his people.
In the sight of Infinite Wisdom, it was needful that the Saviour of men
should be one who has the fellow-feeling which no being but a
fellow-creature could possibly have; and therefore it was necessary he
should actual experience of all the effects of sin that could be
separated from its actual guilt. God sent his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, [Rom 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003); but the more
holy and pure he was, the more he must have been unwilling in his nature
to sin, and must have had deeper impression of its evil; consequently
the more must he be concerned to deliver his people from its guilt and
power. We should encourage ourselves by the excellence of our High
Priest, to come boldly to the throne of grace. Mercy and grace are the
things we want; mercy to pardon all our sins, and grace to purify our
souls. Besides our daily dependence upon God for present supplies, there
are seasons for which we should provide in our prayers; times of
temptation, either by adversity or prosperity, and especially our dying
time. We are to come with reverence and godly fear, yet not as if
dragged to the seat of justice, but as kindly invited to the mercy-seat,
where grace reigns. We have boldness to enter into the holiest only by
the blood of Jesus; he is our Advocate, and has purchased all our souls
want or can desire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 5](heb005)

</div>
