<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb002)  [Next](heb004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 3:0</span></span>

([Heb 3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)) The superior worth and
dignity of Christ above Moses is shown.

([Heb 3:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)) The Hebrews are warned
of the sin and danger of unbelief.

([Heb 3:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)) And of necessity of
faith in Christ, and of stedfastly following him.

[Hebrews 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 3:1</span></span>

Christ is to be considered as the Apostle of our profession, the
Messenger sent by God to men, the great Revealer of that faith which we
profess to hold, and of that hope which we profess to have. As Christ,
the Messiah, anointed for the office both of Apostle and High Priest. As
Jesus, our Saviour, our Healer, the great Physician of souls. Consider
him thus. Consider what he is in himself, what he is to us, and what he
will be to us hereafter and for ever. Close and serious thoughts of
Christ bring us to know more of him. The Jews had a high opinion of the
faithfulness of Moses, yet his faithfulness was but a type of Christ's.
Christ was the Master of this house, of his church, his people, as well
as their Maker. Moses was a faithful servant; Christ, as the eternal Son
of God, is rightful Owner and Sovereign Ruler of the Church. There must
not only be setting out well in the ways of Christ, but stedfastness and
perseverance therein to the end. Every meditation on his person and his
salvation, will suggest more wisdom, new motives to love, confidence,
and obedience.

[Hebrews 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 3:7</span></span>

Days of temptation are often days of provocation. But to provoke God,
when he is letting us see that we entirely depend and live upon him, is
a provocation indeed. The hardening of the heart is the spring of all
other sins. The sins of others, especially of our relations, should be
warnings to us. All sin, especially sin committed by God's professing,
privileged people, not only provokes God, but it grieves him. God is
loth to destroy any in, or for their sin; he waits long to be gracious
to them. But sin, long persisted in, will make God's wrath discover
itself in destroying the impenitent; there is no resting under the wrath
of God. "Take heed:" all who would get safe to heaven must look about
them; if once we allow ourselves to distrust God, we may soon desert
him. Let those that think they stand, take heed lest they fall. Since
to-morrow is not ours, we must make the best improvement of this day.
And there are none, even the strongest of the flock, who do not need
help of other Christians. Neither are there any so low and despised, but
the care of their standing in the faith, and of their safety, belongs to
all. Sin has so many ways and colours, that we need more eyes than ours
own. Sin appears fair, but is vile; it appears pleasant, but is
destructive; it promises much, but performs nothing. The deceitfulness
of sin hardens the soul; one sin allowed makes way for another; and
every act of sin confirms the habit. Let every one beware of sin.

[Hebrews 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">heb 3:14</span></span>

The saints' privilege is, they are made partakers of Christ, that is, of
the Spirit, the nature, graces, righteousness, and life of Christ; they
are interested in all Christ is, in all he has done, or will do. The
same spirit with which Christians set out in the ways of God, they
should maintain unto the end. Perseverance in faith is the best evidence
of the sincerity of our faith. Hearing the word often is a means of
salvation, yet, if not hearkened to, it will expose more to the Divine
wrath. The happiness of being partakers of Christ and his complete
salvation, and the fear of God's wrath and eternal misery, should stir
us up to persevere in the life of obedient faith. Let us beware of
trusting to outward privileges or professions, and pray to be numbered
with the true believers who enter heaven, when all others fail because
of unbelief. As our obedience follows according to the power of our
faith, so our sins and want of care are according to the prevailing of
unbelief in us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 4](heb004)

</div>
