<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb006)  [Next](heb008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 7:0</span></span>

([Heb 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)) A comparison between the
priesthood of Melchisedec and that of Christ.

([Heb 7:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)) The excellence of
Christ's priesthood above the Levitical priesthood is shown.

([Heb 7:11-25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)) This is applied to
Christ.

([Heb 7:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)) The faith and hope of
the church encouraged from this.

[Hebrews 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 7:1</span></span>

Melchisedec met Abraham when returning from the rescue of Lot. His name,
"King of Righteousness," doubtless suitable to his character, marked him
as a type of the Messiah and his kingdom. The name of his city signified
"Peace;" and as king of peace he typified Christ, the Prince of Peace,
the great Reconciler of God and man. Nothing is recorded as to the
beginning or end of his life; thus he typically resembled the Son of
God, whose existence is from everlasting to everlasting, who had no one
that was before him, and will have no one come after him, in his
priesthood. Every part of Scripture honours the great King of
Righteousness and Peace, our glorious High Priest and Saviour; and the
more we examine it, the more we shall be convinced, that the testimony
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

[Hebrews 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 7:4</span></span>

That High Priest who should afterward appear, of whom Melchisedec was a
type, must be much superior to the Levitical priests. Observe Abraham's
great dignity and happiness; that he had the promises. That man is rich
and happy indeed, who has the promises, both of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come. This honour have all those who receive the
Lord Jesus. Let us go forth in our spiritual conflicts, trusting in his
word and strength, ascribing our victories to his grace, and desiring to
be met and blessed by him in all our ways.

[Hebrews 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 7:11</span></span>

The priesthood and law by which perfection could not come, are done
away; a Priest is risen, and a dispensation now set up, by which true
believers may be made perfect. That there is such a change is plain. The
law which made the Levitical priesthood, showed that the priests were
frail, dying creatures, not able to save their own lives, much less
could they save the souls of those who came to them. But the High Priest
of our profession holds his office by the power of endless life in
himself; not only to keep himself alive, but to give spiritual and
eternal life to all who rely upon his sacrifice and intercession. The
better covenant, of which Jesus was the Surety, is not here contrasted
with the covenant of works, by which every transgressor is shut up under
the curse. It is distinguished from the Sinai covenant with Israel, and
the legal dispensation under which the church so long remained. The
better covenant brought the church and every believer into clearer
light, more perfect liberty, and more abundant privileges. In the order
of Aaron there was a multitude of priests, of high priests one after
another; but in the priesthood of Christ there is only one and the same.
This is the believer's safety and happiness, that this everlasting High
Priest is able to save to the uttermost, in all times, in all cases.
Surely then it becomes us to desire a spirituality and holiness, as much
beyond those of the Old Testament believers, as our advantages exceed
theirs.

[Hebrews 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">heb 7:26</span></span>

Observe the description of the personal holiness of Christ. He is free
from all habits or principles of sin, not having the least disposition
to it in his nature. No sin dwells in him, not the least sinful
inclination, though such dwells in the best of Christians. He is
harmless, free from all actual transgression; he did no violence, nor
was there any deceit in his mouth. He is undefiled. It is hard to keep
ourselves pure, so as not to partake the guilt of other men's sins. But
none need be dismayed who come to God in the name of his beloved Son.
Let them be assured that he will deliver them in the time of trial and
suffering, in the time of prosperity, in the hour of death, and in the
day of judgment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 8](heb008)

</div>
