<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos001)  [Next](hos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 2:0</span></span>

([Hos 2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001)) The idolatry of the
people.

([Hos 2:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#006)) God's judgments against
them.

([Hos 2:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)) His promises of
reconciliation.

[Hosea 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 2:1</span></span>

This chapter continues the figurative address to Israel, in reference to
Hosea's wife and children. Let us own and love as brethren, all whom the
Lord seems to put among his children, and encourage them in that they
have received mercy. But every Christian, by his example and conduct,
must protest against evil and abuses, even among those to whom he
belongs and owes respect. Impenitent sinners will soon be stripped of
the advantages they misuse, and which they consume upon their lusts.

[Hosea 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 2:6</span></span>

God threatens what he would do with this treacherous, idolatrous people.
They did not turn, therefore all this came upon them; and it is written
for admonition to us. If lesser difficulties be got over, God will raise
greater. The most resolute in sinful pursuits, are commonly most crossed
in them. The way of God and duty is often hedged about with thorns, but
we have reason to think it is a sinful way that is hedged up with
thorns. Crosses and obstacles in an evil course are great blessings, and
are to be so accounted; they are God's hedges, to keep us from
transgressing, to make the way of sin difficult, and to keep us from it.
We have reason to bless God for restraining grace, and for restraining
providences; and even for sore pain, sickness, or calamity, if it keeps
us from sin. The disappointments we meet with in seeking for
satisfaction from the creature, should, if nothing else will do it,
drive us to the Creator. When men forget, or consider not that their
comforts come from God, he will often in mercy take them away, to bring
them to think upon their folly and danger. Sin and mirth can never hold
long together; but if men will not take away sin from their mirth, God
will take away mirth from their sin. And if men destroy God's word and
ordinances, it is just with him to destroy their vines and fig-trees.
This shall be the ruin of their mirth. Taking away the solemn seasons
and the sabbaths will not do it, they will readily part with them, and
think it no loss; but He will take away their sensual pleasures. Days of
sinful mirth must be visited with days of mourning.

[Hosea 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 2:14</span></span>

After these judgments the Lord would deal with Israel more gently. By
the promise of rest in Christ we are invited to take his yoke upon us;
and the work of conversion may be forwarded by comforts as well as by
convictions. But usually the Lord drives us to despair of earthly joy,
and help from ourselves, that, being shut from every other door, we may
knock at Mercy's gate. From that time Israel would be more truly
attached to the Lord; no longer calling him Baali, or "My lord and
master," alluding to authority, rather than love, but Ishi, an address
of affection. This may foretell the restoration from the Babylonish
captivity; and also be applied to the conversion of the Jews to Christ,
in the days of the apostles, and the future general conversion of that
nation; and believers are enabled to expect infinitely more tenderness
and kindness from their holy God, than a beloved wife can expect from
the kindest husband. When the people were weaned from idols, and loved
the Lord, no creature should do them any harm. This may be understood of
the blessings and privileges of the spiritual Israel, of every true
believer, and their partaking of Christ's righteousness; also, of the
conversion of the Jews to Christ. Here is an argument for us to walk so
that God may not be dishonoured by us: Thou art my people. If a man's
family walk disorderly, it is a dishonour to the master. If God call us
children, we may say, Thou art our God. Unbelieving soul, lay aside
discouraging thoughts; do not thus answer God's loving-kindness. Doth
God say, Thou art my people? Say, Lord, thou art our God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 3](hos003)

</div>
