<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos012)  [Next](hos014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 13:0</span></span>

([Hos 13:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)) The abuse of God's
favour leads to punishment.

([Hos 13:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009)) A promise of God's
mercy.

[Hosea 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 13:1</span></span>

While Ephraim kept up a holy fear of God, and worshipped Him in that
fear, so long he was very considerable. When Ephraim forsook God, and
followed idolatry, he sunk. Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves,
in token of their adoration of them, affection for them, and obedience
to them; but the Lord will not give his glory to another, and therefore
all that worship images shall be confounded. No solid, lasting comfort,
is to be expected any where but in God. God not only took care of the
Israelites in the wilderness, he put them in possession of Canaan, a
good land; but worldly prosperity, when it feeds men's pride, makes them
forgetful of God. Therefore the Lord would meet them in just vengeance,
as the most terrible beast that inhabited their forests. Abused goodness
calls for greater severity.

[Hosea 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 13:9</span></span>

Israel had destroyed himself by his rebellion; but he could not save
himself, his help was from the Lord only. This may well be applied to
the case of spiritual redemption, from that lost state into which all
have fallen by wilful sins. God often gives in displeasure what we
sinfully desire. It is the happiness of the saints, that, whether God
gives or takes away, all is in love. But it is the misery of the wicked,
that, whether God gives or takes away, it is all in wrath, nothing is
comfortable. Except sinners repent and believe the gospel, anguish will
soon come upon them. The prophecy of the ruin of Israel as a nation,
also showed there would be a merciful and powerful interposition of God,
to save a remnant of them. Yet this was but a shadow of the ransom of
the true Israel, by the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ. He
will destroy death and the grave. The Lord would not repent of his
purpose and promise. Yet, in the mean time, Israel would be desolated
for her sins. Without fruitfulness in good works, springing from the
Holy Spirit, all other fruitfulness will be found as empty as the
uncertain riches of the world. The wrath of God will wither its
branches, its sprigs shall be dried up, it shall come to nothing. Woes,
more terrible than any from the most cruel warfare, shall fall on those
who rebel against God. From such miseries, and from sin, the cause of
them, may the Lord deliver us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 14](hos014)

</div>
