<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos010)  [Next](hos012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 11:0</span></span>

([Hos 11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)) God's regard for Israel;
their ingratitude.

([Hos 11:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008)) The Divine mercy yet in
store.

[Hosea 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 11:1</span></span>

When Israel were weak and helpless as children, foolish and froward as
children, then God loved them; he bore them as the nurse does the
sucking child, nourished them, and suffered their manners. All who are
grown up, ought often to reflect upon the goodness of God to them in
their childhood. He took care of them, took pains with them, not only as
a father, or a tutor, but as a mother, or nurse. When they were in the
wilderness, God showed them the way in which they should go, and bore
them up, taking them by the arms. He taught them the way of his
commandments by the ceremonial law given by Moses. He took them by the
arms, to guide them, that they might not stray, and to hold them up,
that they might not stumble and fall. God's spiritual Israel are all
thus supported. It is God's work to draw poor souls to himself; and none
can come to him except he draw them. With bands of love; this word
signifies stronger cords than the former. He eased them of the burdens
they had long groaned under. Israel is very ungrateful to God. God's
counsels would have saved them, but their own counsels ruined them. They
backslide; there is no hold of them, no stedfastness in them. They
backslide from me, from God, the chief good. They are bent to backslide;
they are ready to sin; they are forward to close with every temptation.
Their hearts are fully set in them to do evil. Those only are truly
happy, whom the Lord teaches by his Spirit, upholds by his power, and
causes to walk in his ways. By his grace he takes away the love and
dominion of sin, and creates a desire for the blessed feast of the
gospel, that they may feed thereon, and live for ever.

[Hosea 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 11:8</span></span>

God is slow to anger, and is loth to abandon a people to utter ruin, who
have been called by his name. When God was to give a sacrifice for sin,
and a Saviour for sinners, he spared not his own Son, that he might
spare us. This is the language of the day of his patience; but when men
sin that away, then the great day of his wrath comes. Man's compassions
are nothing in comparison with the tender mercies of our God, whose
thoughts and ways, in receiving returning sinners, are as much above
ours as heaven is above the earth. God knows how to pardon poor sinners.
He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and therein declares his
righteousness, now Christ has purchased the pardon, and he has promised
it. Holy trembling at the word of Christ will draw us to him, not drive
us from him, the children tremble, and flee to him. And all that come at
the gospel call, shall have a place and a name in the gospel church. The
religious service of Israel were mere hypocrisy, but in Judah regard was
had to God's laws, and the people followed their pious forefathers. Let
us be faithful: those who thus honour God, he will honour, but such us
despise Him shall be lightly esteemed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 12](hos012)

</div>
