<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](hos000)  [Next](hos002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

([Hos 1:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001).md) Under a figure, is
represented the shameful idolatry of the ten tribes.

([Hos 1:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008).md) The calling of the
Gentiles, and the uniting Israel and Judah under the Messiah.

[Hosea 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 1:1</span></span>

Israel was prosperous, yet then Hosea boldly tells them of their sins,
and foretells their destruction. Men are not to be flattered in sinful
ways because they prosper in the world; nor will it last long if they go
on still in their trespasses. The prophet must show Israel their sin;
show it to be exceedingly hateful. Their idolatry is the sin they are
here charged with. Giving that glory to any creature which is due to God
alone, is an injury and affront to God; such as for a wife to take a
stranger, is to her husband. The Lord, doubtless, had good reasons for
giving such a command to the prophet; it would form an affecting picture
of the Lord's unmerited goodness and unwearied patience, and of the
perverseness and ingratitude of Israel. We should be broken and wearied
with half that perverseness from others, with which we try the patience
and grieve the Spirit of our God. Let us also be ready to bear any cross
the Lord appoints. The prophet must show the ruin of the people, in the
names given to his children. He foretells the fall of the royal family
in the name of his first child: call his name Jezreel, which signifies
"dispersion." He foretells God's abandoning the nation in the name of
the second child; Lo-ruhamah, "not beloved," or "not having obtained
mercy." God showed great mercy, but Israel abused his favours. Sin turns
away the mercy of God, even from Israel, his own professing people. If
pardoning mercy is denied, no other mercy can be expected. Though some,
through unbelief, are broken off, yet God will have a church in this
world till the end of time. Our salvation is owing to God's mercy, not
to any merit of our own. That salvation is sure, of which he is the
Author; and if he will work, none shall hinder.

[Hosea 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 1:8</span></span>

The rejection of Israel for a time, is signified by the name of another
child: call him Lo-ammi, "not my people." The Lord disowns all relation
to them. We love him, because he first loved us; but our being cast out
of covenant, is owing to ourselves and our folly. Mercy is remembered in
the midst of wrath; the rejection, as it shall not be total, so it shall
not be final. The same hand that wounded, is stretched forth to heal.
Very precious promises are here given concerning the Israel of God, and
they may be of use to us now. Some think that these promises will not
have accomplishment in full, till the general conversion of the Jews in
the latter days. Also this promise is applied to the gospel, and the
bringing in both the Jews and Gentiles to it, by St. Paul, [Rom
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025.md), [Rom
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026.md), and by St. Peter, [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md). To believe in Christ, is to have
him for our Head, and willingly to commit ourselves to his guidance and
government. And let us pray for the coming of the glorious day, when
there shall be one Lord through all the earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 2](hos002.md)

</div>
