<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos013)  [Next](joe000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 14:0</span></span>

([Hos 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)) An exhortation to
repentance.

([Hos 14:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)) Blessings promised,
showing the rich comforts of the gospel.

([Hos 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)) The just and the wicked.

[Hosea 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 14:1</span></span>

Israel is exhorted to return unto Jehovah, from their sins and idols, by
faith in his mercy, and grace through the promised Redeemer, and by
diligently attending on his worship and service. Take away iniquity;
lift it off as a burden we are ready to sink under, or as the
stumbling-block we have often fallen over. Take it all away by a free
and full forgiveness, for we cannot strike any of it off. Receive our
prayer graciously. They do not say what good they seek, but refer it to
God. It is not good of the world's showing, but good of God's giving.
They were to consider their sins, their wants, and the remedy; and they
were to take, not sacrifices, but words stating the desires of their
hearts, and with them to address the Lord. The whole forms a clear
description of the nature and tendency of a sinner's conversion to God
through Jesus Christ. As we draw near to God by the prayer of faith, we
should first beseech him to teach us what to ask. We must be earnest
with him to take away all iniquity.

[Hosea 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 14:4</span></span>

Israel seeks God's face, and they shall not seek it in vain. His anger
is turned from them. Whom God loves, he loves freely; not because they
deserve it, but of his own good pleasure. God will be to them all they
need. The graces of the Spirit are the hidden manna, hidden in the dew;
the grace thus freely bestowed on them shall not be in vain. They shall
grow upward, and be more flourishing; shall grow as the lily. The lily,
when come to its height, is a lovely flower, [Mat
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028), [Mat
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029). They shall grow downward, and be
more firm. With the flower of the lily shall be the strong root of the
cedar of Lebanon. Spiritual growth consists most in the growth of the
root, which is out of sight. They shall also spread as the vine, whose
branches extend very widely. When believers abound in good works, then
their branches spread. They shall be acceptable both to God and man.
Holiness is the beauty of a soul. The church is compared to the vine and
the olive, which bring forth useful fruits. God's promises pertain to
those only that attend on his ordinances; not such as flee to this
shadow only for shelter in a hot gleam, but all who dwell under it. When
a man is brought to God, all who dwell under his shadow fare the better.
The sanctifying fruits shall appear in his life. Thus believers grow up
into the experience and fruitfulness of the gospel. Ephraim shall say,
God will put it into his heart to say it, What have I to do any more
with idols! God's promises to us are more our security and our strength
for mortifying sin, than our promises to God. See the power of Divine
grace. God will work such a change in him, that he shall loathe the
idols as much as ever he loved them. See the benefit of sanctified
afflictions. Ephraim smarted for his idolatry, and this is the fruit,
even the taking away his sin, [Isa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009). See the nature of repentance; it
is a firm and fixed resolution to have no more to do with sin. The Lord
meets penitents with mercy, as the father of the prodigal met his
returning son. God will be to all true converts both a delight and a
defence; they shall sit under his shadow with delight. And as the root
of a tree; From me is thy fruit found: from Him we receive grace and
strength to enable us to do our duty.

[Hosea 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 14:9</span></span>

Who profit by the truths the prophet delivered? Such as set themselves
to understand and know these things. The ways of God's providence
towards us are right; all is well done. Christ is a Foundation Stone to
some, to others a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offence. That which
was ordained to life, becomes, through their abuse of it, death to them.
The same sun softens wax and hardens clay. But those transgressors
certainly have the most dangerous, fatal falls, who fall in the ways of
God, who split on the Rock of Ages, and suck poison out of the Balm of
Gilead. Let sinners in Zion fear this. May we learn to walk in the right
ways of God, as his righteous servants, and may none of us be
disobedient and unbelieving, and stumble at the word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Introduction](joe000)

</div>
