<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa050)  [Next](isa052.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 51:0</span></span>

([Isa 51:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001).md) Exhortations to trust
the Messiah.

([Isa 51:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004).md) The power of God, and
the weakness of man.

([Isa 51:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009).md) Christ defends his
people.

([Isa 51:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017).md) Their afflictions and
deliverances.

[Isaiah 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 51:1</span></span>

It is good for those privileged by the new birth, to consider that they
were shapen in sin. This should cause low thoughts of ourselves, and
high thoughts of Divine grace. It is the greatest comfort to be made
serviceable to the glory of God. The more holiness men have, and the
more good they do, the more gladness they have. Let us seriously reflect
upon our guilt. To do so will tend to keep the heart humble, and the
conscience awake and tender. They make Christ more precious to the soul,
and give strength to our attempts and prayers for others.

[Isaiah 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 51:4</span></span>

The gospel of Christ shall be preached and published. How shall we
escape if we neglect it? There is no salvation without righteousness.
The soul shall, as to this world, vanish like smoke, and the body be
thrown by like a worn-out garment. But those whose happiness is in
Christ's righteousness and salvation, will have the comfort of it when
time and days shall be no more. Clouds darken the sun, but do not stop
its course. The believer will enjoy his portion, while revilers of
Christ are in darkness.

[Isaiah 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 51:9</span></span>

The people whom Christ has redeemed with his blood, as well as by his
power, will obtain joyful deliverance from every enemy. He that designs
such joy for us at last, will he not work such deliverance in the mean
time, as our cases require? In this world of changes, it is a short step
from joy to sorrow, but in that world, sorrow shall never come in view.
They prayed for the display of God's power; he answers them with
consolations of his grace. Did we dread to sin against God, we should
not fear the frowns of men. Happy is the man that fears God always. And
Christ's church shall enjoy security by the power and providence of the
Almighty.

[Isaiah 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 51:17</span></span>

God calls upon his people to mind the things that belong to their
everlasting peace. Jerusalem had provoked God, and was made to taste the
bitter fruits. Those who should have been her comforters, were their own
tormentors. They have no patience by which to keep possession of their
own souls, nor any confidence in God's promise, by which to keep
possession of its comfort. Thou art drunken, not as formerly, with the
intoxicating cup of Babylon's idolatries, but with the cup of
affliction. Know, then, the cause of God's people may for a time seem as
lost, but God will protect it, by convincing the conscience, or
confounding the projects, of those that strive against it. The
oppressors required souls to be subjected to them, that every man should
believe and worship as they would have them. But all they could gain by
violence was, that people were brought to outward hypocritical
conformity, for consciences cannot be forced.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 52](isa052.md)

</div>
