<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa062)  [Next](isa064.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 63:0</span></span>

([Isa 63:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001).md) Christ's victory over
his enemies.

([Isa 63:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007).md) His mercy toward his
church.

([Isa 63:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015).md) The prayer of the
church.

[Isaiah 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 63:1</span></span>

The prophet, in vision, beholds the Messiah returning in triumph from
the conquest of his enemies, of whom Edom was a type. Travelling, not as
wearied by the combat, but, in the greatness of his strength, prepared
to overcome every opposing power. Messiah declares that he had been
treading the wine-press of the wrath of God, [Rev
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#019.md); [Rev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013.md), and by his own power, without
any human help, he had crushed his obstinate opposers, for the day of
vengeance was determined on, being the appointed season for rescuing his
church. Once, he appeared on earth in apparent weakness, to pour out his
precious blood as an atonement for our sins; but he will in due time
appear in the greatness of his strength. The vintage ripens apace; the
day of vengeance, fixed and determined on, approaches apace; let sinners
seek to be reconciled to their righteous Judge, ere he brings down their
strength to the earth. Does Christ say, "I come quickly?" let our hearts
reply, "Even so, come; let the year of the redeemed come."

[Isaiah 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 63:7</span></span>

The latter part of this chapter, and the whole of the next, seem to
express the prayers of the Jews on their conversation. They acknowledge
God's great mercies and favours to their nation. They confess their
wickedness and hardness of heart; they entreat his forgiveness, and
deplore the miserable condition under which they have so long suffered.
The only-begotten Son of the Father became the Angel or Messenger of his
love; thus he redeemed and bare them with tenderness. Yet they murmured,
and resisted his Holy Spirit, despising and persecuting his prophets,
rejecting and crucifying the promised Messiah. All our comforts and
hopes spring from the loving-kindness of the Lord, and all our miseries
and fears from our sins. But he is the Saviour, and when sinners seek
after him, who in other ages glorified himself by saving and feeding his
purchased flock, and leading them safely through dangers, and has given
his Holy Spirit to prosper the labours of his ministers, there is good
ground to hope they are discovering the way of peace.

[Isaiah 63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 63:15</span></span>

They beseech him to look down on the abject condition of their
once-favoured nation. Would it not be glorious to his name to remove the
veil from their hearts, to return to the tribes of his inheritance? The
Babylonish captivity, and the after-deliverance of the Jews, were
shadows of the events here foretold. The Lord looks down upon us in
tenderness and mercy. Spiritual judgments are more to be dreaded than
any other calamities; and we should most carefully avoid those sins
which justly provoke the Lord to leave men to themselves and to their
deceiver. "Our Redeemer from everlasting" is thy name; thy people have
always looked upon thee as the God to whom they might appeal. The Lord
will hear the prayers of those who belong to him, and deliver them from
those not called by his name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 64](isa064.md)

</div>
