<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa007)  [Next](isa009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 8:0</span></span>

([Isa 8:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001).md) Exhortations and
warnings.

([Isa 8:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009).md) Comfort for those who
fear God.

([Isa 8:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017).md) Afflictions to
idolaters.

[Isaiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 8:1</span></span>

The prophet is to write on a large roll, or on a metal tablet, words
which meant, "Make speed to spoil, hasten to the prey:" pointing out
that the Assyrian army should come with speed, and make great spoil.
Very soon the riches of Damascus and of Samaria, cities then secure and
formidable, shall be taken away by the king of Assyria. The prophet
pleads with the promised Messiah, who should appear in that land in the
fulness of time, and, therefore, as God, would preserve it in the mean
time. As a gentle brook is an apt emblem of a mild government, so an
overflowing torrent represents a conqueror and tyrant. The invader's
success was also described by a bird of prey, stretching its wings over
the whole land. Those who reject Christ, will find that what they call
liberty is the basest slavery. But no enemy shall pluck the believer out
of Emmanuel's hand, or deprive him of his heavenly inheritance.

[Isaiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 8:9</span></span>

The prophet challenges the enemies of the Jews. Their efforts would be
vain, and themselves broken to pieces. It concerns us, in time of
trouble, to watch against all such fears as put us upon crooked courses
for our own security. The believing fear of God preserves against the
disquieting fear of man. If we thought rightly of the greatness and
glory of God, we should see all the power of our enemies restrained. The
Lord, who will be a Sanctuary to those who trust in him, will be a Stone
of stumbling, and a Rock of offence, to those who make the creature
their fear and their hope. If the things of God be an offence to us,
they will undo us. The apostle quotes this as to all who persisted in
unbelief of the gospel of Christ, [Pe1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008.md). The crucified Emmanuel, who was
and is a Stumbling-stone and Rock of offence to unbelieving Jews, is no
less so to thousands who are called Christians. The preaching of the
cross is foolishness in their esteem; his doctrines and precepts offend
them.

[Isaiah 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 8:17</span></span>

The prophet foresaw that the Lord would hide his face; but he would look
for his return in favour to them again. Though not miraculous signs, the
children's names were memorials from God, suited to excite attention.
The unbelieving Jews were prone to seek counsel in difficulties, from
diviners of different descriptions, whose foolish and sinful ceremonies
are alluded to. Would we know how we may seek to our God, and come to
the knowledge of his mind? To the law and to the testimony; for there
you will see what is good, and what the Lord requires. We must speak of
the things of God in the words which the Holy Ghost teaches, and be
ruled by them. To those that seek to familiar spirits, and regard not
God's law and testimony, there shall be horror and misery. Those that go
away from God, go out of the way of all good; for fretfulness is a sin
that is its own punishment. They shall despair, and see no way of
relief, when they curse God. And their fears will represent every thing
as frightful. Those that shut their eyes against the light of God's
word, will justly be left to darkness. All the miseries that ever were
felt or witnessed on earth, are as nothing, compared with what will
overwhelm those who leave the words of Christ, to follow delusions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 9](isa009.md)

</div>
