<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa006)  [Next](isa008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 7:0</span></span>

([Isa 7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001).md) Ahaz threatened by Israel
and Syria; and is assured their attack would be in vain.

([Isa 7:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010).md) God gives a sure sign
by the promise of the long-expected Messiah.

([Isa 7:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017).md) The folly and sin of
seeking relief from Assyria are reproved.

[Isaiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 7:1</span></span>

Ungodly men are often punished by others as bad as themselves. Being in
great distress and confusion, the Jews gave up all for lost. They had
made God their enemy, and knew not how to make him their friend. The
prophet must teach them to despise their enemies, in faith and
dependence on God. Ahaz, in fear, called them two powerful princes. No,
says the prophet, they are but tails of smoking firebrands, burnt out
already. The two kingdoms of Syria and Israel were nearly expiring.
While God has work for the firebrands of the earth, they consume all
before them; but when their work is fulfilled, they will be extinguished
in smoke. That which Ahaz thought most formidable, is made the ground of
their defeat; because they have taken evil counsel against thee; which
is an offence to God. God scorns the scorners, and gives his word that
the attempt should not succeed. Man purposes, but God disposes. It was
folly for those to be trying to ruin their neighbours, who were
themselves near to ruin. Isaiah must urge the Jews to rely on the
assurances given them. Faith is absolutely necessary to quiet and
compose the mind in trials.

[Isaiah 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 7:10</span></span>

Secret disaffection to God is often disguised with the colour of respect
to him; and those who are resolved that they will not trust God, yet
pretend they will not tempt him. The prophet reproved Ahaz and his
court, for the little value they had for Divine revelation. Nothing is
more grievous to God than distrust, but the unbelief of man shall not
make the promise of God of no effect; the Lord himself shall give a
sign. How great soever your distress and danger, of you the Messiah is
to be born, and you cannot be destroyed while that blessing is in you.
It shall be brought to pass in a glorious manner; and the strongest
consolations in time of trouble are derived from Christ, our relation to
him, our interest in him, our expectations of him and from him. He would
grow up like other children, by the use of the diet of those countries;
but he would, unlike other children, uniformly refuse the evil and
choose the good. And although his birth would be by the power of the
Holy Ghost, yet he should not be fed with angels' food. Then follows a
sign of the speedy destruction of the princes, now a terror to Judah.
"Before this child," so it may be read; "this child which I have now in
my arms," (Shear-jashub, the prophet's own son, [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003),.md) shall be three or four years
older, these enemies' forces shall be forsaken of both their kings. The
prophecy is so solemn, the sign is so marked, as given by God himself
after Ahaz rejected the offer, that it must have raised hopes far beyond
what the present occasion suggested. And, if the prospect of the coming
of the Divine Saviour was a never-failing support to the hopes of
ancient believers, what cause have we to be thankful that the Word was
made flesh! May we trust in and love Him, and copy his example.

[Isaiah 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 7:17</span></span>

Let those who will not believe the promises of God, expect to hear the
alarms of his threatenings; for who can resist or escape his judgments?
The Lord shall sweep all away; and whomsoever he employs in any service
for him, he will pay. All speaks a sad change of the face of that
pleasant land. But what melancholy change is there, which sin will not
make with a people? Agriculture would cease. Sorrows of every kind will
come upon all who neglect the great salvation. If we remain unfruitful
under the means of grace, the Lord will say, Let no fruit grow on thee
henceforth for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 8](isa008.md)

</div>
