<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa043)  [Next](isa045.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 44:0</span></span>

([Isa 44:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001).md) Here are promises of the
influences of the Holy Spirit.

([Isa 44:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009).md) An exposure of the
folly of idolatry.

([Isa 44:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021).md) Also the deliverance
of God's people.

[Isaiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 44:1</span></span>

Israel is here called Jeshurun, which means "the upright one." Such only
are Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile. Those that serve God he will
own. He will help them over difficulties, and in their services. Water
is the emblem of the Holy Spirit; as water refreshes, cleanses, and
makes the earth fruitful, so do his influences the soul. This gift of
the Holy Ghost is the great blessing, the plentiful pouring out of which
God kept for the latter days. Where God gives his Spirit, he will give
all other blessings. Hereby shall be a great increase of the church;
thus it shall be spread to distant places. Was there any other Rock, or
Protector, that could defend them? None besides could foretell these
things to come, of which God by his prophets gave notice. All was set in
order in the Divine predictions, as well as in the Divine purposes.
Could any other have done so? Who can compare with Israel's Redeemer and
King?

[Isaiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 44:9</span></span>

Image-making is described, to expose the folly of idolaters. Though a
man had used part of a log for fuel, he fell down before an image made
of the remainder, praying it to deliver him. Man greatly dishonours God,
when he represents him after the image of man. Satan blinds the eyes of
unbelievers, causing absurd reasonings in matters of religion. Whether
men seek happiness in worldly things, or run into unbelief,
superstition, or any false system, they feed on ashes. A heart deceived
by pride, love of sin, and departure from God, turns men aside from his
holy truth and worship. While the affections are depraved, a man holds
fast the lie as his best treasure. Are our hearts set upon the wealth of
the world and its pleasures? They will certainly prove a lie. If we
trust to outward professions and doings, as if those would save us, we
deceive ourselves. Self-suspicion is the first step towards
self-deliverance. He that would deliver his soul, must question his
conscience, Is there not a lie in my right hand?

[Isaiah 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 44:21</span></span>

Return unto me. It is the great concern of those who have backslidden
from God, like the Jews of old, to hasten their return to him. The work
of redemption wrought for us by Christ, encourages to hope for all
blessings from him. Our transgressions and our sins are as a thick cloud
between heaven and earth: sins separate between us and God; they
threaten a storm of wrath. When God pardons sin, he blots out, he
dispels this cloud, this thick cloud, so that the way to heaven is open
again. The cloud is scattered by the Sun of righteousness; it is quite
gone. The comforts that flow into the soul when sin is pardoned, are
like clear shining after clouds and rain. Let not Israel be discouraged;
nothing is too hard for God: having made all, he can make what use he
pleases of any. Those that learn to know Christ, see all knowledge to be
foolishness, in comparison with the knowledge of him. And his enemies
will find their counsels turned into foolishness, and themselves taken
in their craftiness. The exact fulfilling the prophecies of Scripture
confirms the truth of the whole, and proves its Divine origin. The
particular favours God designed for his people in captivity, were
foretold here, long before they went into captivity. Very great
difficulties would be in the way of their deliverance; but it is
promised that by Divine power they should all be removed. God knew who
should be the Deliverer of his people; and let his church know it, that
when they heard such a name talked of, they might know their redemption
drew nigh. It is the greatest honour of the greatest men, to be employed
as instruments of the Divine favour to his people. In things wherein men
serve themselves, and look no further, God makes them do all his
pleasure. And a nobler Shepherd than Cyrus does his Father's will, till
his work is fully completed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 45](isa045.md)

</div>
