<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa018)  [Next](isa020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 19:0</span></span>

(v. 1-17) Judgments upon Egypt.

([Isa 19:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)) Its deliverance, and
the conversion of the people.

[Isaiah 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 19:1</span></span>

God shall come into Egypt with his judgments. He will raise up the
causes of their destruction from among themselves. When ungodly men
escape danger, they are apt to think themselves secure; but evil pursues
sinners, and will speedily overtake them, except they repent. The
Egyptians will be given over into the hand of one who shall rule them
with rigour, as was shortly after fulfilled. The Egyptians were renowned
for wisdom and science; yet the Lord would give them up to their own
perverse schemes, and to quarrel, till their land would be brought by
their contests to become an object of contempt and pity. He renders
sinners afraid of those whom they have despised and oppressed; and the
Lord of hosts will make the workers of iniquity a terror to themselves,
and to each other; and every object around a terror to them.

[Isaiah 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 19:18</span></span>

The words, "In that day," do not always refer to the passage just
before. At a time which was to come, the Egyptians shall speak the holy
language, the Scripture language; not only understand it, but use it.
Converting grace, by changing the heart, changes the language; for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. So many Jews shall come
to Egypt, that they shall soon fill five cities. Where the sun was
worshipped, a place infamous for idolatry, even there shall be a
wonderful reformation. Christ, the great Altar, who sanctifies every
gift, shall be owned, and the gospel sacrifices of prayer and praise
shall be offered up. Let the broken-hearted and afflicted, whom the Lord
has wounded, and thus taught to return to, and call upon him, take
courage; for He will heal their souls, and turn their sorrowing
supplications into joyful praises. The Gentile nations shall not only
unite with each other in the gospel fold under Christ, the great
Shepherd, but they shall all be united with the Jews. They shall be
owned together by him; they shall all share in one and the same
blessing. Meeting at the same throne of grace, and serving with each
other in the same business of religion, should end all disputes, and
unite the hearts of believers to each other in holy love.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 20](isa020)

</div>
