<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa059)  [Next](isa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 60:0</span></span>

([Isa 60:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)) The glories of the
church of God, when the fulness of the Gentiles shall come in.

([Isa 60:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009)) And the Jews shall be
converted and gathered from their dispersions.

([Isa 60:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015)) And the kingdoms of
this world shall become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ.

[Isaiah 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 60:1</span></span>

As far as we have the knowledge of God in us, and the favour of God
towards us, our light is come. And if God's glory is seen upon us to our
honour, we ought, not only with our lips, but in our lives, to return
its praise. We meet with nothing in the history of the Jews which can be
deemed a fulfilment of the prophecy in this chapter; we must conclude it
relates principally to future events. It predicts the purity and
enlargement of the church. The conversion of souls is here described.
They fly to Christ, to the church, to the word and ordinances, as doves
to their own home; thither they fly for refuge and shelter, thither they
fly for rest. What a pleasant sight to see poor souls hastening to
Christ!

[Isaiah 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 60:9</span></span>

God will be very gracious. We must begin with his promise, thence all
mercies take rise. Many shall be brought into the church, even from far
countries. Christ is always ready to receive all who come to him; and
the gate of mercy is always open, night and day. All that are about the
church shall be made serviceable to it. But those who will not be
subject to Christ's golden sceptre, to his word and Spirit, who will not
be kept in by the laws and rules of his family, shall be broken in
pieces by his iron rod. The peculiar advantages of every nation, and of
every description of men, shall join to beautify the church of Christ.
We must suppose this to be accomplished in the beauties of holiness, and
the graces and comforts of the Spirit, with which gospel ordinances are
adorned and enriched. Blessed be his name, the gates of Zion are ever
open to returning sinners.

[Isaiah 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 60:15</span></span>

We must look for the full accomplishment in times and things, exceeding
those of the Old Testament church. The nations and their kings shall lay
themselves out for the good of the church. Such a salvation, such a
redemption, shall be wrought out for thee, as discovers itself to be the
work of the Lord. Every thing shall be changed for the better. In thy
land shall no more be heard threats of those that do violence, nor
complaints of those that suffer violence. Thy walls shall be means of
safety, thy gates shall be written upon with praises to God. In the
close of this chapter are images and expressions used in the description
of the New Jerusalem, [Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023); [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). Nothing can answer to this but
some future glorious state of the church on earth, or the state of the
church triumphant in heaven. Those that make God their only light, shall
have him their all-sufficient light. And the happiness shall know no
change or alloy. No people on earth are all righteous; but there are no
mixtures in heaven. They shall be wholly righteous. The spirits of just
men shall there be made perfect. The glory of the church shall be to the
honour of God. When it shall be finished, it will appear a work of
wonder. It may seem too difficult to be brought about, but the God of
almighty power has undertaken it. It may seem to be delayed and put off;
but the Lord will hasten it in the time appointed by his wisdom, though
not in the time prescribed by our folly. Let this hope cheer us under
all difficulties, and stir us up to all diligence, that we may have an
abundant entrance into this everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 61](isa061)

</div>
