<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa032)  [Next](isa034.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 33:0</span></span>

([Isa 33:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001).md) God's judgments against
the enemies of his church.

([Isa 33:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015).md) The happiness of his
people.

[Isaiah 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 33:1</span></span>

Here we have the proud and false destroyer justly reckoned with for all
his fraud and violence. The righteous God often pays sinners in their
own coin. Those who by faith humbly wait for God, shall find him
gracious to them; as the day, so let the strength be. If God leaves us
to ourselves any morning, we are undone; we must every morning commit
ourselves to him, and go forth in his strength to do the work of the
day. When God arises, his enemies are scattered. True wisdom and
knowledge lead to strength of salvation, which renders us stedfast in
the ways of God; and true piety is the only treasure which can never be
plundered or spent. The distress Jerusalem was brought into, is
described. God's time to appear for his people, is, when all other
helpers fail. Let all who hear what God has done, acknowledge that he
can do every thing. Sinners in Zion will have much to answer for, above
other sinners. And those that rebel against the commands of the word,
cannot take its comforts in time of need. His wrath will burn those
everlastingly who make themselves fuel for it. It is a fire that shall
never be quenched, nor ever go out of itself; it is the wrath of an
ever-living God preying on the conscience of a never-dying soul.

[Isaiah 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 33:15</span></span>

The true believer watches against all occasions of sin. The Divine power
will keep him safe, and his faith in that power will keep him easy. He
shall want nothing needful for him. Every blessing of salvation is
freely bestowed on all that ask with humble, believing prayer; and the
believer is safe in time and for ever. Those that walk uprightly shall
not only have bread given, and their water sure, but they shall, by
faith, see the King of kings in his beauty, the beauty of holiness. The
remembrance of the terror they were in, shall add to the pleasure of
their deliverance. It is desirable to be quiet in our own houses, but
much more so to be quiet in God's house; and in every age Christ will
have a seed to serve him. Jerusalem had no large river running by it,
but the presence and power of God make up all wants. We have all in God,
all we need, or can desire. By faith we take Christ for our Prince and
Saviour; he reigns over his redeemed people. All that refuse to have Him
to reign over them, make shipwreck of their souls. Sickness is taken
away in mercy, when the fruit of it is the taking away of sin. If
iniquity be taken away, we have little reason to complain of outward
affliction. This last verse leads our thoughts, not only to the most
glorious state of the gospel church on earth, but to heaven, where no
sickness or trouble can enter. He that blotteth out our transgressions,
will heal our souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 34](isa034.md)

</div>
