<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa027)  [Next](isa029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 28:0</span></span>

([Isa 28:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)) The desolations of
Samaria.

([Isa 28:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#005)) The prosperity of
Judah; with reproofs for sinfulness and unbelief.

([Isa 28:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)) Christ is pointed out
as the sure Foundation for all believers.

([Isa 28:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#023)) God's dealings with
his people.

[Isaiah 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 28:1</span></span>

What men are proud of, be it ever so mean, is to them as a crown; but
pride is the forerunner of destruction. How foolishly drunkards act!
Those who are overcome with wine are overcome by Satan; and there is not
greater drudgery in the world than hard drinking. Their health is
ruined; men are broken in their callings and estates, and their families
are ruined by it. Their souls are in danger of being undone for ever,
and all merely to gratify a base lust. In God's professing people, like
Israel, it is worse than in any other. And he is just in taking away the
plenty they thus abuse. The plenty they were proud of, is but a fading
flower. Like the early fruit, which, as soon as discovered, is plucked
and eaten.

[Isaiah 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 28:5</span></span>

The prophet next turns to Judah, whom he calls the residue of his
people. Happy are those alone, who glory in the Lord of hosts himself.
Hence his people get wisdom and strength for every service and every
conflict. But it is only in Christ Jesus that the holy God communicates
with sinful man. And whether those that teach are drunk with wine, or
intoxicated with false doctrines and notions concerning the kingdom and
salvation of the Messiah, they not only err themselves, but lead
multitudes astray. All places where such persons have taught are filled
with errors. For our instruction in the things of God, it is needful
that the same precept and the same line should be often repeated to us,
that we may the better understand them. God, by his word, calls us to
what is really for our advantage; the service of God is the only true
rest for those weary of the service of sin, and there is no refreshment
but under the easy yoke of the Lord Jesus. All this had little effect
upon the people. Those who will not understand what is plain, but scorn
and despise it as mean and trifling, are justly punished. If we are at
peace with God, we have, in effect, made a covenant with death; whenever
it comes, it cannot do us any real damage, if we are Christ's. But to
think of making death our friend, while by sin we are making God our
enemy, is absurd. And do not they make lies their refuge who trust in
their own righteousness, or to a death-bed repentance? which is a
resolution to sin no more, when it is no longer in their power to do so.

[Isaiah 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 28:16</span></span>

Here is a promise of Christ, as the only foundation of hope for escaping
the wrath to come. This foundation was laid in Zion, in the eternal
counsels of God. This foundation is a stone, firm and able to support
his church. It is a tried stone, a chosen stone, approved of God, and
never failed any who made trial of it. A corner stone, binding together
the whole building, and bearing the whole weight; precious in the sight
of the Lord, and of every believer; a sure foundation on which to build.
And he who in any age or nation shall believe this testimony, and rest
all his hopes, and his never-dying soul on this foundation, shall never
be confounded. The right effect of faith in Christ is, to quiet and calm
the soul, till events shall be timed by Him, who has all times in his
own hand and power. Whatever men trust to for justification, except the
righteousness of Christ; or for wisdom, strength, and holiness, except
the influences of the Holy Ghost; or for happiness, except the favour of
God; that protection in which they thought to shelter themselves, will
prove not enough to answer the intention. Those who rest in a
righteousness of their own, will have deceived themselves: the bed is
too short, the covering too narrow. God will be glorified in the
fulfilling of his counsels. If those that profess to be members of God's
church, make themselves like Philistines and Canaanites, they must
expect to be dealt with as such. Then dare not to ridicule the reproofs
of God's word, or the approaches of judgements.

[Isaiah 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 28:23</span></span>

The husbandman applies to his calling with pains and prudence, in all
the works of it according to their nature. Thus the Lord, who has given
men this wisdom, is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in his working.
As the occasion requires, he threatens, corrects, spares, shows mercy,
or executes vengeance. Afflictions are God's threshing instruments, to
loosen us from the world, to part between us and our chaff, and to
prepare us for use. God will proportion them to our strength; they shall
be no heavier than there is need. When his end is answered, the trials
and sufferings of his people shall cease; his wheat shall be gathered
into the garner, but the chaff shall be burned with unquenchable fire.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 29](isa029)

</div>
