<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa034)  [Next](isa036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 35:0</span></span>

([Isa 35:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)) The flourishing state of
Christ's kingdom.

([Isa 35:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005)) The privileges of his
people.

[Isaiah 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 35:1</span></span>

Judea was prosperous in the days of Hezekiah, but the kingdom of Christ
is the great subject intended. Converting grace makes the soul that was
a wilderness, to rejoice with joy and singing, and to blossom
abundantly. The feeble and faint-hearted are encouraged. This is the
design of the gospel. Fear is weakening; the more we strive against it,
the stronger we are, both for doing and suffering; and he that says to
us, Be strong, has laid help for us upon One who is mighty. Assurance is
given of the approach of Messiah, to take vengeance on the powers of
darkness, to recompense with abundant comforts those that mourn in Zion;
He will come and save. He will come again at the end of time, to punish
those who have troubled his people; and to give those who were troubled
such rest as will be a full reward for all their troubles.

[Isaiah 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 35:5</span></span>

When Christ shall come to set up his kingdom in the world, then wonders,
great wonders, shall be wrought on men's souls. By the word and Spirit
of Christ, the spiritually blind were enlightened; and those deaf to the
calls of God were made to hear them readily. Those unable to do any
thing good, by Divine grace were made active therein. Those that knew
not how to speak of God or to God, had their lips opened to show forth
his praise. When the Holy Ghost came upon the Gentiles that heard the
word, then were the fountains of life opened. Most of the earth is still
a desert; neither means of grace, spiritual worshippers, nor fruits of
holiness, are to be found in it. But the way of religion and godliness
shall be laid open. The way of holiness is the way of God's commandment;
it is the good old way. And the way to heaven is a plain way. Those
knowing but little, and unlearned, shall be kept from missing the road.
It shall be a safe way; nothing can do them any real hurt. Christ, the
way to God, shall be clearly made known; and the way of a believer's
duty shall be plainly marked out. Let us then go forward cheerfully,
assured that the end of this way shall be everlasting joy, and rest for
the soul. Those who by faith are made citizens of the gospel Zion,
rejoice in Christ Jesus; and their sorrows and sighs are made to flee
away by Divine consolations. Thus these prophecies conclude. Our joyful
hopes and prospects of eternal life should swallow up all the sorrows
and all the joys of this present time. But of what avail is it to admire
the excellence of God's word, unless we can call its precious promises
our own? Do we love God, not only as our Creator, but because he gave
his only Son to die for us? And are we walking in the ways of holiness?
Let us try ourselves by such plain questions, rather than spend time on
things that may be curious and amusing, but are unprofitable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 36](isa036)

</div>
