<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa013)  [Next](isa015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 14:0</span></span>

(v. 1-23) The destruction of Babylon, and the death of its proud
monarch.

([Isa 14:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024).md) Assurance of the
destruction of Assyria.

([Isa 14:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028).md) The destruction of the
Philistines.

[Isaiah 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 14:1</span></span>

The whole plan of Divine Providence is arranged with a view to the good
of the people of God. A settlement in the land of promise is of God's
mercy. Let the church receive those whom God receives. God's people,
wherever their lot is cast, should endeavour to recommend religion by a
right and winning conversation. Those that would not be reconciled to
them, should be humbled by them. This may be applied to the success of
the gospel, when those were brought to obey it who had opposed it. God
himself undertakes to work a blessed change. They shall have rest from
their sorrow and fear, the sense of their present burdens, and the dread
of worse. Babylon abounded in riches. The king of Babylon having the
absolute command of so much wealth, by the help of it ruled the nations.
This refers especially to the people of the Jews; and it filled up the
measure of the king of Babylon's sins. Tyrants sacrifice their true
interest to their lusts and passions. It is gracious ambition to covet
to be like the Most Holy, for he has said, Be ye holy, for I am holy;
but it is sinful ambition to aim to be like the Most High, for he has
said, He who exalts himself shall be abased. The devil thus drew our
first parents to sin. Utter ruin should be brought upon him. Those that
will not cease to sin, God will make to cease. He should be slain, and
go down to the grave; this is the common fate of tyrants. True glory,
that is, true grace, will go up with the soul to heaven, but vain pomp
will go down with the body to the grave; there is an end of it. To be
denied burial, if for righteousness' sake, may be rejoiced in, [Mat
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md). But if the just punishment of
sin, it denotes that impenitent sinners shall rise to everlasting shame
and contempt. Many triumphs should be in his fall. God will reckon with
those that disturb the peace of mankind. The receiving the king of
Babylon into the regions of the dead, shows there is a world of spirits,
to which the souls of men remove at death. And that souls have converse
with each other, though we have none with them; and that death and hell
will be death and hell indeed, to all who fall unholy, from the height
of this world's pomps, and the fulness of its pleasures. Learn from all
this, that the seed of evil-doers shall never be renowned. The royal
city is to be ruined and forsaken. Thus the utter destruction of the New
Testament Babylon is illustrated, [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002.md). When a people will not be made
clean with the besom of reformation, what can they expect but to be
swept off the face of the earth with the besom of destruction?

[Isaiah 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 14:24</span></span>

Let those that make themselves a yoke and a burden to God's people, see
what they are to expect. Let those that are the called according to
God's purpose, comfort themselves, that whatever God has purposed, it
shall stand. The Lord of hosts has purposed to break the Assyrian's
yoke; his hand is stretched out to execute this purpose; who has power
to turn it back? By such dispensations of providence, the Almighty shows
in the most convincing manner, that sin is hateful in his sight.

[Isaiah 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 14:28</span></span>

Assurance is given of the destruction of the Philistines and their
power, by famine and war. Hezekiah would be more terrible to them than
Uzziah had been. Instead of rejoicing, there would be lamentation, for
the whole land would be ruined. Such destruction will come upon the
proud and rebellious, but the Lord founded Zion for a refuge to poor
sinners, who flee from the wrath to come, and trust in his mercy through
Christ Jesus. Let us tell all around of our comforts and security, and
exhort them to seek the same refuge and salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 15](isa015.md)

</div>
