<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa052)  [Next](isa054.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 53](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 53:0</span></span>

([Isa 53:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001).md) The person.

([Isa 53:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004).md) Sufferings.

([Isa 53:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010).md) Humiliation, and
exaltation of Christ, are minutely described; with the blessings to
mankind from his death.

[Isaiah 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 53:1</span></span>

No where in all the Old Testament is it so plainly and fully prophesied,
that Christ ought to suffer, and then to enter into his glory, as in
this chapter. But to this day few discern, or will acknowledge, that
Divine power which goes with the word. The authentic and most important
report of salvation for sinners, through the Son of God, is disregarded.
The low condition he submitted to, and his appearance in the world, were
not agreeable to the ideas the Jews had formed of the Messiah. It was
expected that he should come in pomp; instead of that, he grew up as a
plant, silently, and insensibly. He had nothing of the glory which one
might have thought to meet with him. His whole life was not only humble
as to outward condition, but also sorrowful. Being made sin for us, he
underwent the sentence sin had exposed us to. Carnal hearts see nothing
in the Lord Jesus to desire an interest in him. Alas! by how many is he
still despised in his people, and rejected as to his doctrine and
authority!

[Isaiah 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 53:4</span></span>

In these verses is an account of the sufferings of Christ; also of the
design of his sufferings. It was for our sins, and in our stead, that
our Lord Jesus suffered. We have all sinned, and have come short of the
glory of God. Sinners have their beloved sin, their own evil way, of
which they are fond. Our sins deserve all griefs and sorrows, even the
most severe. We are saved from the ruin, to which by sin we become
liable, by laying our sins on Christ. This atonement was to be made for
our sins. And this is the only way of salvation. Our sins were the
thorns in Christ's head, the nails in his hands and feet, the spear in
his side. He was delivered to death for our offences. By his sufferings
he purchased for us the Spirit and grace of God, to mortify our
corruptions, which are the distempers of our souls. We may well endure
our lighter sufferings, if He has taught us to esteem all things but
loss for him, and to love him who has first loved us.

[Isaiah 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 53:10</span></span>

Come, and see how Christ loved us! We could not put him in our stead,
but he put himself. Thus he took away the sin of the world, by taking it
on himself. He made himself subject to death, which to us is the wages
of sin. Observe the graces and glories of his state of exaltation.
Christ will not commit the care of his family to any other. God's
purposes shall take effect. And whatever is undertaken according to
God's pleasure shall prosper. He shall see it accomplished in the
conversion and salvation of sinners. There are many whom Christ
justifies, even as many as he gave his life a ransom for. By faith we
are justified; thus God is most glorified, free grace most advanced,
self most abased, and our happiness secured. We must know him, and
believe in him, as one that bore our sins, and saved us from sinking
under the load, by taking it upon himself. Sin and Satan, death and
hell, the world and the flesh, are the strong foes he has vanquished.
What God designed for the Redeemer he shall certainly possess. When he
led captivity captive, he received gifts for men, that he might give
gifts to men. While we survey the sufferings of the Son of God, let us
remember our long catalogue of transgressions, and consider him as
suffering under the load of our guilt. Here is laid a firm foundation
for the trembling sinner to rest his soul upon. We are the purchase of
his blood, and the monuments of his grace; for this he continually
pleads and prevails, destroying the works of the devil.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 54](isa054.md)

</div>
