<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa010)  [Next](isa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 11:0</span></span>

([Isa 11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)) The peaceful character
of Christ's kingdom and subjects.

([Isa 11:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)) The conversion of the
Gentiles and Jews.

[Isaiah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 11:1</span></span>

The Messiah is called a Rod, and a Branch. The words signify a small,
tender product; a shoot, such as is easily broken off. He comes forth
out of the stem of Jesse; when the royal family was cut down and almost
levelled with the ground, it would sprout again. The house of David was
brought very low at the time of Christ's birth. The Messiah thus gave
early notice that his kingdom was not of this world. But the Holy
Spirit, in all his gifts and graces, shall rest and abide upon him; he
shall have the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in him, [Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019); [Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009). Many consider that seven gifts of
the Holy Spirit are here mentioned. And the doctrine of the influences
of the Holy Spirit is here clearly taught. The Messiah would be just and
righteous in all his government. His threatening shall be executed by
the working of his Spirit according to his word. There shall be great
peace and quiet under his government. The gospel changes the nature, and
makes those who trampled on the meek of the earth, meek like them, and
kind to them. But it shall be more fully shown in the latter days. Also
Christ, the great Shepherd, shall take care of his flock, that the
nature of troubles, and of death itself, shall be so changed, that they
shall not do any real hurt. God's people shall be delivered, not only
from evil, but from the fear of it. Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? The better we know the God of love, the more shall we be
changed into the same likeness, and the better disposed to all who have
any likeness to him. This knowledge shall extend as the sea, so far
shall it spread. And this blessed power there have been witnesses in
every age of Christianity, though its most glorious time, here foretold,
is not yet arrived. Meanwhile let us aim that our example and endeavours
may help to promote the honour of Christ and his kingdom of peace.

[Isaiah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 11:10</span></span>

When the gospel should be publicly preached, the Gentiles would seek
Christ Jesus as their Lord and Saviour, and find rest of soul. When
God's time is come for the deliverance of his people, mountains of
opposition shall become plains before him. God can soon turn gloomy days
into glorious ones. And while we expect the Lord to gather his ancient
people, and bring them home to his church, also to bring in the fulness
of the Gentiles, when all will be united in holy love, let us tread the
highway of holiness he has made for his redeemed. Let us wait for the
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life, looking to him to
prepare our way through death, that river which separates this world
from the eternal world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 12](isa012)

</div>
