<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa004)  [Next](isa006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 5:0</span></span>

([Isa 5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)) The state and conduct of
the Jewish nation.

(v. 8-23) The judgments which would come.

([Isa 5:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024)) The executioners of
these judgments.

[Isaiah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 5:1</span></span>

Christ is God's beloved Son, and our beloved Saviour. The care of the
Lord over the church of Israel, is described by the management of a
vineyard. The advantages of our situation will be brought into the
account another day. He planted it with the choicest vines; gave them a
most excellent law, instituted proper ordinances. The temple was a
tower, where God gave tokens of his presence. He set up his altar, to
which the sacrifices should be brought; all the means of grace are
denoted thereby. God expects fruit from those that enjoy privileges.
Good purposes and good beginnings are good things, but not enough; there
must be vineyard fruit; thoughts and affections, words and actions,
agreeable to the Spirit. It brought forth bad fruit. Wild grapes are the
fruits of the corrupt nature. Where grace does not work, corruption
will. But the wickedness of those that profess religion, and enjoy the
means of grace, must be upon the sinners themselves. They shall no
longer be a peculiar people. When errors and vice go without check or
control, the vineyard is unpruned; then it will soon be grown over with
thorns. This is often shown in the departure of God's Spirit from those
who have long striven against him, and the removal of his gospel from
places which have long been a reproach to it. The explanation is given.
It is sad with a soul, when, instead of the grapes of humility,
meekness, love, patience, and contempt of the world, for which God
looks, there are the wild grapes of pride, passion, discontent, and
malice, and contempt of God; instead of the grapes of praying and
praising, the wild grapes of cursing and swearing. Let us bring forth
fruit with patience, that in the end we may obtain everlasting life.

[Isaiah 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 5:8</span></span>

Here is a woe to those who set their hearts on the wealth of the world.
Not that it is sinful for those who have a house and a field to purchase
another; but the fault is, that they never know when they have enough.
Covetousness is idolatry; and while many envy the prosperous, wretched
man, the Lord denounces awful woes upon him. How applicable to many
among us! God has many ways to empty the most populous cities. Those who
set their hearts upon the world, will justly be disappointed. Here is
woe to those who dote upon the pleasures and the delights of sense. The
use of music is lawful; but when it draws away the heart from God, then
it becomes a sin to us. God's judgments have seized them, but they will
not disturb themselves in their pleasures. The judgments are declared.
Let a man be ever so high, death will bring him low; ever so mean, death
will bring him lower. The fruit of these judgments shall be, that God
will be glorified as a God of power. Also, as a God that is holy; he
shall be owned and declared to be so, in the righteous punishment of
proud men. Those are in a woful condition who set up sin, and who exert
themselves to gratify their base lusts. They are daring in sin, and walk
after their own lusts; it is in scorn that they call God the Holy One of
Israel. They confound and overthrow distinctions between good and evil.
They prefer their own reasonings to Divine revelations; their own
devices to the counsels and commands of God. They deem it prudent and
politic to continue profitable sins, and to neglect self-denying duties.
Also, how light soever men make of drunkenness, it is a sin which lays
open to the wrath and curse of God. Their judges perverted justice.
Every sin needs some other to conceal it.

[Isaiah 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 5:24</span></span>

Let not any expect to live easily who live wickedly. Sin weakens the
strength, the root of a people; it defaces the beauty, the blossoms of a
people. When God's word is despised, and his law cast away, what can men
expect but that God should utterly abandon them? When God comes forth in
wrath, the hills tremble, fear seizes even great men. When God designs
the ruin of a provoking people, he can find instruments to be employed
in it, as he sent for the Chaldeans, and afterwards the Romans, to
destroy the Jews. Those who would not hear the voice of God speaking by
his prophets, shall hear the voice of their enemies roaring against
them. Let the distressed look which way they will, all appears dismal.
If God frowns upon us, how can any creature smile? Let us diligently
seek the well-grounded assurance, that when all earthly helps and
comforts shall fail, God himself will be the strength of our hearts, and
our portion for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 6](isa006)

</div>
