<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa005)  [Next](isa007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 6:0</span></span>

([Isa 6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001).md) The vision which Isaiah
beheld in the temple.

([Isa 6:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009).md) The Lord declares the
blindness to come upon the Jewish nation, and the destruction which
would follow.

[Isaiah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 6:1</span></span>

In this figurative vision, the temple is thrown open to view, even to
the most holy place. The prophet, standing outside the temple, sees the
Divine Presence seated on the mercy-seat, raised over the ark of the
covenant, between the cherubim and seraphim, and the Divine glory filled
the whole temple. See God upon his throne. This vision is explained,
[Joh 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041.md), that Isaiah now saw
Christ's glory, and spake of Him, which is a full proof that our Saviour
is God. In Christ Jesus, God is seated on a throne of grace; and through
him the way into the holiest is laid open. See God's temple, his church
on earth, filled with his glory. His train, the skirts of his robes,
filled the temple, the whole world, for it is all God's temple. And yet
he dwells in every contrite heart. See the blessed attendants by whom
his government is served. Above the throne stood the holy angels, called
seraphim, which means "burners;" they burn in love to God, and zeal for
his glory against sin. The seraphim showing their faces veiled, declares
that they are ready to yield obedience to all God's commands, though
they do not understand the secret reasons of his counsels, government,
or promises. All vain-glory, ambition, ignorance, and pride, would be
done away by one view of Christ in his glory. This awful vision of the
Divine Majesty overwhelmed the prophet with a sense of his own vileness.
We are undone if there is not a Mediator between us and this holy God. A
glimpse of heavenly glory is enough to convince us that all our
righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Nor is there a man that would dare
to speak to the Lord, if he saw the justice, holiness, and majesty of
God, without discerning his glorious mercy and grace in Jesus Christ.
The live coal may denote the assurance given to the prophet, of pardon,
and acceptance in his work, through the atonement of Christ. Nothing is
powerful to cleanse and comfort the soul, but what is taken from
Christ's satisfaction and intercession. The taking away sin is necessary
to our speaking with confidence and comfort, either to God in prayer, or
from God in preaching; and those shall have their sin taken away who
complain of it as a burden, and see themselves in danger of being undone
by it. It is great comfort to those whom God sends, that they go for
God, and may therefore speak in his name, assured that he will bear them
out.

[Isaiah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 6:9</span></span>

God sends Isaiah to foretell the ruin of his people. Many hear the sound
of God's word, but do not feel the power of it. God sometimes, in
righteous judgment, gives men up to blindness of mind, because they will
not receive the truth in the love of it. But no humble inquirer after
Christ, need to fear this awful doom, which is a spiritual judgment on
those who will still hold fast their sins. Let every one pray for the
enlightening of the Holy Spirit, that he may perceive how precious are
the Divine mercies, by which alone we are secured against this dreadful
danger. Yet the Lord would preserve a remnant, like the tenth, holy to
him. And blessed be God, he still preserves his church; however
professors or visible churches may be lopped off as unfruitful, the holy
seed will shoot forth, from whom all the numerous branches of
righteousness shall arise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 7](isa007.md)

</div>
