<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa047)  [Next](isa049) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 48:0</span></span>

([Isa 48:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)) The Jews reproved for
their idolatry.

([Isa 48:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009)) Yet deliverance is
promised them.

([Isa 48:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)) Solemn warnings of
judgment upon those who persisted in evil.

[Isaiah 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 48:1</span></span>

The Jews valued themselves on descent from Jacob, and used the name of
Jehovah as their God. They prided themselves respecting Jerusalem and
the temple, yet there was no holiness in their lives. If we are not
sincere in religion, we do but take the name of the Lord in vain. By
prophecy they were shown how God would deal with them, long before it
came to pass. God has said and done enough to prevent men's boasting of
themselves, which makes the sin and ruin of the proud worse; sooner or
later every mouth shall be stopped, and all become silent before Him. We
are all born children of disobedience. Where original sin is, actual sin
will follow. Does not the conscience of every man witness to the truth
of Scripture? May the Lord prove us, and render us doers of the word.

[Isaiah 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 48:9</span></span>

We have nothing ourselves to plead with God, why he should have mercy
upon us. It is for his praise, to the honour of his mercy, to spare. His
bringing men into trouble was to do them good. It was to refine them,
but not as silver; not so thoroughly as men refine silver. If God should
take that course, they are all dross, and, as such, might justly be put
away. He takes them as refined in part only. Many have been brought home
to God as chosen vessels, and a good work of grace begun in them, in the
furnace of affliction. It is comfort to God's people, that God will
secure his own honour, therefore work deliverance for them. And if God
delivers his people, he cannot be at a loss for instruments to be
employed. God has formed a plan, in which, for his own sake, and the
glory of his grace, he saves all that come to Him.

[Isaiah 48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 48:16</span></span>

The Holy Spirit qualifies for service; and those may speak boldly, whom
God and his Spirit send. This is to be applied to Christ. He was sent,
and he had the Spirit without measure. Whom God redeems, he teaches; he
teaches to profit by affliction, and then makes them partakers of his
holiness. Also, by his grace he leads them in the way of duty; and by
his providence he leads in the way of deliverance. God did not afflict
them willingly. If their sins had not turned them away, their peace
should have been always flowing and abundant. Spiritual enjoyments are
ever joined with holiness of life and regard to God's will. It will make
the misery of the disobedient the more painful, to think how happy they
might have been. And here is assurance given of salvation out of
captivity. Those whom God designs to bring home to himself, he will take
care of, that they want not for their journey. This is applicable to the
grace laid up for us in Jesus Christ, from whom all good flows to us, as
the water to Israel out of the rock, for that Rock was Christ. The
spiritual blessings of redemption, and the rescue of the church from
antichristian tyranny, are here pointed to. But whatever changes take
place, the Lord warned impenitent sinners that no good would come to
them; that inward anguish and outward trouble, which spring from guilt
and from the Divine wrath, must be their portion for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 49](isa049)

</div>
