<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa054)  [Next](isa056) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 55](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 55:0</span></span>

([Isa 55:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)) An invitation to receive
freely the blessings of the Saviour.

([Isa 55:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)) Gracious offers of
pardon and peace.

[Isaiah 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 55:1</span></span>

All are welcome to the blessings of salvation, to whom those blessings
are welcome. In Christ there is enough for all, and enough for each.
Those satisfied with the world, that see no need of Christ, do not
thirst. They are in no uneasiness about their souls: but where God gives
grace, he gives a thirst after it; and where he has given a thirst after
it, he will give it. Come to Christ, for he is the Fountain opened, he
is the Rock smitten. Come to holy ordinances, to the streams that make
glad the city of our God. Come to the healing waters, come to the living
waters, [Rev 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017). Our Saviour
referred to this, [Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037). Come, and
buy; make it your own by application of the grace of the gospel to
yourselves. Come, and eat; make it still more your own, and enjoy it.
The world comes short of our expectations; we promise ourselves, at
least, water in it, and we are disappointed; but Christ outdoes our
expectations. We come to him, and we find wine and milk. The gifts
offered to us are such as no price can be set upon. The things offered
are already paid for; for Christ purchased them at the full price of his
own blood, [Pe1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019). Our wants are
beyond number, and we have nothing to supply them; if Christ and heaven
are ours, we see ourselves for ever indebted to free grace. Hearken
diligently; let the proud heart stoop; not only come, but accept God's
offers. All the wealth and pleasure in the world, will not yield solid
comfort and content to the soul. They do not satisfy even the appetites
of the body; for all is vanity and vexation. Let the disappointments we
meet with in the world, help to drive us to Christ, and to seek for
satisfaction in him only. Then, and not before, we shall find rest for
our souls. Hear, and your soul shall live. On what easy terms is
happiness offered us! By the sure mercies of David, we are to understand
the Messiah. All his mercies are covenant mercies; they are purchased by
him, they are promised in him, and out of his hand they are dispensed to
us. We know not how to find the way to the waters, but Christ is given
to be a Leader, a Commander, to show us what to do, and enable us to do
it. Our business is to obey him, and follow him. And there is no coming
to the Father but by him. He is the Holy One of Israel, true to his
promises; and he has promised to glorify Christ, by giving him the
heathen for his inheritance.

[Isaiah 55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 55:6</span></span>

Here is a gracious offer of pardon, and peace, and of all happiness. It
shall not be in vain to seek God, now his word is calling to us, and his
Spirit is striving with us. But there is a day coming when he will not
be found. There may come such a time in this life; it is certain that at
death and judgment the door will be shut. There must be not only a
change of the way, but a change of the mind. We must alter our judgments
about persons and things. It is not enough to break off from evil
practices, we must strive against evil thoughts. To repent is to return
to our Lord, against whom we have rebelled. If we do so, God will
multiply to pardon, as we have multiplied to offend. But let none trifle
with this plenteous mercy, or use it as an occasion to sin. Men's
thoughts concerning sin, Christ, and holiness, concerning this world and
the other, vastly differ from God's; but in nothing more than in the
matter of pardon. We forgive, and cannot forget; but when God forgives
sin, he remembers it no more. The power of his word in the kingdoms of
providence and grace, is as certain as in that of nature. Sacred truth
produces a spiritual change in the mind of men, which neither rain nor
snow can make on the earth. It shall not return to the Lord without
producing important effects. If we take a special view of the church, we
shall find what great things God has done, and will do for it. The Jews
shall come to their own land; this shall represent the blessings
promised. Gospel grace will make a great change in men. Delivered from
the wrath to come, the converted sinner finds peace in his conscience;
and love constrains him to devote himself to the service of his
Redeemer. Instead of being profane, contentious, selfish, or sensual,
behold him patient, humble, kind, and peaceable. The hope of helping in
such a work should urge us to spread the gospel of salvation. And do
thou help us, O Spirit of all truth, to have such views of the fulness,
freeness, and greatness of the rich mercy in Christ, as may remove from
us all narrow views of sovereign grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 56](isa056)

</div>
