<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa040)  [Next](isa042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 41:0</span></span>

([Isa 41:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)) God's care of his
people.

([Isa 41:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010)) They are encouraged
not to fear.

([Isa 41:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021)) The vanity and folly
of idolatry.

[Isaiah 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 41:1</span></span>

Can any heathen god raise up one in righteousness, make what use of him
he pleases, and make him victorious over the nations? The Lord did so
with Abraham, or rather, he would do so with Cyrus. Sinners encourage
one another in the ways of sin; shall not the servants of the living God
stir up one another in his service? God's people are the seed of Abraham
his friend. This is certainly the highest title ever given to a mortal.
It means that Abraham, by Divine grace, was made like to God, and that
he was admitted to communion with Him. Happy are the servants of the
Lord, whom he has called to be his friends, and to walk with him in
faith and holy obedience. Let not such as have thus been favoured yield
to fear; for the contest may be sharp, but the victory shall be sure.

[Isaiah 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 41:10</span></span>

God speaks with tenderness; Fear thou not, for I am with thee: not only
within call, but present with thee. Art thou weak? I will strengthen
thee. Art thou in want of friends? I will help thee in the time of need.
Art thou ready to fall? I will uphold thee with that right hand which is
full of righteousness, dealing forth rewards and punishments. There are
those that strive with God's people, that seek their ruin. Let not God's
people render evil for evil, but wait God's time. It is the worm Jacob;
so little, so weak, so despised and trampled on by every body. God's
people are as worms, in humble thoughts of themselves, and in their
enemies' haughty thoughts of them; worms, but not vipers, not of the
serpent's seed. Every part of God's word is calculated to humble man's
pride, and to make him appear little in his own eyes. The Lord will help
them, for he is their Redeemer. The Lord will make Jacob to become a
threshing instrument. God will make him fit for use, new, and having
sharp spikes. This has fulfilment in the triumphs of the gospel of
Christ, and of all faithful followers of Christ, over the power of
darkness. God has provided comforts to supply all their wants, and to
answer all their prayers. Our way to heaven lies through the wilderness
of this world. The soul of man is in want, and seeks for satisfaction;
but becomes weary of seeking that in the world, which is not to be had
in it. Yet they shall have a constant supply, where one would least
expect it. I will open rivers of grace, rivers of living water, which
Christ spake of the Spirit, [Joh 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038),
[Joh 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039). When God sets up his church
in the Gentile wilderness, there shall be a great change, as if thorns
and briers were turned into cedars, and fir-trees, and myrtles. These
blessings are kept for the poor in spirit, who long for Divine
enlightening, pardon, and holiness. And God will render their barren
souls fruitful in the grace of his Spirit, that all who behold may
consider it.

[Isaiah 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 41:21</span></span>

There needs no more to show the folly of sin, than to bring to notice
the reasons given in defence of it. There is nothing in idols worthy of
regard. They are less than nothing, and worse than nothing. Let the
advocates of other doctrines than that of salvation through Christ,
bring their arguments. Can they tell of a cure for human depravity?
Jehovah has power which cannot be withstood; this he will make appear.
But the certain knowledge of the future must be only with Jehovah, who
fulfils his own plans. All prophecies, except those of the Bible, have
been uncertain. In the work of redemption the Lord showed himself much
more than in the release of the Jews from Babylon. The good tidings the
Lord will send in the gospel, is a mystery hid from ages and
generations. A Deliverer is raised up for us, of nobler name and greater
power than the deliverer of the captive Jews. May we be numbered among
his obedient servants and faithful friends.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 42](isa042)

</div>
