<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa064)  [Next](isa066.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 65:0</span></span>

([Isa 65:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001).md) The calling of the
Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews.

([Isa 65:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008).md) The Lord would preserve
a remnant.

([Isa 65:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011).md) Judgments upon the
wicked.

([Isa 65:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017).md) The future happy and
flourishing state of the church.

[Isaiah 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 65:1</span></span>

The Gentiles came to seek God, and find him, because they were first
sought and found of him. Often he meets some thoughtless trifler or
profligate opposer, and says to him, Behold me; and a speedy change
takes place. All the gospel day, Christ waited to be gracious. The Jews
were bidden, but would not come. It is not without cause they are
rejected of God. They would do what most pleased them. They grieved,
they vexed the Holy Spirit. They forsook God's temple, and sacrificed in
groves. They cared not for the distinction between clean and unclean
meats, before it was taken away by the gospel. Perhaps this is put for
all forbidden pleasures, and all that is thought to be gotten by sin,
that abominable thing which the Lord hates. Christ denounced many woes
against the pride and hypocrisy of the Jews. The proof against them is
plain. And let us watch against pride and self-preference, remembering
that every sin, and the most secret thoughts of man's heart, are known
and will be judged by God.

[Isaiah 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 65:8</span></span>

In the bunch of unripe grapes, at present of no value, the new wine is
contained. The Jews have been kept a distinct people, that all may
witness the fulfilment of ancient prophecies and promises. God's chosen,
the spiritual seed of praying Jacob, shall inherit his mountains of
bliss and joy, and be carried safe to them through the vale of tears.
All things are for the display of God's glory in the redemption of
sinners.

[Isaiah 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 65:11</span></span>

Here the different states of the godly and wicked, of the Jews who
believed, and of those who persisted in unbelief, are set against one
another. They prepared a table for that troop of deities which the
heathen worship, and poured out drink-offerings to that countless
number. Their worshippers spared no cost to honour them, which should
shame the worshippers of the true God. See the malignity of sin; it is
doing by choice what we know will displease God. In every age and
nation, the Lord leaves those who persist in doing evil, and despise the
call of the gospel. God's servants shall have the bread of life, and
shall want nothing good for them. But those who forsake the Lord, shall
be ashamed of vain confidence in their own righteousness, and the hopes
they built thereon. Wordly people bless themselves in the abundance of
this world's goods; but God's servants bless themselves in him. He is
their strength and portion. They shall honour him as the God of truth.
And it was promised that in him should all the families of the earth be
blessed. They shall think themselves happy in having him for their God,
who made them forget their troubles.

[Isaiah 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 65:17</span></span>

In the grace and comfort believers have in and from Christ, we are to
look for this new heaven and new earth. The former confusions, sins and
miseries of the human race, shall be no more remembered or renewed. The
approaching happy state of the church is described under a variety of
images. He shall be thought to die in his youth, and for his sins, who
only lives to the age of a hundred years. The event alone can determine
what is meant; but it is plain that Christianity, if universal, would so
do away violence and evil, as greatly to lengthen life. In those happy
days, all God's people shall enjoy the fruit of their labours. Nor will
children then be the trouble of their parents, or suffer trouble
themselves. The evil dispositions of sinners shall be completely
moritified; all shall live in harmony. Thus the church on earth shall be
full of happiness, like heaven. This prophecy assures the servants of
Christ, that the time approaches, wherein they shall be blessed with the
undisturbed enjoyment of all that is needful for their happiness. As
workers together with God, let us attend his ordinances, and obey his
commands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 66](isa066.md)

</div>
