<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa045)  [Next](isa047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 46:0</span></span>

([Isa 46:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)) The idols could not save
themselves, but God saves his people.

([Isa 46:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)) The folly of
worshipping idols.

[Isaiah 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 46:1</span></span>

The heathen insulted the Jews, as if their idols Bel and Nebo were too
hard for Jehovah. But their worshippers cannot help them; both the idols
and the idolaters are gone into captivity. Let not God's people be
afraid of either. Those things from which ungodly men expect safety and
happiness, will be found unable to save them from death and hell. The
true God will never fail his worshippers. The history of the life of
every believer is a kind of abstract of the history of Israel. Our
spiritual life is upheld by his grace, as constantly as our natural life
by his providence. And God will never leave them. The Author will be the
Finisher of their well-being, when, by decays, they need help as much as
in infancy. This promise to Israel, enfeebled and grown old as a nation,
is applicable to every aged follower of Christ. When compassed about
with infirmities, and perhaps those around begin to grow weary of you,
yet I am He that I have promised to be, He that you would have me to be.
I will bear you up; carry you on in your way, and carry you home at
last. If we learn to trust in and love him, we need not be anxious about
our remaining days or years; he will still provide for us and watch over
us, both as the creatures of his power, and as new-created by his
Spirit.

[Isaiah 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 46:5</span></span>

Here the folly of those who made idols, and then prayed to them, is
exposed. How does the profuseness of idolaters shame the niggardliness
of many who call themselves God's servants, but are for a religion which
costs them nothing! The service of sin always costs a great deal. God
puts it to them what senseless, helpless things idols are. Let, then,
the Jews show themselves men, avoiding such abominations. Many Scripture
prophecies, delivered long ago, are not yet fulfilled; but the
fulfilling of some is an earnest that the rest will come to pass.
Nothing can help more to make us easy, than to be assured that God will
do all his pleasure. Even those who know not and mind not God's revealed
will, are called and used to fulfil the counsels of his secret will.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, sooner than one tittle of the word of
God. Obstinate sinners are addressed. Such were far from acceptance, but
they were summoned to hearken to the word of the Lord. The salvation of
a sinner begins with a humble and contrite heart, that trembles at God's
word, with godly sorrow working true repentance, and faith in his mercy,
through the obedience unto death of our Divine Surety. Christ, as the
Divine righteousness and salvation to his people, would come in the
appointed time. His salvation abides in his church for all believers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 47](isa047)

</div>
