<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa016)  [Next](isa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 17:0</span></span>

([Isa 17:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)) Syria and Israel
threatened.

([Isa 17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012)) The woe of Israel's
enemies.

[Isaiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 17:1</span></span>

Sin desolates cities. It is strange that great conquerors should take
pride in being enemies to mankind; but it is better that flocks should
lie down there, than that they should harbour any in open rebellion
against God and holiness. The strong holds of Israel, the kingdom of the
ten tribes, will be brought to ruin. Those who are partakers in sin, are
justly made partakers in ruin. The people had, by sins, made themselves
ripe for ruin; and their glory was as quickly cut down and taken away by
the enemy, as the corn is out of the field by the husbandman. Mercy is
reserved in the midst of judgment, for a remnant. But very few shall be
marked to be saved. Only here and there one was left behind. But they
shall be a remnant made holy. The few that are saved were awakened to
return to God. They shall acknowledge his hand in all events; they shall
give him the glory due to his name. To bring us to this, is the design
of his providence, as he is our Maker; and the work of his grace, as he
is the Holy One of Israel. They shall look off from their idols, the
creatures of their own fancy. We have reason to account those
afflictions happy, which part between us and our sins. The God of our
salvation is the Rock of our strength; and our forgetfulness and
unmindfulness of him are at the bottom of all sin. The pleasant plants,
and shoots from a foreign soil, are expressions for strange and
idolatrous worship, and the vile practices connected therewith.
Diligence would be used to promote the growth of these strange slips,
but all in vain. See the evil and danger of sin, and its certain
consequences.

[Isaiah 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 17:12</span></span>

The rage and force of the Assyrians resembled the mighty waters of the
sea; but when the God of Israel should rebuke them, they would flee like
chaff, or like a rolling thing, before the whirlwind. In the evening
Jerusalem would be in trouble, because of the powerful invader, but
before morning his army would be nearly cut off. Happy are those who
remember God as their salvation, and rely on his power and grace. The
trouble of the believers, and the prosperity of their enemies, will be
equally short; while the joy of the former, and the destruction of those
that hate and spoil them, shall last for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 18](isa018)

</div>
