<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 5:0</span></span>

([Jam 5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)) The judgments of God
denounced against rich unbelievers.

([Jam 5:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)) Exhortation to patience
and meekness under tribulations.

([Jam 5:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)) Cautions against rash
swearing Prayer recommended in afflictive and prosperous circumstances,
Christians to confess their faults to each other.

([Jam 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019), [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)) The happiness of being the means
of the conversion of a sinner.

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

Public troubles are most grievous to those who live in pleasure, and are
secure and sensual, though all ranks suffer deeply at such times. All
idolized treasures will soon perish, except as they will rise up in
judgment against their possessors. Take heed of defrauding and
oppressing; and avoid the very appearance of it. God does not forbid us
to use lawful pleasures; but to live in pleasure, especially sinful
pleasure, is a provoking sin. Is it no harm for people to unfit
themselves for minding the concerns of their souls, by indulging bodily
appetites? The just may be condemned and killed; but when such suffer by
oppressors, this is marked by God. Above all their other crimes, the
Jews had condemned and crucified that Just One who had come among them,
even Jesus Christ the righteous.

[James 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 5:7</span></span>

Consider him that waits for a crop of corn; and will not you wait for a
crown of glory? If you should be called to wait longer than the
husbandman, is not there something more worth waiting for? In every
sense the coming of the Lord drew nigh, and all his people's losses,
hardships, and sufferings, would be repaid. Men count time long, because
they measure it by their own lives; but all time is as nothing to God;
it is as a moment. To short-lived creatures a few years seem an age; but
Scripture, measuring all things by the existence of God, reckons
thousands of years but so many days. God brought about things in Job's
case, so as plainly to prove that he is very pitiful and of tender
mercy. This did not appear during his troubles, but was seen in the
event, and believers now will find a happy end to their trials. Let us
serve our God, and bear our trials, as those who believe that the end
will crown all. Our eternal happiness is safe if we trust to him: all
else is mere vanity, which soon will be done with for ever.

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

The sin of swearing is condemned; but how many make light of common
profane swearing! Such swearing expressly throws contempt upon God's
name and authority. This sin brings neither gain, nor pleasure, nor
reputation, but is showing enmity to God without occasion and without
advantage It shows a man to be an enemy to God, however he pretends to
call himself by his name, or sometimes joins in acts of worship. But the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain. In a day
of affliction nothing is more seasonable than prayer. The spirit is then
most humble, and the heart is broken and tender. It is necessary to
exercise faith and hope under afflictions; and prayer is the appointed
means for obtaining and increasing these graces. Observe, that the
saving of the sick is not ascribed to the anointing with oil, but to
prayer. In a time of sickness it is not cold and formal prayer that is
effectual, but the prayer of faith. The great thing we should beg of God
for ourselves and others in the time of sickness is, the pardon of sin.
Let nothing be done to encourage any to delay, under the mistaken fancy
that a confession, a prayer, a minister's absolution and exhortation, or
the sacrament, will set all right at last, where the duties of a godly
life have been disregarded. To acknowledge our faults to each other,
will tend greatly to peace and brotherly love. And when a righteous
person, a true believer, justified in Christ, and by his grace walking
before God in holy obedience, presents an effectual fervent prayer,
wrought in his heart by the power of the Holy Spirit, raising holy
affections and believing expectations and so leading earnestly to plead
the promises of God at his mercy-seat, it avails much. The power of
prayer is proved from the history of Elijah. In prayer we must not look
to the merit of man, but to the grace of God. It is not enough to say a
prayer, but we must pray in prayer. Thoughts must be fixed, desires must
be firm and ardent, and graces exercised. This instance of the power of
prayer, encourages every Christian to be earnest in prayer. God never
says to any of the seed of Jacob, Seek my face in vain. Where there may
not be so much of miracle in God's answering our prayers, yet there may
be as much of grace.

[James 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 5:19</span></span>

It is no mark of a wise or holy man, to boast of being free from error,
or to refuse to acknowledge an error. And there is some doctrinal
mistake at the bottom of every practical mistake. There is no one
habitually bad, but upon some bad principle. This is conversion; to turn
a sinner from the error of his ways, not merely from one party to
another, or from one notion and way of thinking to another. There is no
way effectually and finally to hide sin, but forsaking it. Many sins are
hindered in the party converted; many also may be so in others whom he
may influence. The salvation of one soul is of infinitely greater
importance than preserving the lives of multitudes, or promoting the
welfare of a whole people. Let us in our several stations keep these
things in mind, sparing no pains in God's service, and the event will
prove that our labour is not in vain in the Lord. For six thousand years
He has been multiplying pardons, and yet his free grace is not tired nor
grown weary. Certainly Divine mercy is an ocean that is ever full and
ever flowing. May the Lord give us a part in this abundant mercy,
through the blood of Christ, and the sanctification of the Spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Introduction](pe1000)

</div>
