<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam001)  [Next](jam003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 2:0</span></span>

([Jam 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001).md) All professions of faith
are vain, if not producing love and justice to others.

([Jam 2:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014).md) The necessity of good
works to prove the sincerity of faith, which otherwise will be of no
more advantage than the faith of devils.

[James 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 2:1</span></span>

Those who profess faith in Christ as the Lord of glory, must not respect
persons on account of mere outward circumstances and appearances, in a
manner not agreeing with their profession of being disciples of the
lowly Jesus. St. James does not here encourage rudeness or disorder:
civil respect must be paid; but never such as to influence the
proceedings of Christians in disposing of the offices of the church of
Christ, or in passing the censures of the church, or in any matter of
religion. Questioning ourselves is of great use in every part of the
holy life. Let us be more frequent in this, and in every thing take
occasion to discourse with our souls. As places of worship cannot be
built or maintained without expense, it may be proper that those who
contribute thereto should be accommodated accordingly; but were all
persons more spiritually-minded, the poor would be treated with more
attention that usually is the case in worshipping congregations. A lowly
state is most favourable for inward peace and for growth in holiness.
God would give to all believers riches and honours of this world, if
these would do them good, seeing that he has chosen them to be rich in
faith, and made them heirs of his kingdom, which he promised to bestow
on all who love him. Consider how often riches lead to vice and
mischief, and what great reproaches are thrown upon God and religion, by
men of wealth, power, and worldly greatness; and it will make this sin
appear very sinful and foolish. The Scripture gives as a law, to love
our neighbour as ourselves. This law is a royal law, it comes from the
King of kings; and if Christians act unjustly, they are convicted by the
law as transgressors. To think that our good deeds will atone for our
bad deeds, plainly puts us upon looking for another atonement. According
to the covenant of works, one breach of any one command brings a man
under condemnation, from which no obedience, past, present, or future,
can deliver him. This shows us the happiness of those that are in
Christ. We may serve him without slavish fear. God's restraints are not
a bondage, but our own corruptions are so. The doom passed upon
impenitent sinners at last, will be judgment without mercy. But God
deems it his glory and joy, to pardon and bless those who might justly
be condemned at his tribunal; and his grace teaches those who partake of
his mercy, to copy it in their conduct.

[James 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 2:14</span></span>

Those are wrong who put a mere notional belief of the gospel for the
whole of evangelical religion, as many now do. No doubt, true faith
alone, whereby men have part in Christ's righteousness, atonement, and
grace, saves their souls; but it produces holy fruits, and is shown to
be real by its effect on their works; while mere assent to any form of
doctrine, or mere historical belief of any facts, wholly differs from
this saving faith. A bare profession may gain the good opinion of pious
people; and it may procure, in some cases, worldly good things; but what
profit will it be, for any to gain the whole world, and to lose their
souls? Can this faith save him? All things should be accounted
profitable or unprofitable to us, as they tend to forward or hinder the
salvation of our souls. This place of Scripture plainly shows that an
opinion, or assent to the gospel, without works, is not faith. There is
no way to show we really believe in Christ, but by being diligent in
good works, from gospel motives, and for gospel purposes. Men may boast
to others, and be conceited of that which they really have not. There is
not only to be assent in faith, but consent; not only an assent to the
truth of the word, but a consent to take Christ. True believing is not
an act of the understanding only, but a work of the whole heart. That a
justifying faith cannot be without works, is shown from two examples,
Abraham and Rahab. Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned unto him
for righteousness. Faith, producing such works, advanced him to peculiar
favours. We see then, [Jam 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024.md), how
that by works a man is justified, not by a bare opinion or profession,
or believing without obeying; but by having such faith as produces good
works. And to have to deny his own reason, affections, and interests, is
an action fit to try a believer. Observe here, the wonderful power of
faith in changing sinners. Rahab's conduct proved her faith to be
living, or having power; it showed that she believed with her heart, not
merely by an assent of the understanding. Let us then take heed, for the
best works, without faith, are dead; they want root and principle. By
faith any thing we do is really good; as done in obedience to God, and
aiming at his acceptance: the root is as though it were dead, when there
is no fruit. Faith is the root, good works are the fruits; and we must
see to it that we have both. This is the grace of God wherein we stand,
and we should stand to it. There is no middle state. Every one must
either live God's friend, or God's enemy. Living to God, as it is the
consequence of faith, which justifies and will save, obliges us to do
nothing against him, but every thing for him and to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 3](jam003.md)

</div>
