<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg015)  [Next](jdg017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 16:0</span></span>

([Jdg 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)) Samson's escape from
Gaza.

([Jdg 16:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#004)) Samson enticed to
declare his strength lay.

([Jdg 16:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#018)) The Philistines take
Samson, and put out his eyes.

([Jdg 16:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#022)) Samson's strength is
renewed.

([Jdg 16:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#025)) He destroys many of
the Philistines.

[Judges 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 16:1</span></span>

Hitherto Samson's character has appeared glorious, though uncommon. In
this chapter we find him behaving in so wicked a manner, that many
question whether or not he were a godly man. But the apostle has
determined this, [Heb 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032). By
adverting to the doctrines and examples of Scripture, the artifices of
Satan, the deceitfulness of the human heart, and the methods in which
the Lord frequently deals with his people, we may learn useful lessons
from this history, at which some needlessly stumble, while others cavil
and object. The peculiar time in which Samson lived may account for many
things, which, if done in our time, and without the special appointment
of Heaven, would be highly criminal. And there might have been in him
many exercises of piety, which, if recorded, would have reflected a
different light upon his character. Observe Samson's danger. Oh that all
who indulge their sensual appetites in drunkenness, or any fleshly
lusts, would see themselves thus surrounded, way-laid, and marked for
ruin by their spiritual enemies! The faster they sleep, the more secure
they feel, the greater their danger. We hope it was with a pious
resolution not to return to his sin, that he rose under a fear of the
danger he was in. Can I be safe under this guilt? It was bad that he lay
down without such checks; but it would have been worse, if he had laid
still under them.

[Judges 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 16:4</span></span>

Samson had been more than once brought into mischief and danger by the
love of women, yet he would not take warning, but is again taken in the
same snare, and this third time is fatal. Licentiousness is one of the
things that take away the heart. This is a deep pit into which many have
fallen; but from which few have escaped, and those by a miracle of
mercy, with the loss of reputation and usefulness, of almost all, except
their souls. The anguish of the suffering is ten thousand times greater
than all the pleasures of the sin.

[Judges 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 16:18</span></span>

See the fatal effects of false security. Satan ruins men by flattering
them into a good opinion of their own safety, and so bringing them to
mind nothing, and fear nothing; and then he robs them of their strength
and honour, and leads them captive at his will. When we sleep our
spiritual enemies do not. Samson's eyes were the inlets of his sin,
([Jdg 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#001),) and now his punishment
began there. Now the Philistines blinded him, he had time to remember
how his own lust had before blinded him. The best way to preserve the
eyes, is, to turn them away from beholding vanity. Take warning by his
fall, carefully to watch against all fleshly lusts; for all our glory is
gone, and our defence departed from us, when our separation to God, as
spiritual Nazarites, is profaned.

[Judges 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 16:22</span></span>

Samson's afflictions were the means of bringing him to deep repentance.
By the loss of his bodily sight the eyes of his understanding were
opened; and by depriving him of bodily strength, the Lord was pleased to
renew his spiritual strength. The Lord permits some few to wander wide
and sink deep, yet he recovers them at last, and marking his displeasure
at sin in their severe temporal sufferings, preserves them from sinking
into the pit of destruction. Hypocrites may abuse these examples, and
infidels mock at them, but true Christians will thereby be rendered more
humble, watchful, and circumspect; more simple in their dependence on
the Lord, more fervent in prayer to be kept from falling, and in praise
for being preserved; and, if they fall, they will be kept from sinking
into despair.

[Judges 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 16:25</span></span>

Nothing fills up the sins of any person or people faster than mocking
and misusing the servants of God, even thought it is by their own folly
that they are brought low. God put it into Samson's heart, as a public
person, thus to avenge on them God's quarrel, Israel's, and his own.
That strength which he had lost by sin, he recovers by prayer. That it
was not from passion or personal revenge, but from holy zeal for the
glory of God and Israel, appears from God's accepting and answering the
prayer. The house was pulled down, not by the natural strength of
Samson, but by the almighty power of God. In his case it was right he
should avenge the cause of God and Israel. Nor is he to be accused of
self-murder. He sought not his own death, but Israel's deliverance, and
the destruction of their enemies. Thus Samson died in bonds, and among
the Philistines, as an awful rebuke for his sins; but he died repentant.
The effects of his death typified those of the death of Christ, who, of
his own will, laid down his life among transgressors, and thus
overturned the foundation of Satan's kingdom, and provided for the
deliverance of his people. Great as was the sin of Samson, and justly as
he deserved the judgments he brought upon himself, he found mercy of the
Lord at last; and every penitent shall obtain mercy, who flees for
refuge to that Saviour whose blood cleanses from all sin. But here is
nothing to encourage any to indulge sin, from a hope they shall at last
repent and be saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 17](jdg017)

</div>
