<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg005)  [Next](jdg007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001.md)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 6:0</span></span>

([Jdg 6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001).md) Israel oppressed by
Midianites.

([Jdg 6:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#007).md) Israel rebuked by a
prophet.

([Jdg 6:11-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011).md) Gideon set to deliver
Israel.

([Jdg 6:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025).md) Gideon destroys Baal's
altar.

([Jdg 6:33-40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033).md) Signs given him.

[Judges 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 6:1</span></span>

Israel's sin was renewed, and Israel's troubles were repeated. Let all
that sin expect to suffer. The Israelites hid themselves in dens and
caves; such was the effect of a guilty conscience. Sin dispirits men.
The invaders left no food for Israel, except what was taken into the
caves. They prepared that for Baal with which God should have been
served, now God justly sends an enemy to take it away in the season
thereof.

[Judges 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 6:7</span></span>

They cried to God for a deliverer, and he sent them a prophet to teach
them. When God furnishes a land with faithful ministers, it is a token
that he has mercy in store for it. He charges them with rebellion
against the Lord; he intends to bring them to repentance. Repentance is
real when the sinfulness of sin, as disobedience to God, is chiefly
lamented.

[Judges 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 6:11</span></span>

Gideon was a man of a brave, active spirit, yet in obscurity through the
times: he is here stirred up to undertake something great. It was very
sure that the Lord was with him, when his Angel was with him. Gideon was
weak in faith, which made it hard to reconcile the assurances of the
presence of God with the distress to which Israel was brought. The Angel
answered his objections. He told him to appear and act as Israel's
deliverer, there needed no more. Bishop Hall says, While God calls
Gideon valiant, he makes him so. God delights to advance the humble.
Gideon desires to have his faith confirmed. Now, under the influences of
the Spirit, we are not to expect signs before our eyes such as Gideon
here desired, but must earnestly pray to God, that if we have found
grace in his sight, he would show us a sign in our heart, by the
powerful working of his Spirit there, The Angel turned the meat into an
offering made by fire; showing that he was not a man who needed meat,
but the Son of God, who was to be served and honoured by sacrifice, and
who in the fulness of time was to make himself a sacrifice. Hereby a
sign was given to Gideon, that he had found grace in God's sight. Ever
since man has by sin exposed himself to God's wrath and curse, a message
from heaven has been a terror to him, as he scarcely dares to expect
good tidings thence. In this world, it is very awful to have any
converse with that world of spirits to which we are so much strangers.
Gideon's courage failed him. But God spoke peace to him.

[Judges 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 6:25</span></span>

See the power of God's grace, that he could raise up a reformer; and the
kindness of his grace, that he would raise up a deliverer, out of the
family of a leader in idolatry. Gideon must not think it enough not to
worship at that altar; he must throw it down, and offer sacrifice on
another. It was needful he should make peace with God, before he made
war on Midian. Till sin be pardoned through the great Sacrifice, no good
is to be expected. God, who has all hearts in his hands, influenced
Joash to appear for his son against the advocates for Baal, though he
had joined formerly in the worship of Baal. Let us do our duty, and
trust God with our safety. Here is a challenge to Baal, to do either
good or evil; the result convinced his worshippers of their folly, in
praying to one to help them that could not avenge himself.

[Judges 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 6:33</span></span>

These signs are truly miraculous, and very significant. Gideon and his
men were going to fight the Midianites; could God distinguish between a
small fleece of Israel, and the vast floor of Midian? Gideon is made to
know that God could do so. Is Gideon desirous that the dew of Divine
grace might come down upon himself in particular? He sees the fleece wet
with dew to assure him of it. Does he desire that God will be as the dew
to all Israel? Behold, all the ground is wet. What cause we sinners of
the Gentiles have, to bless the Lord that the dew of heavenly blessings,
once confined to Israel, is now sent to all the inhabitants of the
earth! Yet still the means of grace are in different measures, according
to the purposes of God. In the same congregation, one man's soul is like
Gideon's moistened fleece, another like the dry ground.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 7](jdg007.md)

</div>
