<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg008)  [Next](jdg010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001.md)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 9:0</span></span>

([Jdg 9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001).md) Abimelech murders his
brethren, and is made king.

([Jdg 9:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007).md) Jotham rebukes the
Shechemites.

([Jdg 9:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#022).md) The Shechemites
conspire against Abimelech.

(v. 30-49) Abimelech destroys Shechem.

([Jdg 9:50-57](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050).md) Abimelech slain.

[Judges 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 9:1</span></span>

The men of Shechem chose Abimelech king. God was not consulted whether
they should have any king, much less who it should be. If parents could
see what their children would do, and what they are to suffer, their joy
in them often would be turned into sorrow: we may be thankful that we
cannot know what shall happen. Above all, we should fear and watch
against sin; for our evil conduct may produce fatal effects upon our
families, after we are in our graves.

[Judges 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 9:7</span></span>

There was no occasion for the trees to choose a king, they are all the
trees of the Lord which he has planted. Nor was there any occasion for
Israel to set a king over them, for the Lord was their King. Those who
bear fruit for the public good, are justly respected and honoured by all
that are wise, more than those who merely make a figure. All these
fruit-trees gave much the same reason for their refusal to be promoted
over the trees; or, as the margin reads it, to go up and down for the
trees. To rule, involves a man in a great deal both of toil and care.
Those who are preferred to public trust and power, must forego all
private interests and advantages, for the good of others. And those
advanced to honour and dignity, are in great danger of losing their
fruitfulness. For which reason, they that desire to do good, are afraid
of being too great. Jotham compares Abimelech to the bramble or thistle,
a worthless plant, whose end is to be burned. Such a one was Abimelech.

[Judges 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 9:22</span></span>

Abimelech is seated in the throne his father refused. But how long does
this glory last? Stay but three years, and see the bramble withered and
burned. The prosperity of the wicked is short and fickle. The
Shechemites are plagued by no other hand than Abimelech's. They raised
him unjustly to the throne; they first feel the weight of his sceptre.

[Judges 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 9:30</span></span>

Abimelech intended to punish the Shechemites for slighting him now, but
God punished them for their serving him formerly in the murder of
Gideon's sons. When God uses men as instruments in his hand to do his
work, he means one thing, and they another. That, which they hoped would
have been for their welfare, proved a snare and a trap, as those will
certainly find, who run to idols for shelter; such will prove a refuge
of lies.

[Judges 9:50](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">jdg 9:50</span></span>

The Shechemites were ruined by Abimelech; now he is reckoned with, who
was their leader in villany. Evil pursues sinners, and sometimes
overtakes them, when not only at ease, but triumphant. Though wickedness
may prosper a while, it will not prosper always. The history of mankind,
if truly told, would greatly resemble that of this chapter. The records
of what are called splendid events present to us such contests for
power. Such scenes, though praised of men, fully explain the Scripture
doctrine of the deceitfulness and desperate wickedness of the human
heart, the force of men's lust, and the effect of Satan's influence.
Lord, thou has given us thy word of truth and righteousness, O pour upon
us thy spirit of purity, peace, and love, and write thy holy law in our
hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 10](jdg010.md)

</div>
