<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg003)  [Next](jdg005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 4:0</span></span>

([Jdg 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001)) Israel again revolts, and
is oppressed by Jabin.

([Jdg 4:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004)) Deborah concerts their
deliverance with Barak.

([Jdg 4:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#010)) Sisera defeated.

([Jdg 4:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017)) Sisera put to death by
Jael.

[Judges 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 4:1</span></span>

The land had rest for eighty years, which should have confirmed them in
their religion; but it made them secure, and indulge their lusts. Thus
the prosperity of fools destroys them. Jabin and his general Sisera,
mightily oppressed Israel. This enemy was nearer than any of the former.
Israel cried unto the Lord, when distress drove them to him, and they
saw no other way of relief. Those who slight God in prosperity, will
find themselves under a necessity of seeking him in trouble.

[Judges 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 4:4</span></span>

Deborah was a prophetess; one instructed in Divine knowledge by the
inspiration of the Spirit of God. She judged Israel as God's mouth to
them; correcting abuses, and redressing grievances. By God's direction,
she ordered Barak to raise an army, and engage Jabin's forces. Barak
insisted much upon her presence. Deborah promised to go with him. She
would not send him where she would not go herself. Those who in God's
name call others to their duty, should be ready to assist them in it.
Barak values the satisfaction of his mind, and the good success of his
enterprise, more than mere honour.

[Judges 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 4:10</span></span>

Sisera's confidence was chiefly in his chariots. But if we have ground
to hope that God goes before us, we may go on with courage and
cheerfulness. Be not dismayed at the difficulties thou meetest with in
resisting Satan, in serving God, or suffering for him; for is not the
Lord gone before thee? Follow him then fully. Barak went down, though
upon the plain the iron chariots would have advantage against him: he
quitted the mountain in dependence on the Divine power; for in the Lord
alone is the salvation of his people, [Jer
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#023). He was not deceived in his
confidence. When God goes before us in our spiritual conflicts, we must
bestir ourselves; and when, by his grace, he gives us some success
against the enemies of our souls, we must improve it by watchfulness and
resolution.

[Judges 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 4:17</span></span>

Sisera's chariots had been his pride and his confidence. Thus are those
disappointed who rest on the creature; like a broken reed, it not only
breaks under them, but pierces them with many sorrows. The idol may
quickly become a burden, [Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001);
what we were sick for, God can make us sick of. It is probable that Jael
really intended kindness to Sisera; but by a Divine impulse she was
afterwards led to consider him as the determined enemy of the Lord and
of his people, and to destroy him. All our connexions with God's enemies
must be broken off, if we would have the Lord for our God, and his
people for our people. He that had thought to have destroyed Israel with
his many iron chariots, is himself destroyed with one iron nail. Thus
the weak things of the world confound the mighty. The Israelites would
have prevented much mischief, if they had sooner destroyed the
Canaanites, as God commanded and enabled them: but better be wise late,
and buy wisdom by experience, than never be wise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 5](jdg005)

</div>
