<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg014)  [Next](jdg016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 15:0</span></span>

([Jdg 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)) Samson is denied his
wife, He smites the Philistines.

([Jdg 15:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009)) Samson kills a thousand
of the Philistines with a jaw-bone.

([Jdg 15:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#018)) His distress from
thirst.

[Judges 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 15:1</span></span>

When there are differences between relations, let those be reckoned the
wisest and best, who are most forward to forgive or forget, and most
willing to stoop and yield for the sake of peace. In the means which
Samson employed, we must look at the power of God supplying them, and
making them successful, to mortify the pride and punish the wickedness
of the Philistines. The Philistines threatened Samson's wife that they
would burn her and her father's house. She, to save herself and oblige
her countrymen, betrayed her husband; and the very thing that she
feared, and by sin sought to avoid, came upon her! She, and her father's
house, were burnt with fire, and by her countrymen, whom she thought to
oblige by the wrong she did to her husband. The mischief we seek to
escape by any unlawful practices, we often pull down upon our own heads.

[Judges 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 15:9</span></span>

Sin dispirits men, it hides from their eyes the things that belong to
their peace. The Israelites blamed Samson for what he had done against
the Philistines, as if he had done them a great injury. Thus our Lord
Jesus did many good works, and for those the Jews were ready to stone
him. When the Spirit of the Lord came upon Samson, his cords were
loosed: where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, and those are
free indeed who are thus set free. Thus Christ triumphed over the powers
of darkness that shouted against him, as if they had him in their power.
Samson made great destruction among the Philistines. To take the bone of
an ass for this, was to do wonders by the foolish things of the world,
that the excellency of the power might be of God, not of man. This
victory was not in the weapon, was not in the arm; but it was in the
Spirit of God, which moved the weapon by the arm. We can do all things
through Him that strengtheneth us. Seest thou a poor Christian, who is
enabled to overcome a temptation by weak, feeble counsel, there is the
Philistine vanquished by a sorry jaw-bone.

[Judges 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 15:18</span></span>

So little notice did the men of Judah take of their deliverer, that he
was ready to perish for want of a draught of water. Thus are the
greatest slights often put upon those who do the greatest services.
Samson prayed to God in this distress. Those that forget to attend God
their praises, may be compelled to attend him with their prayers. Past
experiences of God's power and goodness, are excellent pleas in prayer
for further mercy. He pleads his being exposed to God's enemies; our
best pleas are taken from God's glory. The Lord sent him seasonable
relief. The place of this action was, from the jaw-bone, called Lehi.
And in the place thus called, God caused a fountain suddenly and
seasonably to open, close by Samson. We should be more thankful for the
mercy of water, did we consider how ill we can spare it. Israel
submitted to him whom they had betrayed. God was with him; henceforward
they were directed by him as their judge.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 16](jdg016)

</div>
