<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer031)  [Next](jer033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 32:0</span></span>

([Jer 32:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001).md) Jeremiah buys a field.

([Jer 32:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016).md) The prophet's prayer.

(v. 26-44) God declares that he will give up his people, but promises to
restore them.

[Jeremiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 32:1</span></span>

Jeremiah, being in prison for his prophecy, purchased a piece of ground.
This was to signify, that though Jerusalem was besieged, and the whole
country likely to be laid waste, yet the time would come, when houses,
and fields, and vineyards, should be again possessed. It concerns
ministers to make it appear that they believe what they preach to
others. And it is good to manage even our worldly affairs in faith; to
do common business with reference to the providence and promise of God.

[Jeremiah 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 32:16</span></span>

Jeremiah adores the Lord and his infinite perfections. When at any time
we are perplexed about the methods of Providence, it is good for us to
look to first principles. Let us consider that God is the fountain of
all being, power, and life; that with him no difficulty is such as
cannot be overcome; that he is a God of boundless mercy; that he is a
God of strict justice; and that he directs every thing for the best.
Jeremiah owns that God was righteous in causing evil to come upon them.
Whatever trouble we are in, personal or public, we may comfort ourselves
that the Lord sees it, and knows how to remedy it. We must not dispute
God's will, but we may seek to know what it means.

[Jeremiah 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 32:26</span></span>

God's answer discovers the purposes of his wrath against that generation
of the Jews, and the purposes of his grace concerning future
generations. It is sin, and nothing else, that ruins them. The
restoration of Judah and Jerusalem is promised. This people were now at
length brought to despair. But God gives hope of mercy which he had in
store for them hereafter. Doubtless the promises are sure to all
believers. God will own them for his, and he will prove himself theirs.
He will give them a heart to fear him. All true Christians shall have a
disposition to mutual love. Though they may have different views about
lesser things, they shall all be one in the great things of God; in
their views of the evil of sin, and the low estate of fallen man, the
way of salvation through the Saviour, the nature of true holiness, the
vanity of the world, and the importance of eternal things. Whom God
loves, he loves to the end. We have no reason to distrust God's
faithfulness and constancy, but only our own hearts. He will settle them
again in Canaan. These promises shall surely be performed. Jeremiah's
purchase was the pledge of many a purchase that should be made after the
captivity; and those inheritances are but faint resemblances of the
possessions in the heavenly Canaan, which are kept for all who have
God's fear in their hearts, and do not depart from him. Let us then bear
up under our trials, assured we shall obtain all the good he has
promised us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 33](jer033.md)

</div>
