<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer030)  [Next](jer032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 31:0</span></span>

([Jer 31:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001).md) The restoration of
Israel.

([Jer 31:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010).md) Promises of guidance
and happiness; Rachel lamenting.

([Jer 31:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018).md) Ephraim laments his
errors.

([Jer 31:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021).md) The promised Saviour.

([Jer 31:27-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027).md) God's care over the
church.

([Jer 31:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035).md) Peace and prosperity
in gospel time.

[Jeremiah 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 31:1</span></span>

God assures his people that he will again take them into covenant
relation to himself. When brought very low, and difficulties appear, it
is good to remember that it has been so with the church formerly. But it
is hard under present frowns to take comfort from former smiles; yet it
is the happiness of those who, through grace, are interested in the love
of God, that it is an everlasting love, from everlasting in the
counsels, to everlasting in the continuance. Those whom God loves with
this love, he will draw to himself, by the influences of his Spirit upon
their souls. When praising God for what he has done, we must call upon
him for the favours his church needs and expects. When the Lord calls,
we must not plead that we cannot come; for he that calls us, will help
us, will strengthen us. The goodness of God shall lead them to
repentance. And they shall weep for sin with more bitterness, and more
tenderness, when delivered out of their captivity, than when groaning
under it. If we take God for our Father, and join the church of the
first-born, we shall want nothing that is good for us. These predictions
doubtless refer also to a future gathering of the Israelites from all
quarters of the globe. And they figuratively describe the conversion of
sinners to Christ, and the plain and safe way in which they are led.

[Jeremiah 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 31:10</span></span>

He that scattered Israel, knows where to find them. It is comfortable to
observe the goodness of the Lord in the gifts of providence. But our
souls are never valuable as gardens, unless watered with the dews of
God's Spirit and grace. A precious promise follows, which will not have
full accomplishment except in the heavenly Zion. Let them be satisfied
of God's loving-kindness, and they will be satisfied with it, and desire
no more to make them happy. Rachel is represented as rising from her
grave, and refusing to be comforted, supposing her offspring rooted out.
The murder of the children at Bethlehem, by Herod, [Mat
2:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016.md), in some degree fulfilled this
prediction, but could not be its full meaning. If we have hope in the
end, concerning an eternal inheritance, for ourselves and those
belonging to us, all temporal afflictions may be borne, and will be for
our good.

[Jeremiah 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 31:18</span></span>

Ephraim (the ten tribes) is weeping for sin. He is angry at himself for
his sin, and folly, and frowardness. He finds he cannot, by his own
power, keep himself close with God, much less bring himself back when he
is revolted. Therefore he prays, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned.
His will was bowed to the will of God. When the teaching of God's Spirit
went with the corrections of his providence, then the work was done.
This is our comfort in affliction, that the Lord thinks upon us. God has
mercy in store, rich mercy, sure mercy, suitable mercy, for all who seek
him in sincerity.

[Jeremiah 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 31:21</span></span>

The way from the bondage of sin to the liberty of God's children, is a
high-way. It is plain, it is safe; yet none are likely to walk in it,
unless they set their hearts towards it. They are encouraged by the
promise of a new, unheard-of, extraordinary thing; a creation, a work of
Almighty power; the human nature of Christ, formed and prepared by the
power of the Holy Ghost: and this is here mentioned as an encouragement
to the Jews to return to their own land. And a comfortable prospect is
given them of a happy settlement there. Godliness and honesty God has
joined: let no man think to put them asunder, or to make the one atone
for the want of the other. In the love and favour of God the weary soul
shall find rest, and the sorrowful shall find joy. And what can we see
with more satisfaction than the good of Jerusalem, and peace upon
Israel?

[Jeremiah 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 31:27</span></span>

The people of God shall become numerous and prosperous. In [Heb
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md), [Heb
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009.md), this place is quoted as the sum
of the covenant of grace made with believers in Jesus Christ. Not, I
will give them a new law; for Christ came not to destroy the law, but to
fulfil it; but the law shall be written in their hearts by the finger of
the Spirit, as formerly written in the tables of stone. The Lord will,
by his grace, make his people willing people in the day of his power.
All shall know the Lord; all shall be welcome to the knowledge of God,
and shall have the means of that knowledge. There shall be an outpouring
of the Holy Spirit, at the time the gospel is published. No man shall
finally perish, but for his own sins; none, who is willing to accept of
Christ's salvation.

[Jeremiah 31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 31:35</span></span>

As surely as the heavenly bodies will continue their settled course,
according to the will of their Creator, to the end of time, and as the
raging sea obeys him, so surely will the Jews be continued a separate
people. Words can scarcely set forth more strongly the restoration of
Israel. The rebuilding of Jerusalem, and its enlargement and
establishment, shall be an earnest of the great things God will do for
the gospel church. The personal happiness of every true believer, as
well as the future restoration of Israel, is secured by promise,
covenant, and oath. This Divine love passes knowledge; and to those who
take hold upon it, every present mercy is an earnest of salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 32](jer032.md)

</div>
