<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer001)  [Next](jer003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 2:0</span></span>

([Jer 2:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)) God expostulates with his
people.

([Jer 2:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)) Their revolt beyond
example.

([Jer 2:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014)) Guilt the cause of
sufferings.

([Jer 2:20-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020)) The sins of Judah.

([Jer 2:29-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029)) Their false confidence.

[Jeremiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 2:1</span></span>

Those who begin well, but do not persevere, will justly be upbraided
with their hopeful and promising beginnings. Those who desert religion,
commonly oppose it more than those who never knew it. For this they
could have no excuse. God's spiritual Israel must own their obligations
to him for safe conduct through the wilderness of this world, so
dangerous to the soul. Alas, that many, who once appeared devoted to the
Lord, so live that their professions aggravate their crimes! Let us be
careful that we do not lose in zeal and fervency, as we gain knowledge.

[Jeremiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 2:9</span></span>

Before God punishes sinners, he pleads with them, to bring them to
repentance. He pleads with us, what we should plead with ourselves. Be
afraid to think of the wrath and curse which will be the portion of
those who throw themselves out of God's grace and favour. Grace in
Christ is compared to water from a fountain, it being cooling and
refreshing, cleansing and making fruitful: to living water, because it
quickens dead sinners, revives drooping saints, supports and maintains
spiritual life, and issues in eternal life, and is ever-flowing. To
forsake this Fountain is the first evil; this is done when the people of
God neglect his word and ordinances. They hewed them out broken
cisterns, that could hold no water. Such are the world, and the things
in it; such are the inventions of men when followed and depended on. Let
us, with purpose of heart, cleave to the Lord only; whither else shall
we go? How prone are we to forego the consolations of the Holy Spirit,
for the worthless joys of the enthusiast and hypocrite!

[Jeremiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 2:14</span></span>

Is Israel a servant? No, they are the seed of Abraham. We may apply this
spiritually: Is the soul of man a slave? No, it is not; but has sold its
own liberty, and enslaved itself to divers lusts and passions. The
Assyrian princes, like lions, prevailed against Israel. People from
Egypt destroyed their glory and strength. They brought these calamities
on themselves by departing from the Lord. The use and application of
this is, Repent of thy sin, that thy correction may not be thy ruin.
What has a Christian to do in the ways of forbidden pleasure or vain
sinful mirth, or with the pursuits of covetousness and ambition?

[Jeremiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 2:20</span></span>

Notwithstanding all their advantages, Israel had become like the wild
vine that bears poisonous fruit. Men are often as much under the power
of their unbridled desires and their sinful lusts, as the brute beasts.
But the Lord here warns them not to weary themselves in pursuits which
could only bring distress and misery. As we must not despair of the
mercy of God, but believe that to be sufficient for the pardon of our
sins, so neither must we despair of the grace of God, but believe that
it is able to subdue our corruptions, though ever so strong.

[Jeremiah 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 2:29</span></span>

The nation had not been wrought upon by the judgements of God, but
sought to justify themselves. The world is, to those who make it their
home and their portion, a wilderness and a land of darkness; but those
who dwell in God, have the lines fallen to them in pleasant places. Here
is the language of presumptuous sinners. The Jews had long thrown off
serious thoughts of God. How many days of our lives pass without
suitable remembrance of him! The Lord was displeased with their
confidences, and would not prosper them therein. Men employ all their
ingenuity, but cannot find happiness in the way of sin, or excuse for
it. They may shift from one sin to another, but none ever hardened
himself against God, or turned from him, and prospered.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 3](jer003)

</div>
