<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer028)  [Next](jer030.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 29:0</span></span>

(v. 1-19) Two letters to the captives in Babylon; In the first, they are
recommended to be patient and composed.

([Jer 29:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#020).md) In the second,
judgments are denounced against the false prophets who deceived them.

[Jeremiah 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 29:1</span></span>

The written word of God is as truly given by inspiration of God as his
spoken word. The zealous servant of the Lord will use every means to
profit those who are far off, as well as those who are near him. The art
of writing is very profitable for this end; and by the art of printing
it is rendered most beneficial for circulating the knowledge of the word
of God. God's sending to the captives by this letter would show that he
had not forsaken them, though he was displeased, and corrected them. If
they live in the fear of God, they may live comfortably in Babylon. In
all conditions of life, it is our wisdom and duty not to throw away the
comfort of what we may have, because we have not all we would have. They
are directed to seek the good of the country where they were captives.
While the king of Babylon protected them, they must live quiet and
peaceable lives under him, in all godliness and honesty; patiently
leaving it to God to work deliverance for them in due time.

[Jeremiah 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 29:8</span></span>

Let men beware how they call those prophets whom they choose after their
own fancies, and how they consider their fancies and dreams to be
revelations from God. False prophets flatter people in their sins,
because they love to be flattered; and they speak smoothly to their
prophets, that their prophets may speak smoothly to them. God promises
that they should return after seventy years were accomplished. By this
it appears, that the seventy years of the captivity are not to be
reckoned from the last captivity, but the first. It will be the bringing
to pass of God's good word to them. This shall form God's purposes. We
often do not know our own minds, but the Lord is never at an
uncertainty. We are sometimes ready to fear that God's designs are all
against us; but as to his own people, even that which seems evil, is for
good. He will give them, not the expectations of their fears, or the
expectations of their fancies, but the expectations of their faith; the
end he has promised, which will be the best for them. When the Lord
pours out an especial spirit of prayer, it is a good sign that he is
coming toward us in mercy. Promises are given to quicken and encourage
prayer. He never said, Seek ye me in vain. Those who remained at
Jerusalem would be utterly destroyed, notwithstanding what the false
prophets said to the contrary. The reason has often been given, and it
justifies the eternal ruin of impenitent sinners; Because they have not
hearkened to my words; I called, but they refused.

[Jeremiah 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 29:20</span></span>

Jeremiah foretells judgments upon the false prophets, who deceived the
Jews in Babylon. Lying was bad; lying to the people of the Lord, to
delude them into a false hope, was worse; but pretending to rest their
own lies upon the God of truth, was worst of all. They flattered others
in their sins, because they could not reprove them without condemning
themselves. The most secret sins are known to God; and there is a day
coming when he will bring to light all the hidden works of darkness.
Shemaiah urges the priests to persecute Jeremiah. Their hearts are
wretchedly hardened who justify doing mischief by having power to do it.
They were in a miserable thraldom for mocking the messengers of the
Lord, and misusing his prophets; yet in their distress they trespass
still more against the Lord. Afflictions will not of themselves cure men
of their sins, unless the grace of God works with them. Those who slight
the blessings, deserve to lose the benefit of God's word, like Shemaiah.
The accusations against many active Christians in all ages, amount to no
more than this, that they earnestly counsel men to attend to their true
interest and duties, and to wait for the performance of God's promises
in his appointed way.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 30](jer030.md)

</div>
