<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer011)  [Next](jer013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 12:0</span></span>

([Jer 12:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)) Jeremiah complains of
the prosperity of the wicked.

([Jer 12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)) The heavy judgments to
come upon the nation.

([Jer 12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)) Divine mercy to them,
and even to the nations around.

[Jeremiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 12:1</span></span>

When we are most in the dark concerning God's dispensations, we must
keep up right thoughts of God, believing that he never did the least
wrong to any of his creatures. When we find it hard to understand any of
his dealings with us, or others, we must look to general truths as our
first principles, and abide by them: the Lord is righteous. The God with
whom we have to do, knows how our hearts are toward him. He knows both
the guile of the hypocrite and the sincerity of the upright. Divine
judgments would pull the wicked out of their pasture as sheep for the
slaughter. This fruitful land was turned into barrenness for the
wickedness of those that dwelt therein. The Lord reproved the prophet.
The opposition of the men of Anathoth was not so formidable as what he
must expect from the rulers of Judah. Our grief that there should be so
much evil is often mixed with peevishness on account of the trials it
occasions us. And in this our favoured day, and under our trifling
difficulties, let us consider how we should behave, if called to
sufferings like those of saints in former ages.

[Jeremiah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 12:7</span></span>

God's people had been the dearly-beloved of his soul, precious in his
sight, but they acted so, that he gave them up to their enemies. Many
professing churches become like speckled birds, presenting a mixture of
religion and the world, with its vain fashions, pursuits, and
pollutions. God's people are as men wondered at, as a speckled bird; but
this people had by their own folly made themselves so; and the beasts
and birds are called to prey upon them. The whole land would be made
desolate. But until the judgments were actually inflicted, none of the
people would lay the warning to heart. When God's hand is lifted up, and
men will not see, they shall be made to feel. Silver and gold shall not
profit in the day of the Lord's anger. And the efforts of sinners to
escape misery, without repentance and works answerable thereto, will end
in confusion.

[Jeremiah 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 12:14</span></span>

The Lord would plead the cause of his people against their evil
neighbours. Yet he would afterwards show mercy to those nations, when
they should learn true religion. This seems to look forward to the times
when the fulness of the Gentiles shall come in. Those who would have
their lot with God's people, and a last end like theirs, must learn
their ways, and walk in them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 13](jer013)

</div>
