<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1003)  [Next](jo1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 4:0</span></span>

([Jo1 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)) Believers cautioned
against giving heed to every one that pretends to the Spirit.

([Jo1 4:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)) Brotherly love enforced.

[1 John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 4:1</span></span>

Christians who are well acquainted with the Scriptures, may, in humble
dependence on Divine teaching, discern those who set forth doctrines
according to the apostles, and those who contradict them. The sum of
revealed religion is in the doctrine concerning Christ, his person and
office. The false teachers spake of the world according to its maxims
and tastes, so as not to offend carnal men. The world approved them,
they made rapid progress, and had many followers such as themselves; the
world will love its own, and its own will love it. The true doctrine as
to the Saviour's person, as leading men from the world to God, is a mark
of the spirit of truth in opposition to the spirit of error. The more
pure and holy any doctrine is, the more likely to be of God; nor can we
by any other rules try the spirits whether they are of God or not. And
what wonder is it, that people of a worldly spirit should cleave to
those who are like themselves, and suit their schemes and discourses to
their corrupt taste?

[1 John 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 4:7</span></span>

The Spirit of God is the Spirit of love. He that does not love the image
of God in his people, has no saving knowledge of God. For it is God's
nature to be kind, and to give happiness. The law of God is love; and
all would have been perfectly happy, had all obeyed it. The provision of
the gospel, for the forgiveness of sin, and the salvation of sinners,
consistently with God's glory and justice, shows that God is love.
Mystery and darkness rest upon many things yet. God has so shown himself
to be love, that we cannot come short of eternal happiness, unless
through unbelief and impenitence, although strict justice would condemn
us to hopeless misery, because we break our Creator's laws. None of our
words or thoughts can do justice to the free, astonishing love of a holy
God towards sinners, who could not profit or harm him, whom he might
justly crush in a moment, and whose deserving of his vengeance was shown
in the method by which they were saved, though he could by his almighty
Word have created other worlds, with more perfect beings, if he had seen
fit. Search we the whole universe for love in its most glorious
displays? It is to be found in the person and the cross of Christ. Does
love exist between God and sinners? Here was the origin, not that we
loved God, but that he freely loved us. His love could not be designed
to be fruitless upon us, and when its proper end and issue are gained
and produced, it may be said to be perfected. So faith is perfected by
its works. Thus it will appear that God dwells in us by his new-creating
Spirit. A loving Christian is a perfect Christian; set him to any good
duty, and he is perfect to it, he is expert at it. Love oils the wheels
of his affections, and sets him on that which is helpful to his
brethren. A man that goes about a business with ill will, always does it
badly. That God dwells in us and we in him, were words too high for
mortals to use, had not God put them before us. But how may it be known
whether the testimony to this does proceed from the Holy Ghost? Those
who are truly persuaded that they are the sons of God, cannot but call
him Abba, Father. From love to him, they hate sin, and whatever
disagrees with his will, and they have a sound and hearty desire to do
his will. Such testimony is the testimony of the Holy Ghost.

[1 John 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 4:14</span></span>

The Father sent the Son, he willed his coming into this world. The
apostle attests this. And whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son
of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God. This confession includes
faith in the heart as the foundation; makes acknowledgment with the
mouth to the glory of God and Christ, and profession in the life and
conduct, against the flatteries and frowns of the world. There must be a
day of universal judgment. Happy those who shall have holy boldness
before the Judge at that day; knowing he is their Friend and Advocate!
Happy those who have holy boldness in the prospect of that day, who look
and wait for it, and for the Judge's appearance! True love to God
assures believers of God's love to them. Love teaches us to suffer for
him and with him; therefore we may trust that we shall also be glorified
with him, [Ti2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012). We must
distinguish between the fear of God and being afraid of him; the fear of
God imports high regard and veneration for God. Obedience and good
works, done from the principle of love, are not like the servile toil of
one who unwillingly labours from dread of a master's anger. They are
like that of a dutiful child, who does services to a beloved father,
which benefit his brethren, and are done willingly. It is a sign that
our love is far from perfect, when our doubts, fears, and apprehensions
of God, are many. Let heaven and earth stand amazed at his love. He sent
his word to invite sinners to partake of this great salvation. Let them
take the comfort of the happy change wrought in them, while they give
him the glory. The love of God in Christ, in the hearts of Christians
from the Spirit of adoption, is the great proof of conversion. This must
be tried by its effects on their temper, and their conduct to their
brethren. If a man professes to love God, and yet indulges anger or
revenge, or shows a selfish disposition, he gives his profession the
lie. But if it is plain that our natural enmity is changed into
affection and gratitude, let us bless the name of our God for this seal
and earnest of eternal happiness. Then we differ from the false
professors, who pretend to love God, whom they have not seen, yet hate
their brethren, whom they have seen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 5](jo1005)

</div>
