<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1000)  [Next](jo1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

([Jo1 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)) The apostle prefaces his
epistle to believers in general, with evident testimonies to Christ, for
promoting their happiness and joy.

([Jo1 1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)) The necessity of a life
of holiness, in order to communion with God, is shown.

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

That essential Good, that uncreated Excellence, which had been from the
beginning, from eternity, as equal with the Father, and which at length
appeared in human nature for the salvation of sinners, was the great
subject concerning which the apostle wrote to his brethren. The apostles
had seen Him while they witnessed his wisdom and holiness, his miracles,
and love and mercy, during some years, till they saw him crucified for
sinners, and afterwards risen from the dead. They touched him, so as to
have full proof of his resurrection. This Divine Person, the Word of
life, the Word of God, appeared in human nature, that he might be the
Author and Giver of eternal life to mankind, through the redemption of
his blood, and the influence of his new-creating Spirit. The apostles
declared what they had seen and heard, that believers might share their
comforts and everlasting advantages. They had free access to God the
Father. They had a happy experience of the truth in their souls, and
showed its excellence in their lives. This communion of believers with
the Father and the Son, is begun and kept up by the influences of the
Holy Spirit. The benefits Christ bestows, are not like the scanty
possessions of the world, causing jealousies in others; but the joy and
happiness of communion with God is all-sufficient, so that any number
may partake of it; and all who are warranted to say, that truly their
fellowship is with the Father, will desire to lead others to partake of
the same blessedness.

[1 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 1:5</span></span>

A message from the Lord Jesus, the Word of life, the eternal Word, we
should all gladly receive. The great God should be represented to this
dark world, as pure and perfect light. As this is the nature of God, his
doctrines and precepts must be such. And as his perfect happiness cannot
be separated from his perfect holiness, so our happiness will be in
proportion to our being made holy. To walk in darkness, is to live and
act against religion. God holds no heavenly fellowship or intercourse
with unholy souls. There is no truth in their profession; their practice
shows its folly and falsehood. The eternal Life, the eternal Son, put on
flesh and blood, and died to wash us from our sins in his own blood, and
procures for us the sacred influences by which sin is to be subdued more
and more, till it is quite done away. While the necessity of a holy walk
is insisted upon, as the effect and evidence of the knowledge of God in
Christ Jesus, the opposite error of self-righteous pride is guarded
against with equal care. All who walk near to God, in holiness and
righteousness, are sensible that their best days and duties are mixed
with sin. God has given testimony to the sinfulness of the world, by
providing a sufficient, effectual Sacrifice for sin, needed in all ages;
and the sinfulness of believers themselves is shown, by requiring them
continually to confess their sins, and to apply by faith to the blood of
that Sacrifice. Let us plead guilty before God, be humble, and willing
to know the worst of our case. Let us honestly confess all our sins in
their full extent, relying wholly on his mercy and truth through the
righteousness of Christ, for a free and full forgiveness, and our
deliverance from the power and practice of sin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002)

</div>
