<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 John Index](jo2.md)  
  [Previous](jo2000)  [Next](jo3000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001.md)

[2 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo2 1:1</span></span>

Religion turns compliments into real expressions of respect and love.
And old disciple is honourable; an old apostle and leader of disciples
is more so. The letter is to a noble Christian matron, and her children;
it is well that the gospel should get among such: some noble persons are
called. Families are to be encouraged and directed in their love and
duties at home. Those who love truth and piety in themselves, should
love it in others; and the Christians loved this lady, not for her rank,
but for her holiness. And where religion truly dwells, it will abide for
ever. From the Divine Persons of the Godhead, the apostle craves grace,
Divine favour, and good-will, the spring of all good things. It is grace
indeed that any spiritual blessing should be given to sinful mortals.
Mercy, free pardon, and forgiveness; for those already rich in grace,
need continual forgiveness. Peace, quietness of spirit, and a clear
conscience, in assured reconciliation with God, together with all
outward prosperity that is really for good: these are desired in truth
and love.

[2 John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo2 1:4</span></span>

It is good to be trained to early religion; and children may be beloved
for their parents' sake. It gave great joy to the apostle to see
children treading in their parents' steps, and likely in their turn to
support the gospel. May God bless such families more and more, and raise
up many to copy their example. How pleasing the contrast to numbers who
spread irreligion, infidelity, and vice, among their children! Our walk
is true, our converse right, when according to the word of God. This
commandment of mutual Christian love, may be said to be a new one, in
respect of its being declared by the Lord Christ; yet, as to the matter,
it is old. And this is love to our own souls, that we obey the Divine
commands. The foresight of the decay of this love, as well as of other
apostacies, or fallings away, might engage the apostle to urge this
duty, and this command, frequently and earnestly.

[2 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo2 1:7</span></span>

The deceiver and his deceit are described: he brings some error
concerning the person or office of the Lord Jesus. Such a one is a
deceiver and an antichrist; he deludes souls, and undermines the glory
and kingdom of the Lord Christ. Let us not think it strange, that there
are deceivers and opposers of the Lord Christ's name and dignity now,
for there were such, even in the apostles' times. The more deceivers and
deceits abound, the more watchful the disciples must be. Sad it is, that
splendid attainments in the school of Christ, should ever be lost. The
way to gain the full reward is, to abide true to Christ, and constant in
religion to the end. Firm cleaving to Christian truth unites us to
Christ, and thereby to the Father also; for they are one. Let us equally
disregard such as abide not in the doctrine of Christ, and those who
transgress his commands. Any who did not profess and preach the doctrine
of Christ, respecting him as the Son of God, and salvation by him from
guilt and sin, were not to be noticed and countenanced. Yet in obeying
this command, we must show kindness and a good spirit to those who
differ from us in lesser matters, but hold firmly the all-important
doctrines of Christ's person, atonement, and holy salvation.

[2 John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo2 1:12</span></span>

The apostle refers many things to a personal meeting. Pen and ink were
means of strengthening and comforting others; but to see each other is
more so. The communion of saints should be maintained by all methods;
and should tend to mutual joy. In communion with them we find much of
our present joy, and look forward to happiness for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 John Introduction](jo3000.md)

</div>
