<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job002)  [Next](job004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 3:0</span></span>

([Job 3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)) Job complains that he
was born.

([Job 3:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011)) Job complaining.

([Job 3:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020)) He complains of his
life.

[Job 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 3:1</span></span>

For seven days Job's friends sat by him in silence, without offering
consolidation: at the same time Satan assaulted his mind to shake his
confidence, and to fill him with hard thoughts of God. The permission
seems to have extended to this, as well as to torturing the body. Job
was an especial type of Christ, whose inward sufferings, both in the
garden and on the cross, were the most dreadful; and arose in a great
degree from the assaults of Satan in that hour of darkness. These inward
trials show the reason of the change that took place in Job's conduct,
from entire submission to the will of God, to the impatience which
appears here, and in other parts of the book. The believer, who knows
that a few drops of this bitter cup are more dreadful than the sharpest
outward afflictions, while he is favoured with a sweet sense of the love
and presence of God, will not be surprised to find that Job proved a man
of like passions with others; but will rejoice that Satan was
disappointed, and could not prove him a hypocrite; for though he cursed
the day of his birth, he did not curse his God. Job doubtless was
afterwards ashamed of these wishes, and we may suppose what must be his
judgment of them now he is in everlasting happiness.

[Job 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 3:11</span></span>

Job complained of those present at his birth, for their tender attention
to him. No creature comes into the world so helpless as man. God's power
and providence upheld our frail lives, and his pity and patience spared
our forfeited lives. Natural affection is put into parents' hearts by
God. To desire to die that we may be with Christ, that we may be free
from sin, is the effect and evidence of grace; but to desire to die,
only that we may be delivered from the troubles of this life, savours of
corruption. It is our wisdom and duty to make the best of that which is,
be it living or dying; and so to live to the Lord, and die to the Lord,
as in both to be his, [Rom 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#008).
Observe how Job describes the repose of the grave; There the wicked
cease from troubling. When persecutors die, they can no longer
persecute. There the weary are at rest: in the grave they rest from all
their labours. And a rest from sin, temptation, conflict, sorrows, and
labours, remains in the presence and enjoyment of God. There believers
rest in Jesus, nay, as far as we trust in the Lord Jesus and obey him,
we here find rest to our souls, though in the world we have tribulation.

[Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 3:20</span></span>

Job was like a man who had lost his way, and had no prospect of escape,
or hope of better times. But surely he was in an ill frame for death
when so unwilling to live. Let it be our constant care to get ready for
another world, and then leave it to God to order our removal thither as
he thinks fit. Grace teaches us in the midst of life's greatest
comforts, to be willing to die, and in the midst of its greatest
crosses, to be willing to live. Job's way was hid; he knew not wherefore
God contended with him. The afflicted and tempted Christian knows
something of this heaviness; when he has been looking too much at the
things that are seen, some chastisement of his heavenly Father will give
him a taste of this disgust of life, and a glance at these dark regions
of despair. Nor is there any help until God shall restore to him the
joys of his salvation. Blessed be God, the earth is full of his
goodness, though full of man's wickedness. This life may be made
tolerable if we attend to our duty. We look for eternal mercy, if
willing to receive Christ as our Saviour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 4](job004)

</div>
