<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job003)  [Next](job005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 4:0</span></span>

([Job 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)) Eliphaz reproves Job.

([Job 4:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)) And maintains that God's
judgments are for the wicked.

([Job 4:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012)) The vision of Eliphaz.

[Job 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 4:1</span></span>

Satan undertook to prove Job a hypocrite by afflicting him; and his
friends concluded him to be one because he was so afflicted, and showed
impatience. This we must keep in mind if we would understand what
passed. Eliphaz speaks of Job, and his afflicted condition, with
tenderness; but charges him with weakness and faint-heartedness. Men
make few allowances for those who have taught others. Even pious friends
will count that only a touch which we feel as a wound. Learn from hence
to draw off the mind of a sufferer from brooding over the affliction, to
look at the God of mercies in the affliction. And how can this be done
so well as by looking to Christ Jesus, in whose unequalled sorrows every
child of God soonest learns to forget his own?

[Job 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 4:7</span></span>

Eliphaz argues, 1. That good men were never thus ruined. But there is
one event both to the righteous and to the wicked, [Ecc
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002), both in life and death; the great
and certain difference is after death. Our worst mistakes are occasioned
by drawing wrong views from undeniable truths. 2. That wicked men were
often thus ruined: for the proof of this, Eliphaz vouches his own
observation. We may see the same every day.

[Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 4:12</span></span>

Eliphaz relates a vision. When we are communing with our own hearts, and
are still, [Psa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004), then is a time
for the Holy Spirit to commune with us. This vision put him into very
great fear. Ever since man sinned, it has been terrible to him to
receive communications from Heaven, conscious that he can expect no good
tidings thence. Sinful man! shall he pretend to be more just, more pure,
than God, who being his Maker, is his Lord and Owner? How dreadful,
then, the pride and presumption of man! How great the patience of God!
Look upon man in his life. The very foundation of that cottage of clay
in which man dwells, is in the dust, and it will sink with its own
weight. We stand but upon the dust. Some have a higher heap of dust to
stand upon than others but still it is the earth that stays us up, and
will shortly swallow us up. Man is soon crushed; or if some lingering
distemper, which consumes like a moth, be sent to destroy him, he cannot
resist it. Shall such a creature pretend to blame the appointments of
God? Look upon man in his death. Life is short, and in a little time men
are cut off. Beauty, strength, learning, not only cannot secure them
from death, but these things die with them; nor shall their pomp, their
wealth, or power, continue after them. Shall a weak, sinful, dying
creature, pretend to be more just than God, and more pure than his
Maker? No: instead of quarrelling with his afflictions, let him wonder
that he is out of hell. Can a man be cleansed without his Maker? Will
God justify sinful mortals, and clear them from guilt? or will he do so
without their having an interest in the righteousness and gracious help
of their promised Redeemer, when angels, once ministering spirits before
his throne, receive the just recompence of their sins? Notwithstanding
the seeming impunity of men for a short time, though living without God
in the world, their doom is as certain as that of the fallen angels, and
is continually overtaking them. Yet careless sinners note it so little,
that they expect not the change, nor are wise to consider their latter
end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 5](job005)

</div>
