<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job013)  [Next](job015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 14:0</span></span>

([Job 14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001).md) Job speaks of man's
life.

([Job 14:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007).md) Of man's death.

([Job 14:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016).md) By sin man is subject
to corruption.

[Job 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 14:1</span></span>

Job enlarges upon the condition of man, addressing himself also to God.
Every man of Adam's fallen race is short-lived. All his show of beauty,
happiness, and splendour falls before the stroke of sickness or death,
as the flower before the scythe; or passes away like the shadow. How is
it possible for a man's conduct to be sinless, when his heart is by
nature unclean? Here is a clear proof that Job understood and believed
the doctrine of original sin. He seems to have intended it as a plea,
why the Lord should not deal with him according to his own works, but
according to His mercy and grace. It is determined, in the counsel and
decree of God, how long we shall live. Our times are in his hands, the
powers of nature act under him; in him we live and move. And it is very
useful to reflect seriously on the shortness and uncertainty of human
life, and the fading nature of all earthly enjoyments. But it is still
more important to look at the cause, and remedy of these evils. Until we
are born of the Spirit, no spiritually good thing dwells in us, or can
proceed from us. Even the little good in the regenerate is defiled with
sin. We should therefore humble ourselves before God, and cast ourselves
wholly on the mercy of God, through our Divine Surety. We should daily
seek the renewing of the Holy Ghost, and look to heaven as the only
place of perfect holiness and happiness.

[Job 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 14:7</span></span>

Though a tree is cut down, yet, in a moist situation, shoots come forth,
and grow up as a newly planted tree. But when man is cut off by death,
he is for ever removed from his place in this world. The life of man may
fitly be compared to the waters of a land flood, which spread far, but
soon dry up. All Job's expressions here show his belief in the great
doctrine of the resurrection. Job's friends proving miserable
comforters, he pleases himself with the expectation of a change. If our
sins are forgiven, and our hearts renewed to holiness, heaven will be
the rest of our souls, while our bodies are hidden in the grave from the
malice of our enemies, feeling no more pain from our corruptions, or our
corrections.

[Job 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 14:16</span></span>

Job's faith and hope spake, and grace appeared to revive; but depravity
again prevailed. He represents God as carrying matters to extremity
against him. The Lord must prevail against all who contend with him. God
may send disease and pain, we may lose all comfort in those near and
dear to us, every hope of earthly happiness may be destroyed, but God
will receive the believer into realms of eternal happiness. But what a
change awaits the prosperous unbeliever! How will he answer when God
shall call him to his tribunal? The Lord is yet upon a mercy-seat, ready
to be gracious. Oh that sinners would be wise, that they would consider
their latter end! While man's flesh is upon him, that is, the body he is
so loth to lay down, it shall have pain; and while his soul is within
him, that is, the spirit he is so loth to resign, it shall mourn. Dying
work is hard work; dying pangs often are sore pangs. It is folly for men
to defer repentance to a death-bed, and to have that to do which is the
one thing needful, when unfit to do anything.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 15](job015.md)

</div>
