<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job037)  [Next](job039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 38:0</span></span>

([Job 38:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001)) God calls upon Job to
answer.

([Job 38:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004)) God questions Job.

([Job 38:12-24](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#012)) Concerning the light
and darkness.

(v. 25-41) Concerning other mighty works.

[Job 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 38:1</span></span>

Job had silenced, but had not convinced his friends. Elihu had silenced
Job, but had not brought him to admit his guilt before God. It pleased
the Lord to interpose. The Lord, in this discourse, humbles Job, and
brings him to repent of his passionate expressions concerning God's
providential dealings with him; and this he does, by calling upon Job to
compare God's being from everlasting to everlasting, with his own time;
God's knowledge of all things, with his own ignorance; and God's
almighty power, with his own weakness. Our darkening the counsels of
God's wisdom with our folly, is a great provocation to God. Humble faith
and sincere obedience see farthest and best into the will of the Lord.

[Job 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 38:4</span></span>

For the humbling of Job, God here shows him his ignorance, even
concerning the earth and the sea. As we cannot find fault with God's
work, so we need not fear concerning it. The works of his providence, as
well as the work of creation, never can be broken; and the work of
redemption is no less firm, of which Christ himself is both the
Foundation and the Corner-stone. The church stands as firm as the earth.

[Job 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 38:12</span></span>

The Lord questions Job, to convince him of his ignorance, and shame him
for his folly in prescribing to God. If we thus try ourselves, we shall
soon be brought to own that what we know is nothing in comparison with
what we know not. By the tender mercy of our God, the Day-spring from on
high has visited us, to give light to those that sit in darkness, whose
hearts are turned to it as clay to the seal, [Co2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006). God's way in the government of
the world is said to be in the sea; this means, that it is hid from us.
Let us make sure that the gates of heaven shall be opened to us on the
other side of death, and then we need not fear the opening of the gates
of death. It is presumptuous for us, who perceive not the breadth of the
earth, to dive into the depth of God's counsels. We should neither in
the brightest noon count upon perpetual day, nor in the darkest midnight
despair of the return of the morning; and this applies to our inward as
well as to our outward condition. What folly it is to strive against
God! How much is it our interest to seek peace with him, and to keep in
his love!

[Job 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 38:25</span></span>

Hitherto God had put questions to Job to show him his ignorance; now God
shows his weakness. As it is but little that he knows, he ought not to
arraign the Divine counsels; it is but little he can do, therefore he
ought not to oppose the ways of Providence. See the all-sufficiency of
the Divine Providence; it has wherewithal to satisfy the desire of every
living thing. And he that takes care of the young ravens, certainly will
not be wanting to his people. This being but one instance of the Divine
compassion out of many, gives us occasion to think how much good our God
does, every day, beyond what we are aware of. Every view we take of his
infinite perfections, should remind us of his right to our love, the
evil of sinning against him, and our need of his mercy and salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 39](job039)

</div>
