<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job015)  [Next](job017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 16:0</span></span>

([Job 16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#001)) Job reproves his
friends.

([Job 16:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#006)) He represents his case
as deplorable.

([Job 16:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#017)) Job maintains his
innocency.

[Job 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 16:1</span></span>

Eliphaz had represented Job's discourses as unprofitable, and nothing to
the purpose; Job here gives his the same character. Those who pass
censures, must expect to have them retorted; it is easy, it is endless,
but what good does it do? Angry answers stir up men's passions, but
never convince their judgments, nor set truth in a clear light. What Job
says of his friends is true of all creatures, in comparison with God;
one time or other we shall be made to see and own that miserable
comforters are they all. When under convictions of sin, terrors of
conscience, or the arrests of death, only the blessed Spirit can comfort
effectually; all others, without him, do it miserably, and to no
purpose. Whatever our brethren's sorrows are, we ought by sympathy to
make them our own; they may soon be so.

[Job 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 16:6</span></span>

Here is a doleful representation of Job's grievances. What reason we
have to bless God, that we are not making such complaints! Even good
men, when in great troubles, have much ado not to entertain hard
thoughts of God. Eliphaz had represented Job as unhumbled under his
affliction: No, says Job, I know better things; the dust is now the
fittest place for me. In this he reminds us of Christ, who was a man of
sorrows, and pronounced those blessed that mourn, for they shall be
comforted.

[Job 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 16:17</span></span>

Job's condition was very deplorable; but he had the testimony of his
conscience for him, that he never allowed himself in any gross sin. No
one was ever more ready to acknowledge sins of infirmity. Eliphaz had
charged him with hypocrisy in religion, but he specifies prayer, the
great act of religion, and professes that in this he was pure, though
not from all infirmity. He had a God to go to, who he doubted not took
full notice of all his sorrows. Those who pour out tears before God,
though they cannot plead for themselves, by reason of their defects,
have a Friend to plead for them, even the Son of man, and on him we must
ground all our hopes of acceptance with God. To die, is to go the way
whence we shall not return. We must all of us, very certainly, and very
shortly, go this journey. Should not then the Saviour be precious to our
souls? And ought we not to be ready to obey and to suffer for his sake?
If our consciences are sprinkled with his atoning blood, and testify
that we are not living in sin or hypocrisy, when we go the way whence we
shall not return, it will be a release from prison, and an entrance into
everlasting happiness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 17](job017)

</div>
