<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job014)  [Next](job016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 15:0</span></span>

(v. 1-16) Eliphaz reproves Job.

(v. 17-35) The unquietness of wicked men.

[Job 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 15:1</span></span>

Eliphaz begins a second attack upon Job, instead of being softened by
his complaints. He unjustly charges Job with casting off the fear of
God, and all regard to him, and restraining prayer. See in what religion
is summed up, fearing God, and praying to him; the former the most
needful principle, the latter the most needful practice. Eliphaz charges
Job with self-conceit. He charges him with contempt of the counsels and
comforts given him by his friends. We are apt to think that which we
ourselves say is important, when others, with reason, think little of
it. He charges him with opposition to God. Eliphaz ought not to have put
harsh constructions upon the words of one well known for piety, and now
in temptation. It is plain that these disputants were deeply convinced
of the doctrine of original sin, and the total depravity of human
nature. Shall we not admire the patience of God in bearing with us? and
still more his love to us in the redemption of Christ Jesus his beloved
Son?

[Job 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 15:17</span></span>

Eliphaz maintains that the wicked are certainly miserable: whence he
would infer, that the miserable are certainly wicked, and therefore Job
was so. But because many of God's people have prospered in this world,
it does not therefore follow that those who are crossed and made poor,
as Job, are not God's people. Eliphaz shows also that wicked people,
particularly oppressors, are subject to continual terror, live very
uncomfortably, and perish very miserably. Will the prosperity of
presumptuous sinners end miserably as here described? Then let the
mischiefs which befall others, be our warnings. Though no chastening for
the present seemeth to be joyous, but grievous, nevertheless, afterward
it yieldeth the peaceable fruits of righteousness to them that are
exercised thereby. No calamity, no trouble, however heavy, however
severe, can rob a follower of the Lord of his favour. What shall
separate him from the love of Christ?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 16](job016.md)

</div>
