<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job017)  [Next](job019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 18:0</span></span>

([Job 18:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001)) Bildad reproves Job.

([Job 18:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005)) Ruin attends the
wicked.

([Job 18:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011)) The ruin of the
wicked.

[Job 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 18:1</span></span>

Bildad had before given Job good advice and encouragement; here he used
nothing but rebukes, and declared his ruin. And he concluded that Job
shut out the providence of God from the management of human affairs,
because he would not admit himself to be wicked.

[Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 18:5</span></span>

Bildad describes the miserable condition of a wicked man; in which there
is much certain truth, if we consider that a sinful condition is a sad
condition, and that sin will be men's ruin, if they do not repent.
Though Bildad thought the application of it to Job was easy, yet it was
not safe nor just. It is common for angry disputants to rank their
opponents among God's enemies, and to draw wrong conclusions from
important truths. The destruction of the wicked is foretold. That
destruction is represented under the similitude of a beast or bird
caught in a snare, or a malefactor taken into custody. Satan, as he was
a murderer, so he was a robber, from the beginning. He, the tempter,
lays snares for sinners wherever they go. If he makes them sinful like
himself, he will make them miserable like himself. Satan hunts for the
precious life. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare for
himself, and God is preparing for his destruction. See here how the
sinner runs himself into the snare.

[Job 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 18:11</span></span>

Bildad describes the destruction wicked people are kept for, in the
other world, and which in some degree, often seizes them in this world.
The way of sin is the way of fear, and leads to everlasting confusion,
of which the present terrors of an impure conscience are earnests, as in
Cain and Judas. Miserable indeed is a wicked man's death, how secure
soever his life was. See him dying; all that he trusts to for his
support shall be taken from him. How happy are the saints, and how
indebted to the lord Jesus, by whom death is so far done away and
changed, that this king of terrors is become a friend and a servant! See
the wicked man's family sunk and cut off. His children shall perish,
either with him or after him. Those who consult the true honour of their
family, and its welfare, will be afraid of withering all by sin. The
judgments of God follow the wicked man after death in this world, as a
proof of the misery his soul is in after death, and as an earnest of
that everlasting shame and contempt to which he shall rise in the great
day. The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall
rot, [Pro 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007). It would be well if
this report of wicked men would cause any to flee from the wrath to
come, from which their power, policy, and riches cannot deliver them.
But Jesus ever liveth to deliver all who trust in him. Bear up then,
suffering believers. Ye shall for a little time have sorrow, but your
Beloved, your Saviour, will see you again; your hearts shall rejoice,
and your joy no man taketh away.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 19](job019)

</div>
