<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job001)  [Next](job003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 2:0</span></span>

([Job 2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001).md) Satan obtains leave to
try Job.

([Job 2:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007).md) Job's sufferings.

([Job 2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011).md) His friends come to
comfort him.

[Job 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 2:1</span></span>

How well is it for us, that neither men nor devils are to be our judges!
but all our judgment comes from the Lord, who never errs. Job holds fast
his integrity still, as his weapon. God speaks with pleasure of the
power of his own grace. Self-love and self-preservation are powerful in
the hearts of men. But Satan accuses Job, representing him as wholly
selfish, and minding nothing but his own ease and safety. Thus are the
ways and people of God often falsely blamed by the devil and his agents.
Permission is granted to Satan to make trial, but with a limit. If God
did not chain up the roaring lion, how soon would he devour us! Job,
thus slandered by Satan, was a type of Christ, the first prophecy of
whom was, that Satan should bruise his heel, and be foiled.

[Job 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 2:7</span></span>

The devil tempts his own children, and draws them to sin, and afterwards
torments, when he has brought them to ruin; but this child of God he
tormented with affliction, and then tempted to make a bad use of his
affliction. He provoked Job to curse God. The disease was very grievous.
If at any time we are tried with sore and grievous distempers, let us
not think ourselves dealt with otherwise than as God sometimes deals
with the best of his saints and servants. Job humbled himself under the
mighty hand of God, and brought his mind to his condition. His wife was
spared to him, to be a troubler and tempter to him. Satan still
endeavours to draw men from God, as he did our first parents, by
suggesting hard thoughts of Him, than which nothing is more false. But
Job resisted and overcame the temptation. Shall we, guilty, polluted,
worthless creatures, receive so many unmerited blessings from a just and
holy God, and shall we refuse to accept the punishment of our sins, when
we suffer so much less than we deserve? Let murmuring, as well as
boasting, be for ever done away. Thus far Job stood the trial, and
appeared brightest in the furnace of affliction. There might be risings
of corruption in his heart, but grace had the upper hand.

[Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 2:11</span></span>

The friends of Job seem noted for their rank, as well as for wisdom and
piety. Much of the comfort of this life lies in friendship with the
prudent and virtuous. Coming to mourn with him, they vented grief which
they really felt. Coming to comfort him, they sat down with him. It
would appear that they suspected his unexampled troubles were judgments
for some crimes, which he had vailed under his professions of godliness.
Many look upon it only as a compliment to visit their friends in sorrow;
we must look life. And if the example of Job's friends is not enough to
lead us to pity the afflicted, let us seek the mind that was in Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 3](job003.md)

</div>
