<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job004)  [Next](job006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 5:0</span></span>

([Job 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001).md) Eliphaz urges that the
sin of sinners in their ruin.

([Job 5:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006).md) God is to be regarded in
affliction.

([Job 5:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017).md) The happy end of God's
correction.

[Job 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 5:1</span></span>

Eliphaz here calls upon Job to answer his arguments. Were any of the
saints or servants of God visited with such Divine judgments as Job, or
did they ever behave like him under their sufferings? The term,
"saints," holy, or more strictly, consecrated ones, seems in all ages to
have been applied to the people of God, through the Sacrifice slain in
the covenant of their reconciliation. Eliphaz doubts not that the sin of
sinners directly tends to their ruin. They kill themselves by some lust
or other; therefore, no doubt, Job has done some foolish thing, by which
he has brought himself into this condition. The allusion was plain to
Job's former prosperity; but there was no evidence of Job's wickedness,
and the application to him was unfair and severe.

[Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 5:6</span></span>

Eliphaz reminds Job, that no affliction comes by chance, nor is to be
placed to second causes. The difference between prosperity and adversity
is not so exactly observed, as that between day and night, summer and
winter; but it is according to the will and counsel of God. We must not
attribute our afflictions to fortune, for they are from God; nor our
sins to fate, for they are from ourselves. Man is born in sin, and
therefore born to trouble. There is nothing in this world we are born
to, and can truly call our own, but sin and trouble. Actual
transgressions are sparks that fly out of the furnace of original
corruption. Such is the frailty of our bodies, and the vanity of all our
enjoyments, that our troubles arise thence as the sparks fly upward; so
many are they, and so fast does one follow another. Eliphaz reproves Job
for not seeking God, instead of quarrelling with him. Is any afflicted?
let him pray. It is heart's ease, a salve for every sore. Eliphaz speaks
of rain, which we are apt to look upon as a little thing; but if we
consider how it is produced, and what is produced by it, we shall see it
to be a great work of power and goodness. Too often the great Author of
all our comforts, and the manner in which they are conveyed to us, are
not noticed, because they are received as things of course. In the ways
of Providence, the experiences of some are encouragements to others, to
hope the best in the worst of times; for it is the glory of God to send
help to the helpless, and hope to the hopeless. And daring sinners are
confounded, and forced to acknowledge the justice of God's proceedings.

[Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 5:17</span></span>

Eliphaz gives to Job a word of caution and exhortation: Despise not thou
the chastening of the Almighty. Call it a chastening, which comes from
the Father's love, and is for the child's good; and notice it as a
messenger from Heaven. Eliphaz also encourages Job to submit to his
condition. A good man is happy though he be afflicted, for he has not
lost his enjoyment of God, nor his title to heaven; nay, he is happy
because he is afflicted. Correction mortifies his corruptions, weans his
heart from the world, draws him nearer to God, brings him to his Bible,
brings him to his knees. Though God wounds, yet he supports his people
under afflictions, and in due time delivers them. Making a wound is
sometimes part of a cure. Eliphaz gives Job precious promises of what
God would do for him, if he humbled himself. Whatever troubles good men
may be in, they shall do them no real harm. Being kept from sin, they
are kept from the evil of trouble. And if the servants of Christ are not
delivered from outward troubles, they are delivered by them, and while
overcome by one trouble, they conquer all. Whatever is maliciously said
against them shall not hurt them. They shall have wisdom and grace to
manage their concerns. The greatest blessing, both in our employments
and in our enjoyments, is to be kept from sin. They shall finish their
course with joy and honour. That man lives long enough who has done his
work, and is fit for another world. It is a mercy to die seasonably, as
the corn is cut and housed when fully ripe; not till then, but then not
suffered to stand any longer. Our times are in God's hands; it is well
they are so. Believers are not to expect great wealth, long life, or to
be free from trials. But all will be ordered for the best. And remark
from Job's history, that steadiness of mind and heart under trial, is
one of the highest attainments of faith. There is little exercise for
faith when all things go well. But if God raises a storm, permits the
enemy to send wave after wave, and seemingly stands aloof from our
prayers, then, still to hang on and trust God, when we cannot trace him,
this is the patience of the saints. Blessed Saviour! how sweet it is to
look unto thee, the Author and Finisher of faith, in such moments!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 6](job006.md)

</div>
