<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job033)  [Next](job035.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 34:0</span></span>

([Job 34:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#001).md) Elihu accuses Job of
charging God with injustice.

([Job 34:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#010).md) God cannot be unjust.

([Job 34:16-30](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#016).md) God's power and
providence.

([Job 34:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#031).md) Elihu reproves Job.

[Job 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 34:1</span></span>

Elihu calls upon those present to decide with him upon Job's words. The
plainest Christian, whose mind is enlightened, whose heart is sanctified
by the Spirit of God, and who is versed in the Scriptures, can say how
far matters, words, or actions, agree with true religion, better than
any that lean to their own understandings. Job had spoken as if he meant
wholly to justify himself. He that say, I have cleansed my hands in
vain, does not only offend against God's children, [Psa
73:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013.md), but gratifies his enemies,
and says as they say.

[Job 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 34:10</span></span>

Elihu had showed Job, that God meant him no hurt by afflicting him, but
intended his spiritual benefit. Here he shows, that God did him no wrong
by afflicting him. If the former did not satisfy him, this ought to
silence him. God cannot do wickedness, nor the Almighty commit wrong. If
services now go unrewarded, and sins now go unpunished, yet there is a
day coming, when God will fully render to every man according to his
works. Further, though the believer's final condemnation is done away
through the Saviour's ransom, yet he has merited worse than any outward
afflictions; so that no wrong is done to him, however he may be tried.

[Job 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 34:16</span></span>

Elihu appeals directly to Job himself. Could he suppose that God was
like those earthly princes, who hate right, who are unfit to rule, and
prove the scourges of mankind? It is daring presumption to condemn God's
proceedings, as Job had done by his discontents. Elihu suggests divers
considerations to Job, to produce in him high thoughts of God, and so to
persuade him to submit. Job had often wished to plead his cause before
God. Elihu asks, To what purpose? All is well that God does, and will be
found so. What can make those uneasy, whose souls dwell at ease in God?
The smiles of all the world cannot quiet those on whom God frowns.

[Job 34:31](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 34:31</span></span>

When we reprove for what is amiss, we must direct to what is good. Job's
friends would have had him own himself a wicked man. Let will only
oblige him to own that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. Let us, in
giving reproof, not make a matter worse than it is. Elihu directs Job to
humble himself before God for his sins, and to accept the punishment.
Also to pray to God to discover his sins to him. A good man is willing
to know the worst of himself; particularly, under affliction, he desires
to be told wherefore God contends with him. It is not enough to be sorry
for our sins, but we must go and sin no more. And if we are affectionate
children, we shall love to speak with our Father, and to tell him all
our mind. Elihu reasons with Job concerning his discontent under
affliction. We are ready to think every thing that concerns us should be
just as we would have it; but it is not reasonable to expect this. Elihu
asks whether there was not sin and folly in what Job said. God is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, [Psa
145:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#017.md). The believer saith, Let my
Saviour, my wise and loving Lord, choose every thing for me. I am sure
that will be wisest, and the best for his glory and my good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 35](job035.md)

</div>
