<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job028)  [Next](job030.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 29:0</span></span>

([Job 29:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001).md) Job's former comforts.

([Job 29:7-17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007).md) The honour paid to Job,
His usefulness.

([Job 29:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018).md) His prospect of
prosperity.

[Job 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 29:1</span></span>

Job proceeds to contrast his former prosperity with his present misery,
through God's withdrawing from him. A gracious soul delights in God's
smiles, not in the smiles of this world. Four things were then very
pleasant to holy Job. 1. The confidence he had in the Divine protection.
2. The enjoyment he had of the Divine favour. 3. The communion he had
with the Divine word. 4. The assurance he had of the Divine presence.
God's presence with a man in his house, though it be but a cottage,
makes it a castle and a palace. Then also he had comfort in his family.
Riches and flourishing families, like a candle, may be soon
extinguished. But when the mind is enlightened by the Holy Spirit, when
a man walks in the light of God's countenance, every outward comfort is
doubled, every trouble is diminished, and he may pass cheerfully by this
light through life and through death. Yet the sensible comfort of this
state is often withdrawn for a season; and commonly this arises from
sinful neglect, and grieving the Holy Spirit: sometimes it may be a
trial of a man's faith and grace. But it is needful to examine
ourselves, to seek for the cause of such a change by fervent prayer, and
to increase our watchfulness.

[Job 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 29:7</span></span>

All sorts of people paid respect to Job, not only for the dignity of his
rank, but for his personal merit, his prudence, integrity, and good
management. Happy the men who are blessed with such gifts as these! They
have great opportunities of honouring God and doing good, but have great
need to watch against pride. Happy the people who are blessed with such
men! it is a token for good to them. Here we see what Job valued himself
by, in the day of his prosperity. It was by his usefulness. He valued
himself by the check he gave to the violence of proud and evil men. Good
magistrates must thus be a restraint to evil-doers, and protect the
innocent; in order to this, they should arm themselves with zeal and
resolution. Such men are public blessings, and resemble Him who rescues
poor sinners from Satan. How many who were ready to perish, now are
blessing Him! But who can show forth His praises? May we trust in His
mercy, and seek to imitate His truth, justice, and love.

[Job 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 29:18</span></span>

Being thus honoured and useful, Job had hoped to die in peace and
honour, in a good old age. If such an expectation arise from lively
faith in the providence and promise of God, it is well; but if from
conceit of our own wisdom, and dependence on changeable, earthly things,
it is ill grounded, and turns to sin. Every one that has the spirit of
wisdom, has not the spirit of government; but Job had both. Yet he had
the tenderness of a comforter. This he thought upon with pleasure, when
he was himself a mourner. Our Lord Jesus is a King who hates iniquity,
and upon whom the blessing of a world ready to perish comes. To Him let
us give ear.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 30](job030.md)

</div>
