<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh007)  [Next](joh009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 8:0</span></span>

([Joh 8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001).md) The Pharisees and the
adulteress.

(v. 12-59) Christ's discourse with the Pharisees.

[John 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 8:1</span></span>

Christ neither found fault with the law, nor excused the prisoner's
guilt; nor did he countenance the pretended zeal of the Pharisees. Those
are self-condemned who judge others, and yet do the same thing. All who
are any way called to blame the faults of others, are especially
concerned to look to themselves, and keep themselves pure. In this
matter Christ attended to the great work about which he came into the
world, that was, to bring sinners to repentance; not to destroy, but to
save. He aimed to bring, not only the accused to repentance, by showing
her his mercy, but the prosecutors also, by showing them their sins;
they thought to insnare him, he sought to convince and convert them. He
declined to meddle with the magistrate's office. Many crimes merit far
more severe punishment than they meet with; but we should not leave our
own work, to take that upon ourselves to which we are not called. When
Christ sent her away, it was with this caution, Go, and sin no more.
Those who help to save the life of a criminal, should help to save the
soul with the same caution. Those are truly happy, whom Christ does not
condemn. Christ's favour to us in the forgiveness of past sins should
prevail with us, Go then, and sin no more.

[John 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 8:12</span></span>

Christ is the Light of the world. God is light, and Christ is the image
of the invisible God. One sun enlightens the whole world; so does one
Christ, and there needs no more. What a dark dungeon would the world be
without the sun! So would it be without Jesus, by whom light came into
the world. Those who follow Christ shall not walk in darkness. They
shall not be left without the truths which are necessary to keep them
from destroying error, and the directions in the way of duty, necessary
to keep them from condemning sin.

[John 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 8:17</span></span>

If we knew Christ better, we should know the Father better. Those become
vain in their imaginations concerning God, who will not learn of Christ.
Those who know not his glory and grace, know not the Father that sent
him. The time of our departure out of the world, depends upon God. Our
enemies cannot hasten it any sooner, nor can our friends delay it any
longer, than the time appointed of the Father. Every true believer can
look up and say with pleasure, My times are in thy hand, and better
there than in my own. To all God's purposes there is a time.

[John 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 8:21</span></span>

Those that live in unbelief, are for ever undone, if they die in
unbelief. The Jews belonged to this present evil world, but Jesus was of
a heavenly and Divine nature, so that his doctrine, kingdom, and
blessings, would not suit their taste. But the curse of the law is done
away to all that submit to the grace of the gospel. Nothing but the
doctrine of Christ's grace will be an argument powerful enough, and none
but the Spirit of Christ's grace will be an agent powerful enough, to
turn us from sin to God; and that Spirit is given, and that doctrine is
given, to work upon those only who believe in Christ. Some say, Who is
this Jesus? They allow him to have been a Prophet, an excellent Teacher,
and even more than a creature; but cannot acknowledge him as over all,
God blessed for evermore. Will not this suffice? Jesus here answers the
question. Is this to honour him as the Father? Does this admit his being
the Light of the world, and the Life of men, one with the Father? All
shall know by their conversion, or in their condemnation, that he always
spake and did what pleased the Father, even when he claimed the highest
honours to himself.

[John 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 8:30</span></span>

Such power attended our Lord's words, that many were convinced, and
professed to believe in him. He encouraged them to attend his teaching,
rely on his promises, and obey his commands, notwithstanding all
temptations to evil. Thus doing, they would be his disciples truly; and
by the teaching of his word and Spirit, they would learn where their
hope and strength lay. Christ spoke of spiritual liberty; but carnal
hearts feel no other grievances than those that molest the body, and
distress their worldly affairs. Talk to them of their liberty and
property, tell them of waste committed upon their lands, or damage done
to their houses, and they understand you very well; but speak of the
bondage of sin, captivity to Satan, and liberty by Christ; tell of wrong
done to their precious souls, and the hazard of their eternal welfare,
then you bring strange things to their ears. Jesus plainly reminded
them, that the man who practised any sin, was, in fact, a slave to that
sin, which was the case with most of them. Christ in the gospel offers
us freedom, he has power to do this, and those whom Christ makes free
are really so. But often we see persons disputing about liberty of every
kind, while they are slaves to some sinful lust.

[John 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 8:37</span></span>

Our Lord opposed the proud and vain confidence of these Jews, showing
that their descent from Abraham could not profit those of a contrary
spirit to him. Where the word of God has no place, no good is to be
expected; room is left there for all wickedness. A sick person who turns
from his physician, and will take neither remedies nor food, is past
hope of recovery. The truth both heals and nourishes the hearts of those
who receive it. The truth taught by philosophers has not this power and
effect, but only the truth of God. Those who claim the privileges of
Abraham, must do Abraham's works; must be strangers and sojourners in
this world; keep up the worship of God in their families, and always
walk before God.

[John 8:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 8:41</span></span>

Satan prompts men to excesses by which they murder themselves and
others, while what he puts into the mind tends to ruin men's souls. He
is the great promoter of falsehood of every kind. He is a liar, all his
temptations are carried on by his calling evil good, and good evil, and
promising freedom in sin. He is the author of all lies; whom liars
resemble and obey, with whom all liars shall have their portion for
ever. The special lusts of the devil are spiritual wickedness, the lusts
of the mind, and corrupt reasonings, pride and envy, wrath and malice,
enmity to good, and enticing others to evil. By the truth, here
understand the revealed will of God as to the salvation of men by Jesus
Christ, the truth Christ was now preaching, and which the Jews opposed.

[John 8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 8:48</span></span>

Observe Christ's disregard of the applause of men. those who are dead to
the praises of men can bear their contempt. God will seek the honour of
all who do not seek their own. In these verses we have the doctrine of
the everlasting happiness of believers. We have the character of a
believer; he is one that keeps the sayings of the Lord Jesus. And the
privilege of a believer; he shall by no means see death for ever. Though
now they cannot avoid seeing death, and tasting it also, yet they shall
shortly be where it will be no more forever, [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013.md).

[John 8:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#054.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">joh 8:54</span></span>

Christ and all that are his, depend upon God for honour. Men may be able
to dispute about God, yet may not know him. Such as know not God, and
obey not the gospel of Christ, are put together, [Th2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008.md). All who rightly know anything of
Christ, earnestly desire to know more of him. Those who discern the dawn
of the light of the Sun of Righteousness, wish to see his rising.
"Before Abraham was, I AM." This speaks Abraham a creature, and our Lord
the Creator; well, therefore, might he make himself greater than
Abraham. I AM, is the name of God, [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md); it speaks his self-existence; he
is the First and the Last, ever the same, [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008.md). Thus he was not only before
Abraham, but before all worlds, [Pro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023.md); [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md). As Mediator, he was the appointed
Messiah, long before Abraham; the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, [Rev 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008.md). The Lord Jesus was
made of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, to
Adam, and Abel, and all that lived and died by faith in him, before
Abraham. The Jews were about to stone Jesus for blasphemy, but he
withdrew; by his miraculous power he passed through them unhurt. Let us
stedfastly profess what we know and believe concerning God; and if heirs
of Abraham's faith, we shall rejoice in looking forward to that day when
the Saviour shall appear in glory, to the confusion of his enemies, and
to complete the salvation of all who believe in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 9](joh009.md)

</div>
