<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh003)  [Next](joh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 4:0</span></span>

([Joh 4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)) Christ's departure into
Galilee.

(v. 4-26) His discourse with the Samaritan woman.

(v. 27-42) The effects of Christ's conversation with the woman of
Samaria.

([Joh 4:43-54](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#043)) Christ heals the
nobleman's son.

[John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 4:1</span></span>

Jesus applied himself more to preaching, which was the more excellent,
[Co1 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017), than to baptism. He would
put honour upon his disciples, by employing them to baptize. He teaches
us that the benefit of sacraments depends not on the hand that
administers them.

[John 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 4:4</span></span>

There was great hatred between the Samaritans and the Jews. Christ's
road from Judea to Galilee lay through Samaria. We should not go into
places of temptation but when we needs must; and then must not dwell in
them, but hasten through them. We have here our Lord Jesus under the
common fatigue of travellers. Thus we see that he was truly a man. Toil
came in with sin; therefore Christ, having made himself a curse for us,
submitted to it. Also, he was a poor man, and went all his journeys on
foot. Being wearied, he sat thus on the well; he had no couch to rest
upon. He sat thus, as people wearied with travelling sit. Surely, we
ought readily to submit to be like the Son of God in such things as
these. Christ asked a woman for water. She was surprised because he did
not show the anger of his own nation against the Samaritans. Moderate
men of all sides are men wondered at. Christ took the occasion to teach
her Divine things: he converted this woman, by showing her ignorance and
sinfulness, and her need of a Saviour. By this living water is meant the
Spirit. Under this comparison the blessing of the Messiah had been
promised in the Old Testament. The graces of the Spirit, and his
comforts, satisfy the thirsting soul, that knows its own nature and
necessity. What Jesus spake figuratively, she took literally. Christ
shows that the water of Jacob's well yielded a very short satisfaction.
Of whatever waters of comfort we drink, we shall thirst again. But
whoever partakes of the Spirit of grace, and the comforts of the gospel,
shall never want that which will abundantly satisfy his soul. Carnal
hearts look no higher than carnal ends. Give it me, saith she, not that
I may have everlasting life, which Christ proposed, but that I come not
hither to draw. The carnal mind is very ingenious in shifting off
convictions, and keeping them from fastening. But how closely our Lord
Jesus brings home the conviction to her conscience! He severely reproved
her present state of life. The woman acknowledged Christ to be a
prophet. The power of his word in searching the heart, and convincing
the conscience of secret things, is a proof of Divine authority. It
should cool our contests, to think that the things we are striving about
are passing away. The object of worship will continue still the same,
God, as a Father; but an end shall be put to all differences about the
place of worship. Reason teaches us to consult decency and convenience
in the places of our worship; but religion gives no preference to one
place above another, in respect of holiness and approval with God. The
Jews were certainly in the right. Those who by the Scriptures have
obtained some knowledge of God, know whom they worship. The word of
salvation was of the Jews. It came to other nations through them. Christ
justly preferred the Jewish worship before the Samaritan, yet here he
speaks of the former as soon to be done away. God was about to be
revealed as the Father of all believers in every nation. The spirit or
the soul of man, as influenced by the Holy Spirit, must worship God, and
have communion with him. Spiritual affections, as shown in fervent
prayers, supplications, and thanksgivings, form the worship of an
upright heart, in which God delights and is glorified. The woman was
disposed to leave the matter undecided, till the coming of the Messiah.
But Christ told her, I that speak to thee, am He. She was an alien and a
hostile Samaritan, merely speaking to her was thought to disgrace our
Lord Jesus. Yet to this woman did our Lord reveal himself more fully
than as yet he had done to any of his disciples. No past sins can bar
our acceptance with him, if we humble ourselves before him, believing in
him as the Christ, the Saviour of the world.

[John 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 4:27</span></span>

The disciples wondered that Christ talked thus with a Samaritan. Yet
they knew it was for some good reason, and for some good end. Thus when
particular difficulties occur in the word and providence of God, it is
good to satisfy ourselves that all is well that Jesus Christ says and
does. Two things affected the woman. The extent of his knowledge. Christ
knows all the thoughts, words, and actions, of all the children of men.
And the power of his word. He told her secret sins with power. She
fastened upon that part of Christ's discourse, many would think she
would have been most shy of repeating; but the knowledge of Christ, into
which we are led by conviction of sin, is most likely to be sound and
saving. They came to him: those who would know Christ, must meet him
where he records his name. Our Master has left us an example, that we
may learn to do the will of God as he did; with diligence, as those that
make a business of it; with delight and pleasure in it. Christ compares
his work to harvest-work. The harvest is appointed and looked for before
it comes; so was the gospel. Harvest-time is busy time; all must be then
at work. Harvest-time is a short time, and harvest-work must be done
then, or not at all; so the time of the gospel is a season, which if
once past, cannot be recalled. God sometimes uses very weak and unlikely
instruments for beginning and carrying on a good work. Our Saviour, by
teaching one poor woman, spread knowledge to a whole town. Blessed are
those who are not offended at Christ. Those taught of God, are truly
desirous to learn more. It adds much to the praise of our love to Christ
and his word, if it conquers prejudices. Their faith grew. In the matter
of it: they believed him to be the Saviour, not only of the Jews but of
the world. In the certainty of it: we know that this is indeed the
Christ. And in the ground of it, for we have heard him ourselves.

[John 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 4:43</span></span>

The father was a nobleman, yet the son was sick. Honours and titles are
no security from sickness and death. The greatest men must go themselves
to God, must become beggars. The nobleman did not stop from his request
till he prevailed. But at first he discovered the weakness of his faith
in the power of Christ. It is hard to persuade ourselves that distance
of time and place, are no hinderance to the knowledge, mercy, and power
of our Lord Jesus. Christ gave an answer of peace. Christ's saying that
the soul lives, makes it alive. The father went his way, which showed
the sincerity of his faith. Being satisfied, he did not hurry home that
night, but returned as one easy in his own mind. His servants met him
with the news of the child's recovery. Good news will meet those that
hope in God's word. Diligent comparing the works of Jesus with his word,
will confirm our faith. And the bringing the cure to the family brought
salvation to it. Thus an experience of the power of one word of Christ,
may settle the authority of Christ in the soul. The whole family
believed likewise. The miracle made Jesus dear to them. The knowledge of
Christ still spreads through families, and men find health and salvation
to their souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 5](joh005)

</div>
