<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh014)  [Next](joh016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 15:0</span></span>

([Joh 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001).md) Christ the true Vine.

([Joh 15:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#009).md) His love to his
disciples.

([Joh 15:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018).md) Foretold.

([Joh 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md), [Joh
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027).md) The Comforter promised.

[John 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 15:1</span></span>

Jesus Christ is the Vine, the true Vine. The union of the human and
Divine natures, and the fulness of the Spirit that is in him, resemble
the root of the vine made fruitful by the moisture from a rich soil.
Believers are branches of this Vine. The root is unseen, and our life is
hid with Christ; the root bears the tree, diffuses sap to it, and in
Christ are all supports and supplies. The branches of the vine are many,
yet, meeting in the root, are all but one vine; thus all true
Christians, though in place and opinion distant from each other, meet in
Christ. Believers, like the branches of the vine, are weak, and unable
to stand but as they are borne up. The Father is the Husbandman. Never
was any husbandman so wise, so watchful, about his vineyard, as God is
about his church, which therefore must prosper. We must be fruitful.
From a vine we look for grapes, and from a Christian we look for a
Christian temper, disposition, and life. We must honour God, and do
good; this is bearing fruit. The unfruitful are taken away. And even
fruitful branches need pruning; for the best have notions, passions, and
humours, that require to be taken away, which Christ has promised to
forward the sanctification of believers, they will be thankful, for
them. The word of Christ is spoken to all believers; and there is a
cleansing virtue in that word, as it works grace, and works out
corruption. And the more fruit we bring forth, the more we abound in
what is good, the more our Lord is glorified. In order to fruitfulness,
we must abide in Christ, must have union with him by faith. It is the
great concern of all Christ's disciples, constantly to keep up
dependence upon Christ, and communion with him. True Christians find by
experience, that any interruption in the exercise of their faith, causes
holy affections to decline, their corruptions to revive, and their
comforts to droop. Those who abide not in Christ, though they may
flourish for awhile in outward profession, yet come to nothing. The fire
is the fittest place for withered branches; they are good for nothing
else. Let us seek to live more simply on the fulness of Christ, and to
grow more fruitful in every good word and work, so may our joy in Him
and in his salvation be full.

[John 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 15:9</span></span>

Those whom God loves as a Father, may despise the hatred of all the
world. As the Father loved Christ, who was most worthy, so he loved his
disciples, who were unworthy. All that love the Saviour should continue
in their love to him, and take all occasions to show it. The joy of the
hypocrite is but for a moment, but the joy of those who abide in
Christ's love is a continual feast. They are to show their love to him
by keeping his commandments. If the same power that first shed abroad
the love of Christ's in our hearts, did not keep us in that love, we
should not long abide in it. Christ's love to us should direct us to
love each other. He speaks as about to give many things in charge, yet
names this only; it includes many duties.

[John 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 15:18</span></span>

How little do many persons think, that in opposing the doctrine of
Christ as our Prophet, Priest, and King, they prove themselves ignorant
of the one living and true God, whom they profess to worship! The name
into which Christ's disciples were baptized, is that which they will
live and die by. It is a comfort to the greatest sufferers, if they
suffer for Christ's name's sake. The world's ignorance is the true cause
of its hatred to the disciples of Jesus. The clearer and fuller the
discoveries of the grace and truth of Christ, the greater is our sin if
we do not love him and believe in him.

[John 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 15:26</span></span>

The blessed Spirit will maintain the cause of Christ in the world,
notwithstanding the opposition it meets with. Believers taught and
encouraged by his influences, would bear testimony to Christ and his
salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 16](joh016.md)

</div>
