<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh013)  [Next](joh015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 14:0</span></span>

([Joh 14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)) Christ comforts his
disciples.

([Joh 14:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)) He further comforts
his disciples.

([Joh 14:18-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018)) He still further
comforts his disciples.

[John 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 14:1</span></span>

Here are three words, upon any of which stress may be laid. Upon the
word troubled. Be not cast down and disquieted. The word heart. Let your
heart be kept with full trust in God. The word your. However others are
overwhelmed with the sorrows of this present time, be not you so.
Christ's disciples, more than others, should keep their minds quiet,
when everything else is unquiet. Here is the remedy against this trouble
of mind, "Believe." By believing in Christ as the Mediator between God
and man, we gain comfort. The happiness of heaven is spoken of as in a
father's house. There are many mansions, for there are many sons to be
brought to glory. Mansions are lasting dwellings. Christ will be the
Finisher of that of which he is the Author or Beginner; if he have
prepared the place for us, he will prepare us for it. Christ is the
sinner's Way to the Father and to heaven, in his person as God manifest
in the flesh, in his atoning sacrifice, and as our Advocate. He is the
Truth, as fulfilling all the prophecies of a Saviour; believing which,
sinners come by him the Way. He is the Life, by whose life-giving Spirit
the dead in sin are quickened. Nor can any man draw nigh God as a
Father, who is not quickened by Him as the Life, and taught by Him as
the Truth, to come by Him as the Way. By Christ, as the Way, our prayers
go to God, and his blessings come to us; this is the Way that leads to
rest, the good old Way. He is the Resurrection and the Life. All that
saw Christ by faith, saw the Father in Him. In the light of Christ's
doctrine, they saw God as the Father of lights; and in Christ's
miracles, they saw God as the God of power. The holiness of God shone in
the spotless purity of Christ's life. We are to believe the revelation
of God to man in Christ; for the works of the Redeemer show forth his
own glory, and God in him.

[John 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 14:12</span></span>

Whatever we ask in Christ's name, that shall be for our good, and
suitable to our state, he shall give it to us. To ask in Christ's name,
is to plead his merit and intercession, and to depend upon that plea.
The gift of the Spirit is a fruit of Christ's mediation, bought by his
merit, and received by his intercession. The word used here, signifies
an advocate, counsellor, monitor, and comforter. He would abide with the
disciples to the end of time; his gifts and graces would encourage their
hearts. The expressions used here and elsewhere, plainly denote a
person, and the office itself includes all the Divine perfections. The
gift of the Holy Ghost is bestowed upon the disciples of Christ, and not
on the world. This is the favour God bears to his chosen. As the source
of holiness and happiness, the Holy Spirit will abide with every
believer for ever.

[John 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 14:18</span></span>

Christ promises that he would continue his care of his disciples. I will
not leave you orphans, or fatherless, for though I leave you, yet I
leave you this comfort, I will come to you. I will come speedily to you
at my resurrection. I will come daily to you in my Spirit; in the tokens
of his love, and visits of his grace. I will come certainly at the end
of time. Those only that see Christ with an eye of faith, shall see him
for ever: the world sees him no more till his second coming; but his
disciples have communion with him in his absence. These mysteries will
be fully known in heaven. It is a further act of grace, that they should
know it, and have the comfort of it. Having Christ's commands, we must
keep them. And having them in our heads, we must keep them in our hearts
and lives. The surest evidence of our love to Christ is, obedience to
the laws of Christ. There are spiritual tokens of Christ and his love
given to all believers. Where sincere love to Christ is in the heart,
there will be obedience. Love will be a commanding, constraining
principle; and where love is, duty follows from a principle of
gratitude. God will not only love obedient believers, but he will take
pleasure in loving them, will rest in love to them. He will be with them
as his home. These privileges are confined to those whose faith worketh
by love, and whose love to Jesus leads them to keep his commandments.
Such are partakers of the Holy Spirit's new-creating grace.

[John 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 14:25</span></span>

Would we know these things for our good, we must pray for, and depend on
the teaching of the Holy Ghost; thus the words of Jesus will be brought
to our remembrance, and many difficulties be cleared up which are not
plain to others. To all the saints, the Spirit of grace is given to be a
remembrancer, and to him, by faith and prayer, we should commit the
keeping of what we hear and know. Peace is put for all good, and Christ
has left us all that is really and truly good, all the promised good;
peace of mind from our justification before God. This Christ calls his
peace, for he is himself our Peace. The peace of God widely differs from
that of Pharisees or hypocrites, as is shown by its humbling and holy
effects.

[John 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 14:28</span></span>

Christ raises the expectations of his disciples to something beyond what
they thought was their greatest happiness. His time was now short, he
therefore spake largely to them. When we come to be sick, and to die, we
may not be capable of talking much to those about us; such good counsel
as we have to give, let us give while in health. Observe the prospect
Christ had of an approaching conflict, not only with men, but with the
powers of darkness. Satan has something in us to perplex us with, for we
have all sinned; but when he would disturb Christ, he found nothing
sinful to help him. The best evidence of our love to the Father is, our
doing as he has commanded us. Let us rejoice in the Saviour's victories
over Satan the prince of this world. Let us copy the example of his love
and obedience.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 15](joh015)

</div>
