<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh010)  [Next](joh012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 11:0</span></span>

([Joh 11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001).md) The sickness of Lazarus.

([Joh 11:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#007).md) Christ returns to
Judea.

([Joh 11:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011).md) The death of Lazarus.

(v. 17-32) Christ arrives at Bethany.

([Joh 11:33-46](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033).md) He raises Lazarus.

([Joh 11:47-53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047).md) The Pharisees consult
against Jesus.

([Joh 11:54-57](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054).md) The Jews seek for him.

[John 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 11:1</span></span>

It is no new thing for those whom Christ loves, to be sick; bodily
distempers correct the corruption, and try the graces of God's people.
He came not to preserve his people from these afflictions, but to save
them from their sins, and from the wrath to come; however, it behoves us
to apply to Him in behalf of our friends and relatives when sick and
afflicted. Let this reconcile us to the darkest dealings of Providence,
that they are all for the glory of God: sickness, loss, disappointment,
are so; and if God be glorified, we ought to be satisfied. Jesus loved
Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. The families are greatly favoured
in which love and peace abound; but those are most happy whom Jesus
loves, and by whom he is beloved. Alas, that this should seldom be the
case with every person, even in small families. God has gracious
intentions, even when he seems to delay. When the work of deliverance,
temporal or spiritual, public or personal, is delayed, it does but stay
for the right time.

[John 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 11:7</span></span>

Christ never brings his people into any danger but he goes with them in
it. We are apt to think ourselves zealous for the Lord, when really we
are only zealous for our wealth, credit, ease, and safety; we have
therefore need to try our principles. But our day shall be lengthened
out, till our work is done, and our testimony finished. A man has
comfort and satisfaction while in the way of his duty, as set forth by
the word of God, and determined by the providence of God. Christ,
wherever he went, walked in the day; and so shall we, if we follow his
steps. If a man walks in the way of his heart, and according to the
course of this world, if he consults his own carnal reasonings more than
the will and glory of God, he falls into temptations and snares. He
stumbles, because there is no light in him; for light in us is to our
moral actions, that which light about us to our natural actions.

[John 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 11:11</span></span>

Since we are sure to rise again at the last, why should not the
believing hope of that resurrection to eternal life, make it as easy for
us to put off the body and die, as it is to put off our clothes and go
to sleep? A true Christian, when he dies, does but sleep; he rests from
the labours of the past day. Nay, herein death is better than sleep,
that sleep is only a short rest, but death is the end of earthly cares
and toils. The disciples thought that it was now needless for Christ to
go to Lazarus, and expose himself and them. Thus we often hope that the
good work we are called to do, will be done by some other hand, if there
be peril in the doing of it. But when Christ raised Lazarus from the
dead, many were brought to believe on him; and there was much done to
make perfect the faith of those that believed. Let us go to him; death
cannot separate from the love of Christ, nor put us out of the reach of
his call. Like Thomas, in difficult times Christians should encourage
one another. The dying of the Lord Jesus should make us willing to die
whenever God calls us.

[John 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 11:17</span></span>

Here was a house where the fear of God was, and on which his blessing
rested; yet it was made a house of mourning. Grace will keep sorrow from
the heart, but not from the house. When God, by his grace and
providence, is coming towards us in ways of mercy and comfort, we
should, like Martha, go forth by faith, hope, and prayer, to meet him.
When Martha went to meet Jesus, Mary sat still in the house; this temper
formerly had been an advantage to her, when it put her at Christ's feet
to hear his word; but in the day of affliction, the same temper disposed
her to melancholy. It is our wisdom to watch against the temptations,
and to make use of the advantages of our natural tempers. When we know
not what in particular to ask or expect, let us refer ourselves to God;
let him do as seemeth him good. To enlarge Martha's expectations, our
Lord declared himself to be the Resurrection and the Life. In every
sense he is the Resurrection; the source, the substance, the
first-fruits, the cause of it. The redeemed soul lives after death in
happiness; and after the resurrection, both body and soul are kept from
all evil for ever. When we have read or heard the word of Christ, about
the great things of the other world, we should put it to ourselves, Do
we believe this truth? The crosses and comforts of this present time
would not make such a deep impression upon us as they do, if we believed
the things of eternity as we ought. When Christ our Master comes, he
calls for us. He comes in his word and ordinances, and calls us to them,
calls us by them, calls us to himself. Those who, in a day of peace, set
themselves at Christ's feet to be taught by him, may with comfort, in a
day of trouble, cast themselves at his feet, to find favour with him.

[John 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 11:33</span></span>

Christ's tender sympathy with these afflicted friends, appeared by the
troubles of his spirit. In all the afflictions of believers he is
afflicted. His concern for them was shown by his kind inquiry after the
remains of his deceased friend. Being found in fashion as a man, he acts
in the way and manner of the sons of men. It was shown by his tears. He
was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. Tears of compassion
resemble those of Christ. But Christ never approved that sensibility of
which many are proud, while they weep at mere tales of distress, but are
hardened to real woe. He sets us an example to withdraw from scenes of
giddy mirth, that we may comfort the afflicted. And we have not a High
Priest who cannot be touched with a feeling of our infirmities. It is a
good step toward raising a soul to spiritual life, when the stone is
taken away, when prejudices are removed, and got over, and way is made
for the word to enter the heart. If we take Christ's word, and rely on
his power and faithfulness, we shall see the glory of God, and be happy
in the sight. Our Lord Jesus has taught us, by his own example, to call
God Father, in prayer, and to draw nigh to him as children to a father,
with humble reverence, yet with holy boldness. He openly made this
address to God, with uplifted eyes and loud voice, that they might be
convinced the Father had sent him as his beloved Son into the world. He
could have raised Lazarus by the silent exertion of his power and will,
and the unseen working of the Spirit of life; but he did it by a loud
call. This was a figure of the gospel call, by which dead souls are
brought out of the grave of sin: and of the sound of the archangel's
trumpet at the last day, with which all that sleep in the dust shall be
awakened, and summoned before the great tribunal. The grave of sin and
this world, is no place for those whom Christ has quickened; they must
come forth. Lazarus was thoroughly revived, and returned not only to
life, but to health. The sinner cannot quicken his own soul, but he is
to use the means of grace; the believer cannot sanctify himself, but he
is to lay aside every weight and hinderance. We cannot convert our
relatives and friends, but we should instruct, warn, and invite them.

[John 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 11:47</span></span>

There can hardly be a more clear discovery of the madness that is in
man's heart, and of its desperate enmity against God, than what is here
recorded. Words of prophecy in the mouth, are not clear evidence of a
principle of grace in the heart. The calamity we seek to escape by sin,
we take the most effectual course to bring upon our own heads; as those
do who think by opposing Christ's kingdom, to advance their own worldly
interest. The fear of the wicked shall come upon them. The conversion of
souls is the gathering of them to Christ as their ruler and refuge; and
he died to effect this. By dying he purchased them to himself, and the
gift of the Holy Ghost for them: his love in dying for believers should
unite them closely together.

[John 11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">joh 11:54</span></span>

Before our gospel passover we must renew our repentance. Thus by a
voluntary purification, and by religious exercises, many, more devout
than their neighbours, spent some time before the passover at Jerusalem.
When we expect to meet God, we must solemnly prepare. No devices of man
can alter the purposes of God: and while hypocrites amuse themselves
with forms and disputes, and worldly men pursue their own plans, Jesus
still orders all things for his own glory and the salvation of his
people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 12](joh012.md)

</div>
