<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh019)  [Next](joh021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 20:0</span></span>

([Joh 20:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001).md) The sepulchre found to
be empty.

([Joh 20:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011).md) Christ appears to
Mary.

([Joh 20:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019).md) He appears to the
disciples.

([Joh 20:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026).md) The unbelief of
Thomas.

([Joh 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030.md), [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031).md) Conclusion.

[John 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 20:1</span></span>

If Christ gave his life a ransom, and had not taken it again, it would
not have appeared that his giving it was accepted as satisfaction. It
was a great trial to Mary, that the body was gone. Weak believers often
make that the matter of complaint, which is really just ground of hope,
and matter of joy. It is well when those more honoured than others with
the privileges of disciples, are more active than others in the duty of
disciples; more willing to take pains, and run hazards, in a good work.
We must do our best, and neither envy those who can do better, nor
despise those who do as well as they can, though they come behind. The
disciple whom Jesus loved in a special manner, and who therefore in a
special manner loved Jesus, was foremost. The love of Christ will make
us to abound in every duty more than any thing else. He that was behind
was Peter, who had denied Christ. A sense of guilt hinders us in the
service of God. As yet the disciples knew not the Scripture; they Christ
must rise again from the dead.

[John 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 20:11</span></span>

We are likely to seek and find, when we seek with affection, and seek in
tears. But many believers complain of the clouds and darkness they are
under, which are methods of grace for humbling their souls, mortifying
their sins, and endearing Christ to them. A sight of angels and their
smiles, will not suffice, without a sight of Jesus, and God's smiles in
him. None know, but those who have tasted it, the sorrows of a deserted
soul, which has had comfortable evidences of the love of God in Christ,
and hopes of heaven, but has now lost them, and walks in darkness; such
a wounded spirit who can bear? Christ, in manifesting himself to those
that seek him, often outdoes their expectations. See how Mary's heart
was in earnest to find Jesus. Christ's way of making himself known to
his people is by his word; his word applied to their souls, speaking to
them in particular. It might be read, Is it my Master? See with what
pleasure those who love Jesus speak of his authority over them. He
forbids her to expect that his bodily presence look further, than the
present state of things. Observe the relation to God, from union with
Christ. We, partaking of a Divine nature, Christ's Father is our Father;
and he, partaking of the human nature, our God is his God. Christ's
ascension into heaven, there to plead for us, is likewise an unspeakable
comfort. Let them not think this earth is to be their home and rest;
their eye and aim, and earnest desires, must be upon another world, and
this ever upon their hearts, I ascend, therefore I must seek the things
which are above. And let those who know the word of Christ, endeavour
that others should get good from their knowledge.

[John 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 20:19</span></span>

This was the first day of the week, and this day is afterwards often
mentioned by the sacred writers; for it was evidently set apart as the
Christian sabbath, in remembrance of Christ's resurrection. The
disciples had shut the doors for fear of the Jews; and when they had no
such expectation, Jesus himself came and stood in the midst of them,
having miraculously, though silently, opened the doors. It is a comfort
to Christ's disciples, when their assemblies can only be held in
private, that no doors can shut out Christ's presence. When He manifests
his love to believers by the comforts of his Spirit, he assures them
that because he lives, they shall live also. A sight of Christ will
gladden the heart of a disciple at any time; and the more we see of
Jesus, the more we shall rejoice. He said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
thus showing that their spiritual life, as well as all their ability for
their work, would be derived from him, and depended upon him. Every word
of Christ which is received in the heart by faith, comes accompanied by
this Divine breathing; and without this there is neither light nor life.
Nothing is seen, known, discerned, or felt of God, but through this.
After this, Christ directed the apostles to declare the only method by
which sin would be forgiven. This power did not exist at all in the
apostles as a power to give judgment, but only as a power to declare the
character of those whom God would accept or reject in the day of
judgment. They have clearly laid down the marks whereby a child of God
may be discerned and be distinguished from a false professor; and
according to what they have declared shall every case be decided in the
day of judgment. When we assemble in Christ's name, especially on his
holy day, he will meet with us, and speak peace to us. The disciples of
Christ should endeavour to build up one another in their most holy
faith, both by repeating what they have heard to those that were absent,
and by making known what they have experienced. Thomas limited the Holy
One of Israel, when he would be convinced by his own method or not at
all. He might justly have been left in his unbelief, after rejecting
such abundant proofs. The fears and sorrows of the disciples are often
lengthened, to punish their negligence.

[John 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 20:26</span></span>

That one day in seven should be religiously observed, was an appointment
from the beginning. And that, in the kingdom of the Messiah, the first
day of the week should be that solemn day, was pointed out, in that
Christ on that day once and again met his disciples in a religious
assembly. The religious observance of that day has come down to us
through every age of the church. There is not an unbelieving word in our
tongues, nor thought in our minds, but it is known to the Lord Jesus;
and he was pleased to accommodate himself even to Thomas, rather than
leave him in his unbelief. We ought thus to bear with the weak, [Rom
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md), [Rom
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#002.md). This warning is given to all. If
we are faithless, we are Christless and graceless, hopeless and joyless.
Thomas was ashamed of his unbelief, and cried out, My Lord and my God.
He spoke with affection, as one that took hold of Christ with all his
might; "My Lord and my God." Sound and sincere believers, though slow
and weak, shall be graciously accepted of the Lord Jesus. It is the duty
of those who read and hear the gospel, to believe, to embrace the
doctrine of Christ, and that record concerning him, [Jo1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#011.md).

[John 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 20:30</span></span>

There were other signs and proofs of our Lord's resurrection, but these
were committed to writing, that all might believe that Jesus was the
promised Messiah, the Saviour of sinners, and the Son of God; that, by
this faith, they might obtain eternal life, by his mercy, truth, and
power. May we believe that Jesus is the Christ, and believing may we
have life through his name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 21](joh021.md)

</div>
