<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh015)  [Next](joh017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 16:0</span></span>

([Joh 16:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)) Persecution foretold.

([Joh 16:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)) The promise of the Holy
Spirit, and his office.

([Joh 16:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#016)) Christ's departure and
return.

([Joh 16:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023)) Encouragement to
prayer.

([Joh 16:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)) Christ's discoveries
of himself.

[John 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 16:1</span></span>

Our Lord Jesus, by giving his disciples notice of trouble, designed that
the terror might not be a surprise to them. It is possible for those who
are real enemies to God's service, to pretend zeal for it. This does not
lessen the sin of the persecutors; villanies will never be changed by
putting the name of God to them. As Jesus in his sufferings, so his
followers in theirs, should look to the fulfilling of Scripture. He did
not tell them sooner, because he was with them to teach, guide, and
comfort them; they needed not then this promise of the Holy Spirit's
presence. It will silence us to ask, Whence troubles come? It will
satisfy us to ask, Whither go they? for we know they work for good. It
is the common fault and folly of melancholy Christians to look only on
the dark side of the cloud, and to turn a deaf ear to the voice of joy
and gladness. That which filled the disciples' hearts with sorrow, was
too great affection for this present life. Nothing more hinders our joy
in God, than the love of the world, and the sorrow of the world which
comes from it.

[John 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 16:7</span></span>

Christ's departure was necessary to the Comforter's coming. Sending the
Spirit was to be the fruit of Christ's death, which was his going away.
His bodily presence could be only in one place at one time, but his
Spirit is every where, in all places, at all times, wherever two or
three are gathered together in his name. See here the office of the
Spirit, first to reprove, or to convince. Convincing work is the
Spirit's work; he can do it effectually, and none but he. It is the
method the Holy Spirit takes, first to convince, and then to comfort.
The Spirit shall convince the world, of sin; not merely tell them of it.
The Spirit convinces of the fact of sin; of the fault of sin; of the
folly of sin; of the filth of sin, that by it we are become hateful to
God; of the fountain of sin, the corrupt nature; and lastly, of the
fruit of sin, that the end thereof is death. The Holy Spirit proves that
all the world is guilty before God. He convinces the world of
righteousness; that Jesus of Nazareth was Christ the righteous. Also, of
Christ's righteousness, imparted to us for justification and salvation.
He will show them where it is to be had, and how they may be accepted as
righteous in God's sight. Christ's ascension proves the ransom was
accepted, and the righteousness finished, through which believers were
to be justified. Of judgment, because the prince of this world is
judged. All will be well, when his power is broken, who made all the
mischief. As Satan is subdued by Christ, this gives us confidence, for
no other power can stand before him. And of the day of judgment. The
coming of the Spirit would be of unspeakable advantage to the disciples.
The Holy Spirit is our Guide, not only to show us the way, but to go
with us by continued aids and influences. To be led into a truth is more
than barely to know it; it is not only to have the notion of it in our
heads, but the relish, and savour, and power of it in our hearts. He
shall teach all truth, and keep back nothing profitable, for he will
show things to come. All the gifts and graces of the Spirit, all the
preaching, and all the writing of the apostles, under the influence of
the Spirit, all the tongues, and miracles, were to glorify Christ. It
behoves every one to ask, whether the Holy Spirit has begun a good work
in his heart? Without clear discovery of our guilt and danger, we never
shall understand the value of Christ's salvation; but when brought to
know ourselves aright, we begin to see the value of the Redeemer. We
should have fuller views of the Redeemer, and more lively affections to
him, if we more prayed for, and depended on the Holy Spirit.

[John 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 16:16</span></span>

It is good to consider how near our seasons of grace are to an end, that
we may be quickened to improve them. But the sorrows of the disciples
would soon be turned into joy; as those of a mother, at the sight of her
infant. The Holy Spirit would be their Comforter, and neither men nor
devils, neither sufferings in life nor in death, would ever deprive them
of their joy. Believers have joy or sorrow, according to their sight of
Christ, and the tokens of his presence. Sorrow is coming on the ungodly,
which nothing can lessen; the believer is an heir to joy which no one
can take away. Where now is the joy of the murderers of our Lord, and
the sorrow of his friends?

[John 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 16:23</span></span>

Asking of the Father shows a sense of spiritual wants, and a desire of
spiritual blessings, with conviction that they are to be had from God
only. Asking in Christ's name, is acknowledging our unworthiness to
receive any favours from God, and shows full dependence upon Christ as
the Lord our Righteousness. Our Lord had hitherto spoken in short and
weighty sentences, or in parables, the import of which the disciples did
not fully understand, but after his resurrection he intended plainly to
teach them such things as related to the Father and the way to him,
through his intercession. And the frequency with which our Lord enforces
offering up petitions in his name, shows that the great end of the
mediation of Christ is to impress us with a deep sense of our
sinfulness, and of the merit and power of his death, whereby we have
access to God. And let us ever remember, that to address the Father in
the name of Christ, or to address the Son as God dwelling in human
nature, and reconciling the world to himself, are the same, as the
Father and Son are one.

[John 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 16:28</span></span>

Here is a plain declaration of Christ's coming from the Father, and his
return to him. The Redeemer, in his entrance, was God manifest in the
flesh, and in his departure was received up into glory. By this saying
the disciples improved in knowledge. Also in faith; "Now are we sure."
Alas! they knew not their own weakness. The Divine nature did not desert
the human nature, but supported it, and put comfort and value into
Christ's sufferings. And while we have God's favourable presence, we are
happy, and ought to be easy, though all the world forsake us. Peace in
Christ is the only true peace, in him alone believers have it. Through
him we have peace with God, and so in him we have peace in our own
minds. We ought to be encouraged, because Christ has overcome the world
before us. But while we think we stand, let us take heed lest we fall.
We know not how we should act if brought into temptation; let us watch
and pray without ceasing, that we may not be left to ourselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 17](joh017)

</div>
