<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh009)  [Next](joh011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 10:0</span></span>

([Joh 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001).md) The parable of the good
shepherd.

([Joh 10:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#006).md) Christ the Door.

([Joh 10:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010).md) Christ the good
Shepherd.

([Joh 10:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#019).md) The Jews' opinion
concerning Jesus.

([Joh 10:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022).md) His discourse at the
feast of dedication.

([Joh 10:31-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).md) The Jews attempt to
stone Jesus.

([Joh 10:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#039).md) He departs from
Jerusalem.

[John 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 10:1</span></span>

Here is a parable or similitude, taken from the customs of the East, in
the management of sheep. Men, as creatures depending on their Creator,
are called the sheep of his pasture. The church of God in the world is
as a sheep-fold, exposed to deceivers and persecutors. The great
Shepherd of the sheep knows all that are his, guards them by his
providence, guides them by his Spirit and word, and goes before them, as
the Eastern shepherds went before their sheep, to set them in the way of
his steps. Ministers must serve the sheep in their spiritual concerns.
The Spirit of Christ will set before them an open door. The sheep of
Christ will observe their Shepherd, and be cautious and shy of
strangers, who would draw them from faith in him to fancies about him.

[John 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 10:6</span></span>

Many who hear the word of Christ, do not understand it, because they
will not. But we shall find one scripture expounding another, and the
blessed Spirit making known the blessed Jesus. Christ is the Door. And
what greater security has the church of God than that the Lord Jesus is
between it and all its enemies? He is a door open for passage and
communication. Here are plain directions how to come into the fold; we
must come in by Jesus Christ as the Door. By faith in him as the great
Mediator between God and man. Also, we have precious promises to those
that observe this direction. Christ has all that care of his church, and
every believer, which a good shepherd has of his flock; and he expects
the church, and every believer, to wait on him, and to keep in his
pasture.

[John 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 10:10</span></span>

Christ is a good Shepherd; many who were not thieves, yet were careless
in their duty, and by their neglect the flock was much hurt. Bad
principles are the root of bad practices. The Lord Jesus knows whom he
has chosen, and is sure of them; they also know whom they have trusted,
and are sure of Him. See here the grace of Christ; since none could
demand his life of him, he laid it down of himself for our redemption.
He offered himself to be the Saviour; Lo, I come. And the necessity of
our case calling for it, he offered himself for the Sacrifice. He was
both the offerer and the offering, so that his laying down his life was
his offering up himself. From hence it is plain, that he died in the
place and stead of men; to obtain their being set free from the
punishment of sin, to obtain the pardon of their sin; and that his death
should obtain that pardon. Our Lord laid not his life down for his
doctrine, but for his sheep.

[John 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 10:19</span></span>

Satan ruins many, by putting them out of conceit with the word and
ordinances. Men would not be laughed out of their necessary food, yet
suffer themselves thus to be laughed out of what is far more necessary.
If our zeal and earnestness in the cause of Christ, especially in the
blessed work of bringing his sheep into his fold, bring upon us evil
names, let us not heed it, but remember our Master was thus reproached
before us.

[John 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 10:22</span></span>

All who have any thing to say to Christ, may find him in the temple.
Christ would make us to believe; we make ourselves doubt. The Jews
understood his meaning, but could not form his words into a full charge
against him. He described the gracious disposition and happy state of
his sheep; they heard and believed his word, followed him as his
faithful disciples, and none of them should perish; for the Son and the
Father were one. Thus he was able to defend his sheep against all their
enemies, which proves that he claimed Divine power and perfection
equally with the Father.

[John 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 10:31</span></span>

Christ's works of power and mercy proclaim him to be over all, God
blessed for evermore, that all may know and believe He is in the Father,
and the Father in Him. Whom the Father sends, he sanctifies. The holy
God will reward, and therefore will employ, none but such as he makes
holy. The Father was in the Son, so that by Divine power he wrought his
miracles; the Son was so in the Father, that he knew the whole of His
mind. This we cannot by searching find out to perfection, but we may
know and believe these declarations of Christ.

[John 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 10:39</span></span>

No weapon formed against our Lord Jesus shall prosper. He escaped, not
because he was afraid to suffer, but because his hour was not come. And
He who knew how to deliver himself, knows how to deliver the godly our
of their temptations, and to make a way for them to escape. Persecutors
may drive Christ and his gospel our of their own city or country, but
they cannot drive him or it out of the world. When we know Christ by
faith in our hearts, we find all that the Scripture saith of him is
true.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 11](joh011.md)

</div>
