<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh016)  [Next](joh018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 17:0</span></span>

([Joh 17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001).md) Christ's prayer for
himself.

([Joh 17:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006).md) His prayer for his
disciples.

(v. 11-26) His prayer.

[John 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 17:1</span></span>

Our Lord prayed as a man, and as the Mediator of his people; yet he
spoke with majesty and authority, as one with and equal to the Father.
Eternal life could not be given to believers, unless Christ, their
Surety, both glorified the Father, and was glorified of him. This is the
sinner's way to eternal life, and when this knowledge shall be made
perfect, holiness and happiness will be fully enjoyed. The holiness and
happiness of the redeemed, are especially that glory of Christ, and of
his Father, which was the joy set before him, for which he endured the
cross and despised the shame; this glory was the end of the sorrow of
his soul, and in obtaining it he was fully satisfied. Thus we are taught
that our glorifying God is needed as an evidence of our interest in
Christ, through whom eternal life is God's free gift.

[John 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 17:6</span></span>

Christ prays for those that are his. Thou gavest them me, as sheep to
the shepherd, to be kept; as a patient to the physician, to be cured; as
children to a tutor, to be taught: thus he will deliver up his charge.
It is a great satisfaction to us, in our reliance upon Christ, that he,
all he is and has, and all he said and did, all he is doing and will do,
are of God. Christ offered this prayer for his people alone as
believers; not for the world at large. Yet no one who desires to come to
the Father, and is conscious that he is unworthy to come in his own
name, need be discouraged by the Saviour's declaration, for he is both
able and willing to save to the uttermost, all that come unto God by
him. Earnest convictions and desires, are hopeful tokens of a work
already wrought in a man; they begin to evidence that he has been chosen
unto salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth. They are thine; wilt thou not provide for thine own? Wilt thou
not secure them? Observe the foundation on which this plea is grounded,
All mine are thine, and thine are mine. This speaks the Father and Son
to be one. All mine are thine. The Son owns none for his, that are not
devoted to the service of the Father.

[John 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 17:11</span></span>

Christ does not pray that they might be rich and great in the world, but
that they might be kept from sin, strengthened for their duty, and
brought safe to heaven. The prosperity of the soul is the best
prosperity. He pleaded with his holy Father, that he would keep them by
his power and for his glory, that they might be united in affection and
labours, even according to the union of the Father and the Son. He did
not pray that his disciples should be removed out of the world, that
they might escape the rage of men, for they had a great work to do for
the glory of God, and the benefit of mankind. But he prayed that the
Father would keep them from the evil, from being corrupted by the world,
the remains of sin in their hearts, and from the power and craft of
Satan. So that they might pass through the world as through an enemy's
country, as he had done. They are not left here to pursue the same
objects as the men around them, but to glorify God, and to serve their
generation. The Spirit of God in true Christians is opposed to the
spirit of the world.

[John 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 17:17</span></span>

Christ next prayed for the disciples, that they might not only be kept
from evil, but made good. It is the prayer of Jesus for all that are
his, that they may be made holy. Even disciples must pray for
sanctifying grace. The means of giving this grace is, "through thy
truth, thy word is truth." Sanctify them, set them apart for thyself and
thy service. Own them in the office; let thy hand go with them. Jesus
entirely devoted himself to his undertaking, and all the parts of it,
especially the offering up himself without spot unto God, by the eternal
Spirit. The real holiness of all true Christians is the fruit of
Christ's death, by which the gift of the Holy Ghost was purchased; he
gave himself for his church, to sanctify it. If our views have not this
effect on us, they are not Divine truth, or we do not receive them by a
living and a working faith, but as mere notions.

[John 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 17:20</span></span>

Our Lord especially prayed, that all believers might be as one body
under one head, animated by one soul, by their union with Christ and the
Father in him, through the Holy Spirit dwelling in them. The more they
dispute about lesser things, the more they throw doubts upon
Christianity. Let us endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, praying that all believers may be more and more united in
one mind and one judgment. Thus shall we convince the world of the truth
and excellence of our religion, and find more sweet communion with God
and his saints.

[John 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 17:24</span></span>

Christ, as one with the Father, claimed on behalf of all that had been
given to him, and should in due time believe on him, that they should be
brought to heaven; and that there the whole company of the redeemed
might behold his glory as their beloved Friend and Brother, and therein
find happiness. He had declared and would further declare the name or
character of God, by his doctrine and his Spirit, that, being one with
him, the love of the Father to him might abide with them also. Thus,
being joined to Him by one Spirit, they might be filled with all the
fulness of God, and enjoy a blessedness of which we can form no right
idea in our present state.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 18](joh018.md)

</div>
