<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh004)  [Next](joh006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 5:0</span></span>

([Joh 5:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)) The cure at the pool of
Bethesda.

([Joh 5:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010)) The Jews' displeasure.

([Joh 5:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)) Christ reproves the
Jews.

(v. 24-47) Christ's discourse.

[John 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 5:1</span></span>

We are all by nature impotent folk in spiritual things, blind, halt, and
withered; but full provision is made for our cure, if we attend to it.
An angel went down, and troubled the water; and what disease soever it
was, this water cured it, but only he that first stepped in had benefit.
This teaches us to be careful, that we let not a season slip which may
never return. The man had lost the use of his limbs thirty-eight years.
Shall we, who perhaps for many years have scarcely known what it has
been to be a day sick, complain of one wearisome night, when many
others, better than we, have scarcely known what it has been to be a day
well? Christ singled this one out from the rest. Those long in
affliction, may comfort themselves that God keeps account how long.
Observe, this man speaks of the unkindness of those about him, without
any peevish reflections. As we should be thankful, so we should be
patient. Our Lord Jesus cures him, though he neither asked nor thought
of it. Arise, and walk. God's command, Turn and live; Make ye a new
heart; no more supposes power in us without the grace of God, his
distinguishing grace, than this command supposed such power in the
impotent man: it was by the power of Christ, and he must have all the
glory. What a joyful surprise to the poor cripple, to find himself of a
sudden so easy, so strong, so able to help himself! The proof of
spiritual cure, is our rising and walking. Has Christ healed our
spiritual diseases, let us go wherever he sends us, and take up whatever
he lays upon us; and walk before him.

[John 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 5:10</span></span>

Those eased of the punishment of sin, are in danger of returning to sin,
when the terror and restraint are over, unless Divine grace dries up the
fountain. The misery believers are made whole from, warns us to sin no
more, having felt the smart of sin. This is the voice of every
providence, Go, and sin no more. Christ saw it necessary to give this
caution; for it is common for people, when sick, to promise much; when
newly recovered, to perform only something; but after awhile to forget
all. Christ spoke of the wrath to come, which is beyond compare worse
than the many hours, nay, weeks and years of pain, some wicked men have
to suffer in consequence of their unlawful indulgences. And if such
afflictions are severe, how dreadful will be the everlasting punishment
of the wicked!

[John 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 5:17</span></span>

The Divine power of the miracle proved Jesus to be the Son of God, and
he declared that he worked with, and like unto his Father, as he saw
good. These ancient enemies of Christ understood him, and became more
violent, charging him not only with sabbath-breaking, but blasphemy, in
calling God his own Father, and making himself equal with God. But all
things now, and at the final judgment, are committed to the Son,
purposely that all men might honour the Son, as they honour the Father;
and every one who does not thus honour the Son, whatever he may think or
pretend, does not honour the Father who sent him.

[John 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 5:24</span></span>

Our Lord declared his authority and character, as the Messiah. The time
was come when the dead should hear his voice, as the Son of God, and
live. Our Lord first refers to his raising those who were dead in sin,
to newness of life, by the power of the Spirit, and then to his raising
the dead in their graves. The office of Judge of all men, can only be
exercised by one who has all knowledge, and almighty power. May we
believe His testimony; thus our faith and hope will be in God, and we
shall not come into condemnation. And may His voice reach the hearts of
those dead in sin; that they may do works meet for repentance, and
prepare for the solemn day.

[John 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 5:30</span></span>

Our Lord returns to his declaration of the entire agreement between the
Father and the Son, and declared himself the Son of God. He had higher
testimony than that of John; his works bore witness to all he had said.
But the Divine word had no abiding-place in their hearts, as they
refused to believe in Him whom the Father had sent, according to his
ancient promises. The voice of God, accompanied by the power of the Holy
Ghost, thus made effectual to the conversion of sinners, still proclaims
that this is the beloved Son, in whom the Father is well pleased. But
when the hearts of men are full of pride, ambition, and the love of the
world, there is no room for the word of God to abide in them.

[John 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 5:39</span></span>

The Jews considered that eternal life was revealed to them in their
Scriptures, and that they had it, because they had the word of God in
their hands. Jesus urged them to search those Scriptures with more
diligence and attention. "Ye do search the Scriptures," and ye do well
to do so. They did indeed search the Scriptures, but it was with a view
to their own glory. It is possible for men to be very studious in the
letter of the Scriptures, yet to be strangers to its power. Or, "Search
the Scriptures," and so it was spoken to them in the nature of an
appeal. Ye profess to receive and believe the Scripture, let that be the
judge. It is spoken to us as advising or commanding all Christians to
search the Scriptures. Not only read them, and hear them, but search
them; which denotes diligence in examining and studying them. We must
search the Scriptures for heaven as our great end; For in them ye think
ye have eternal life. We must search the Scriptures for Christ, as the
new and living Way, that leads to this end. To this testimony Christ
adds reproofs of their unbelief and wickedness; their neglect of him and
his doctrine. Also he reproves their want of the love of God. But there
is life with Jesus Christ for poor souls. Many who make a great
profession of religion, yet show they want the love of God, by their
neglect of Christ and contempt of his commandments. It is the love of
God in us, the love that is a living, active principle in the heart,
which God will accept. They slighted and undervalued Christ, because
they admired and overvalued themselves. How can those believe, who make
the praise and applause of men their idol! When Christ and his followers
are men wondered at, how can those believe, the utmost of whose ambition
is to make a fair show in the flesh!

[John 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 5:45</span></span>

Many trust in some form of doctrines or some parties, who no more enter
into the real meaning of those doctrines, or the views of the persons
whose names they bear, than the Jews did into those of Moses. Let us
search and pray over the Scriptures, as intent on finding eternal life;
let us observe how Christ is the great subject of them, and daily apply
to him for the life he bestows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 6](joh006)

</div>
