<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh020)  [Next](act000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 21:0</span></span>

([Joh 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001)) Christ appears to his
disciples.

([Joh 21:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)) His discourse with
Peter.

([Joh 21:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020)) Christ's declaration
concerning John.

([Joh 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)) The conclusion.

[John 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 21:1</span></span>

Christ makes himself known to his people, usually in his ordinances; but
sometimes by his Spirit he visits them when employed in their business.
It is good for the disciples of Christ to be together in common
conversation, and common business. The hour for their entering upon
action was not come. They would help to maintain themselves, and not be
burdensome to any. Christ's time of making himself known to his people,
is when they are most at a loss. He knows the temporal wants of his
people, and has promised them not only grace sufficient, but food
convenient. Divine Providence extends itself to things most minute, and
those are happy who acknowledge God in all their ways. Those who are
humble, diligent, and patient, though their labours may be crossed,
shall be crowned; they sometimes live to see their affairs take a happy
turn, after many struggles. And there is nothing lost by observing
Christ's orders; it is casting the net on the right side of the ship.
Jesus manifests himself to his people by doing that for them which none
else can do, and things which they looked not for. He would take care
that those who left all for him, should not want any good thing. And
latter favours are to bring to mind former favours, that eaten bread may
not be forgotten. He whom Jesus loved was the first that said, It is the
Lord. John had cleaved most closely to his Master in his sufferings, and
knew him soonest. Peter was the most zealous, and reached Christ the
first. How variously God dispenses his gifts, and what difference there
may be between some believers and others in the way of their honouring
Christ, yet they all may be accepted of him! Others continue in the
ship, drag the net, and bring the fish to shore, and such persons ought
not to be blamed as worldly; for they, in their places, are as truly
serving Christ as the others. The Lord Jesus had provision ready for
them. We need not be curious in inquiring whence this came; but we may
be comforted at Christ's care for his disciples. Although there were so
many, and such great fishes, yet they lost none, nor damaged their net.
The net of the gospel has enclosed multitudes, yet it is as strong as
ever to bring souls to God.

[John 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 21:15</span></span>

Our Lord addressed Peter by his original name, as if he had forfeited
that of Peter through his denying him. He now answered, Thou knowest
that I love thee; but without professing to love Jesus more than others.
We must not be surprised to have our sincerity called into question,
when we ourselves have done that which makes it doubtful. Every
remembrance of past sins, even pardoned sins, renews the sorrow of a
true penitent. Conscious of integrity, Peter solemnly appealed to
Christ, as knowing all things, even the secrets of his heart. It is well
when our falls and mistakes make us more humble and watchful. The
sincerity of our love to God must be brought to the test; and it behoves
us to inquire with earnest, preserving prayer to the heart-searching
God, to examine and prove us, whether we are able to stand this test. No
one can be qualified to feed the sheep and lambs of Christ, who does not
love the good Shepherd more than any earthly advantage or object. It is
the great concern of every good man, whatever death he dies, to glorify
God in it; for what is our chief end but this, to die to the Lord, at
the word of the Lord?

[John 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 21:20</span></span>

Sufferings, pains, and death, will appear formidable even to the
experienced Christian; but in the hope to glorify God, to leave a sinful
world, and to be present with his Lord, he becomes ready to obey the
Redeemer's call, and to follow Him through death to glory. It is the
will of Christ that his disciples should mind their own duty, and not be
curious about future events, either as to themselves or others. Many
things we are apt to be anxious about, which are nothing to us. Other
people's affairs are nothing to us, to intermeddle in; we must quietly
work, and mind our own business. Many curious questions are put about
the counsels of God, and the state of the unseen world, as to which we
may say, What is this to us? And if we attend to the duty of following
Christ, we shall find neither heart nor time to meddle with that which
does not belong to us. How little are any unwritten traditions to be
relied upon! Let the Scripture be its own interpreter, and explain
itself; as it is, in a great measure, its own evidence, and proves
itself, for it is light. See the easy setting right such mistakes by the
word of Christ. Scripture language is the safest channel for Scripture
truth; the words which the Holy Ghost teaches, [Co1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#013). Those who cannot agree in the
same terms of art, and the application of them, may yet agree in the
same Scripture terms, and to love one another.

[John 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 21:25</span></span>

Only a small part of the actions of Jesus had been written. But let us
bless God for all that is in the Scriptures, and be thankful that there
is so much in so small a space. Enough is recorded to direct our faith,
and regulate our practice; more would have been unnecessary. Much of
what is written is overlooked, much forgotten, and much made the matter
of doubtful disputes. We may, however, look forward to the joy we shall
receive in heaven, from a more complete knowledge of all Jesus did and
said, as well as of the conduct of his providence and grace in his
dealings with each of us. May this be our happiness. These are written
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that
believing ye might have life through his name, [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Introduction](act000)

</div>
