<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh011)  [Next](joh013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 12:0</span></span>

([Joh 12:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001).md) Christ anointed by
Mary.

([Joh 12:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012).md) He enters Jerusalem.

([Joh 12:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020).md) Greeks apply to see
Jesus.

([Joh 12:27-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027).md) A voice from heaven
bears testimony to Christ.

([Joh 12:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034).md) His discourse with the
people.

([Joh 12:37-43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037).md) Unbelief of the Jews.

([Joh 12:44-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044).md) Christ's address to
them.

[John 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 12:1</span></span>

Christ had formerly blamed Martha for being troubled with much serving.
But she did not leave off serving, as some, who when found fault with
for going too far in one way, peevishly run too far another way; she
still served, but within hearing of Christ's gracious words. Mary gave a
token of love to Christ, who had given real tokens of his love to her
and her family. God's Anointed should be our Anointed. Has God poured on
him the oil of gladness above his fellows, let us pour on him the
ointment of our best affections. In Judas a foul sin is gilded over with
a plausible pretence. We must not think that those do no acceptable
service, who do it not in our way. The reigning love of money is
heart-theft. The grace of Christ puts kind comments on pious words and
actions, makes the best of what is amiss, and the most of what is good.
Opportunities are to be improved; and those first and most vigorously,
which are likely to be the shortest. To consult to hinder the further
effect of the miracle, by putting Lazarus to death, is such wickedness,
malice, and folly, as cannot be explained, except by the desperate
enmity of the human heart against God. They resolved that the man should
die whom the Lord had raised to life. The success of the gospel often
makes wicked men so angry, that they speak and act as if they hoped to
obtain a victory over the Almighty himself.

[John 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 12:12</span></span>

Christ's riding in triumph to Jerusalem is recorded by all the
evangelists. Many excellent things, both in the word and providence of
God, disciples do not understand at their first acquaintance with the
things of God. The right understanding of spiritual nature of Christ's
kingdom, prevents our misapplying the Scriptures which speak of it.

[John 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 12:20</span></span>

In attendance upon holy ordinances, particularly the gospel passover,
the great desire of our souls should be to see Jesus; to see him as
ours, to keep up communion with him, and derive grace from him. The
calling of the Gentiles magnified the Redeemer. A corn of wheat yields
no increase unless it is cast into the ground. Thus Christ might have
possessed his heavenly glory alone, without becoming man. Or, after he
had taken man's nature, he might have entered heaven alone, by his own
perfect righteousness, without suffering or death; but then no sinner of
the human race could have been saved. The salvation of souls hitherto,
and henceforward to the end of time, is owing to the dying of this Corn
of wheat. Let us search whether Christ be in us the hope of glory; let
us beg him to make us indifferent to the trifling concerns of this life,
that we may serve the Lord Jesus with a willing mind, and follow his
holy example.

[John 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 12:27</span></span>

The sin of our souls was the troubled of Christ's soul, when he
undertook to redeem and save us, and to make his soul an offering for
our sin. Christ was willing to suffer, yet prayed to be saved from
suffering. Prayer against trouble may well agree with patience under it,
and submission to the will of God in it. Our Lord Jesus undertook to
satisfy God's injured honour, and he did it by humbling himself. The
voice of the Father from heaven, which had declared him to be his
beloved Son, at his baptism, and when he was transfigured, was heard
proclaiming that He had both glorified his name, and would glorify it.
Christ, reconciling the world to God by the merit of his death, broke
the power of death, and cast out Satan as a destroyer. Christ, bringing
the world to God by the doctrine of his cross, broke the power of sin,
and cast out Satan as a deceiver. The soul that was at a distance from
Christ, is brought to love him and trust him. Jesus was now going to
heaven, and he would draw men's hearts to him thither. There is power in
the death of Christ to draw souls to him. We have heard from the gospel
that which exalts free grace, and we have heard also that which enjoins
duty; we must from the heart embrace both, and not separate them.

[John 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 12:34</span></span>

The people drew false notions from the Scriptures, because they
overlooked the prophecies that spoke of Christ's sufferings and death.
Our Lord warned them that the light would not long continue with them,
and exhorted them to walk in it, before the darkness overtook them.
Those who would walk in the light must believe in it, and follow
Christ's directions. But those who have not faith, cannot behold what is
set forth in Jesus, lifted up on the cross, and must be strangers to its
influence as made known by the Holy Spirit; they find a thousand
objections to excuse their unbelief.

[John 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 12:37</span></span>

Observe the method of conversion implied here. Sinners are brought to
see the reality of Divine things, and to have some knowledge of them. To
be converted, and truly turned from sin to Christ, as their Happiness
and Portion. God will heal them, will justify and sanctify them; will
pardon their sins, which are as bleeding wounds, and mortify their
corruptions, which are as lurking diseases. See the power of the world
in smothering convictions, from regard to the applause or censure of
men. Love of the praise of men, as a by-end in that which is good, will
make a man a hypocrite when religion is in fashion, and credit is to be
got by it; and love of the praise of men, as a base principle in that
which is evil, will make a man an apostate, when religion is in
disgrace, and credit is to be lost for it.

[John 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 12:44</span></span>

Our Lord publicly proclaimed, that every one who believed on him, as his
true disciple, did not believe on him only, but on the Father who sent
him. Beholding in Jesus the glory of the Father, we learn to obey, love,
and trust in him. By daily looking to Him, who came a Light into the
world, we are more and more freed from the darkness of ignorance, error,
sin, and misery; we learn that the command of God our Saviour is
everlasting life. But the same word will seal the condemnation of all
who despise it, or neglect it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 13](joh013.md)

</div>
