<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jonah Index](jon.md)  
  [Previous](jon001)  [Next](jon003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001.md)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 2:0</span></span>

([Jon 2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001).md) The prayer of Jonah.

([Jon 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010).md) He is delivered from the
fish.

[Jonah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 2:1</span></span>

Observe when Jonah prayed. When he was in trouble, under the tokens of
God's displeasure against him for sin: when we are in affliction we must
pray. Being kept alive by miracle, he prayed. A sense of God's good-will
to us, notwithstanding our offences, opens the lips in prayer, which
were closed with the dread of wrath. Also, where he prayed; in the belly
of the fish. No place is amiss for prayer. Men may shut us from
communion with one another, but not from communion with God. To whom he
prayed; to the Lord his God. This encourages even backsliders to return.
What his prayer was. This seems to relate his experience and
reflections, then and afterwards, rather than to be the form or
substance of his prayer. Jonah reflects on the earnestness of his
prayer, and God's readiness to hear and answer. If we would get good by
our troubles, we must notice the hand of God in them. He had wickedly
fled from the presence of the Lord, who might justly take his Holy
Spirit from him, never to visit him more. Those only are miserable, whom
God will no longer own and favour. But though he was perplexed, yet not
in despair. Jonah reflects on the favour of God to him, when he sought
to God, and trusted in him in his distress. He warns others, and tells
them to keep close to God. Those who forsake their own duty, forsake
their own mercy; those who run away from the work of their place and
day, run away from the comfort of it. As far as a believer copies those
who observe lying vanities, he forsakes his own mercy, and lives below
his privileges. But Jonah's experience encourages others, in all ages,
to trust in God, as the God of salvation.

[Jonah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 2:10</span></span>

Jonah's deliverance may be considered as an instance of God's power over
all the creatures. As an instance of God's mercy to a poor penitent, who
in distress prays to him: and as a type and figure of Christ's
resurrection. Amidst all our varying experiences, and the changing
scenes of life; we should look by faith, fixedly, upon our once
suffering and dying, but now risen and ascended Redeemer. Let us confess
our sins, consider Christ's resurrection as an earnest of our own, and
thankfully receive every temporal and spiritual deliverance, as the
pledge of our eternal redemption.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 3](jon003.md)

</div>
