<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon003)  [Next](mic000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 4:0</span></span>

([Jon 4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)) Jonah repines at God's
mercy to Nineveh, and is reproved.

([Jon 4:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005)) He is taught by the
withering of a gourd, that he did wrong.

[Jonah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 4:1</span></span>

What all the saints make matter of joy and praise, Jonah makes the
subject of reflection upon God; as if showing mercy were an imperfection
of the Divine nature, which is the greatest glory of it. It is to his
sparing, pardoning mercy, we all owe it that we are out of hell. He
wishes for death: this was the language of folly, passion, and strong
corruption. There appeared in Jonah remains of a proud, uncharitable
spirit; and that he neither expected nor desired the welfare of the
Ninevites, but had only come to declare and witness their destruction.
He was not duly humbled for his own sins, and was not willing to trust
the Lord with his credit and safety. In this frame of mind, he
overlooked the good of which he had been an instrument, and the glory of
the Divine mercy. We should often ask ourselves, Is it well to say thus,
to do thus? Can I justify it? Do I well to be so soon angry, so often
angry, so long angry, and to give others ill language in my anger? Do I
well to be angry at the mercy of God to repenting sinners? That was
Jonah's crime. Do we do well to be angry at that which is for the glory
of God, and the advancement of his kingdom? Let the conversion of
sinners, which is the joy of heaven, be our joy, and never our grief.

[Jonah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 4:5</span></span>

Jonah went out of the city, yet remained near at hand, as if he expected
and desired its overthrow. Those who have fretful, uneasy spirits, often
make troubles for themselves, that they may still have something to
complain of. See how tender God is of his people in their afflictions,
even though they are foolish and froward. A thing small in itself, yet
coming seasonably, may be a valuable blessing. A gourd in the right
place may do us more service than a cedar. The least creatures may be
great plagues, or great comforts, as God is pleased to make them.
Persons of strong passions are apt to be cast down with any trifle that
crosses them, or to be lifted up with a trifle that pleases them. See
what our creature-comforts are, and what we may expect them to be; they
are withering things. A small worm at the root destroys a large gourd:
our gourds wither, and we know not what is the cause. Perhaps
creature-comforts are continued to us, but are made bitter; the creature
is continued, but the comfort is gone. God prepared a wind to make Jonah
feel the want of the gourd. It is just that those who love to complain,
should never be left without something to complain of. When afflicting
providences take away relations, possessions, and enjoyments, we must
not be angry at God. What should especially silence discontent, is, that
when our gourd is gone, our God is not gone. Sin and death are very
dreadful, yet Jonah, in his heat, makes light of both. One soul is of
more value than the whole world; surely then one soul is of more value
than many gourds: we should have more concern for our own and others'
precious souls, than for the riches and enjoyments of this world. It is
a great encouragement to hope we shall find mercy with the Lord, that he
is ready to show mercy. And murmurers shall be made to understand, that
how willing soever they are to keep the Divine grace to themselves and
those of their own way, there is one Lord over all, who is rich in mercy
to all that call upon him. Do we wonder at the forbearance of God
towards his perverse servant? Let us study our own hearts and ways; let
us not forget our own ingratitude and obstinacy; and let us be
astonished at God's patience towards us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Introduction](mic000)

</div>
