<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jonah Index](jon.md)  
  [Previous](jon000)  [Next](jon002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001.md)

([Jon 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001).md) Jonah, sent to Nineveh,
flees to Tarshish.

([Jon 1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#004).md) He is stayed by a
tempest.

([Jon 1:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#008).md) His discourse with the
mariners.

([Jon 1:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#013).md) He is cast into the
sea, and miraculously preserved.

[Jonah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 1:1</span></span>

It is sad to think how much sin is committed in great cities. Their
wickedness, as that of Nineveh, is a bold and open affront to God. Jonah
must go at once to Nineveh, and there, on the spot, cry against the
wickedness of it. Jonah would not go. Probably there are few among us
who would not have tried to decline such a mission. Providence seemed to
give him an opportunity to escape; we may be out of the way of duty, and
yet may meet with a favourable gale. The ready way is not always the
right way. See what the best of men are, when God leaves them to
themselves; and what need we have, when the word of the Lord comes to
us, to have the Spirit of the Lord to bring every thought within us into
obedience.

[Jonah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jon 1:4</span></span>

God sent a pursuer after Jonah, even a mighty tempest. Sin brings storms
and tempests into the soul, into the family, into churches and nations;
it is a disquieting, disturbing thing. Having called upon their gods for
help, the sailors did what they could to help themselves. Oh that men
would be thus wise for their souls, and would be willing to part with
that wealth, pleasure, and honour, which they cannot keep without making
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, and ruining their souls for
ever! Jonah was fast asleep. Sin is stupifying, and we are to take heed
lest at any time our hearts are hardened by the deceitfulness of it.
What do men mean by sleeping on in sin, when the word of God and the
convictions of their own consciences, warn them to arise and call on the
Lord, if they would escape everlasting misery? Should not we warn each
other to awake, to arise, to call upon our God, if so be he will deliver
us? The sailors concluded the storm was a messenger of Divine justice
sent to some one in that ship. Whatever evil is upon us at any time,
there is a cause for it; and each must pray, Lord, show me wherefore
thou contendest with me. The lot fell upon Jonah. God has many ways of
bringing to light hidden sins and sinners, and making manifest that
folly which was thought to be hid from the eyes of all living.

[Jonah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 1:8</span></span>

Jonah gave an account of his religion, for that was his business. We may
hope that he told with sorrow and shame, justifying God, condemning
himself, and explaining to the mariners what a great God Jehovah is.
They said to him, Why hast thou done this? If thou fearest the God that
made the sea and the dry land, why wast thou such a fool as to think
thou couldst flee from his presence? If the professors of religion do
wrong, they will hear it from those who make no such profession. When
sin has raised a storm, and laid us under the tokens of God's
displeasure, we must consider what is to be done to the sin that raised
the storm. Jonah uses the language of true penitents, who desire that
none but themselves may fare the worse for their sins and follies. Jonah
sees this to be the punishment of his iniquity, he accepts it, and
justifies God in it. When conscience is awakened, and a storm raised,
nothing will turn it into a calm but parting with the sin that caused
the disturbance. Parting with our money will not pacify the conscience,
the Jonah must be thrown overboard.

[Jonah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jon 1:13</span></span>

The mariners rowed against wind and tide, the wind of God's displeasure,
the tide of his counsel; but it is in vain to think of saving ourselves
any other way than by destroying our sins. Even natural conscience
cannot but dread blood-guiltiness. And when we are led by Providence God
does what he pleases, and we ought to be satisfied, though it may not
please us. Throwing Jonah into the sea put an end to the storm. God will
not afflict for ever, He will only contend till we submit and turn from
our sins. Surely these heathen mariners will rise up in judgment against
many called Christians, who neither offer prayers when in distress, nor
thanksgiving for signal deliverances. The Lord commands all creatures,
and can make any of them serve his designs of mercy to his people. Let
us see this salvation of the Lord, and admire his power, that he could
thus save a drowning man, and his pity, that he would thus save one who
was running from him, and had offended him. It was of the Lord's mercies
that Jonah was not consumed. Jonah was alive in the fish three days and
nights: to nature this was impossible, but to the God of nature all
things are possible. Jonah, by this miraculous preservation, was made a
type of Christ; as our blessed Lord himself declared, [Mat
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 2](jon002.md)

</div>
