<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 7:0</span></span>

([Jos 7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)) The Israelites smitten at
Ai.

([Jos 7:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)) Joshua's humiliation and
prayer.

([Jos 7:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)) God instructs Joshua
what to do.

([Jos 7:16-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016)) Achan is detected, He
is destroyed.

[Joshua 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 7:1</span></span>

Achan took some of the spoil of Jericho. The love of the world is that
root of bitterness, which of all others is most hardly rooted up. We
should take heed of sin ourselves, lest by it many be defiled or
disquieted, [Heb 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015); and take heed
of having fellowship with sinners, lest we share their guilt. It
concerns us to watch over one another to prevent sin, because others'
sins may be to our damage. The easy conquest of Jericho excited contempt
of the enemy, and a disposition to expect the Lord to do all for them
without their using proper means. Thus men abuse the doctrines of Divine
grace, and the promises of God, into excuses for their own sloth and
self-indulgence. We are to work out our own salvation, though it is God
that works in us. It was a dear victory to the Canaanites, whereby
Israel was awakened and reformed, and reconciled to their God, and the
people of Canaan hardened to their own ruin.

[Joshua 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 7:6</span></span>

Joshua's concern for the honour of God, more than even for the fate of
Israel, was the language of the Spirit of adoption. He pleaded with God.
He laments their defeat, as he feared it would reflect on God's wisdom
and power, his goodness and faithfulness. We cannot at any time urge a
better plea than this, Lord, what wilt thou do for thy great name? Let
God be glorified in all, and then welcome his whole will.

[Joshua 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 7:10</span></span>

God awakens Joshua to inquiry, by telling him that when this accursed
thing was put away, all would be well. Times of danger and trouble
should be times of reformation. We should look at home, into our own
hearts, into our own houses, and make diligent search to find out if
there be not some accursed thing there, which God sees and abhors; some
secret lust, some unlawful gain, some undue withholding from God or from
others. We cannot prosper, until the accursed thing be destroyed out of
our hearts, and put out of our habitations and our families, and
forsaken in our lives. When the sin of sinners finds them out, God is to
be acknowledged. With a certain and unerring judgment, the righteous God
does and will distinguish between the innocent and the guilty; so that
though the righteous are of the same tribe, and family, and household
with the wicked, yet they never shall be treated as the wicked.

[Joshua 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 7:16</span></span>

See the folly of those that promise themselves secrecy in sin. The
righteous God has many ways of bringing to light the hidden works of
darkness. See also, how much it is our concern, when God is contending
with us, to find out the cause that troubles us. We must pray with holy
Job, Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Achan's sin began
in the eye. He saw these fine things, as Eve saw the forbidden fruit.
See what comes of suffering the heart to walk after the eyes, and what
need we have to make this covenant with our eyes, that if they wander
they shall be sure to weep for it. It proceeded out of the heart. They
that would be kept from sinful actions, must mortify and check in
themselves sinful desires, particularly the desire of worldly wealth.
Had Achan looked upon these things with an eye of faith, he would have
seen they were accursed things, and would have dreaded them; but looking
on them with an eye of sense only, he saw them as goodly things, and
coveted them. When he had committed the sin, he tried to hide it. As
soon as he had got this plunder, it became his burden, and he dared not
to use his ill-gotten treasure. So differently do objects of temptation
appear at a distance, to what they do when they have been gotten. See
the deceitfulness of sin; that which is pleasing in the commission, is
bitter in the reflection. See how they will be deceived that rob God.
Sin is a very troublesome thing, not only to a sinner himself, but to
all about him. The righteous God will certainly recompense tribulation
to them that trouble his people. Achan perished not alone in his sin.
They lose their own, who grasp at more than their own. His sons and
daughters were put to death with him. It is probable that they helped to
hide the things; they must have known of them. What fatal consequences
follow, even in this world, to the sinner himself, and to all belonging
him! One sinner destroys much good. What, then, will be the wrath to
come? Let us flee from it to Christ Jesus as the sinner's Friend. There
are circumstances in the confession of Achan, marking the progress of
sin, from its first entrance into the heart to its being done, which may
serve as the history of almost every offence against the law of God, and
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008)

</div>
