<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 22:0</span></span>

([Jos 22:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)) Reuben and Gad, with the
half tribe of Manasseh, dismissed to their homes.

([Jos 22:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010)) They build an altar of
testimony, The congregation offended thereat.

([Jos 22:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021)) The answer of the
Reubenites.

([Jos 22:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030)) The children of Israel
satisfied.

[Joshua 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 22:1</span></span>

Joshua dismisses the tribes with good counsel. Those who have the
commandment have it in vain, unless they do the commandment; and it will
not be done aright unless we take diligent heed. In particular to love
the Lord our God, as the best of beings, and the best of friends; and as
far as that principle rules in the heart, there will be constant care
and endeavour to walk in his ways, even those that are narrow and
up-hill. In every instance to keep his commandments. At all times, and
in all conditions, with purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord, and to
serve him and his kingdom among men, with all our heart, and with all
our soul. This good counsel is given to all; may God give us grace to
take it!

[Joshua 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 22:10</span></span>

Here is the care of the separated tribes to keep their hold of Canaan's
religion. At first sight it seemed a design to set up an altar against
the altar at Shiloh. God is jealous for his own institutions; we should
be so too, and afraid of every thing that looks like, or leads to
idolatry. Corruptions in religion are best dealt with at first. But
their prudence in following up this zealous resolution is no less
commendable. Many an unhappy strife would be prevented, or soon made up,
by inquiries into the matter of the offence. The remembrance of great
sins committed formerly, should engage us to stand on our guard against
the beginnings of sin; for the way of sin is down-hill. We are all
concerned to reprove our neighbour when he does amiss, lest we suffer
sin upon him, [Lev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017). The offer
made that they should be welcome to come to the land where the Lord's
tabernacle was, and settle there, was in the spirit of true Israelites.

[Joshua 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 22:21</span></span>

The tribes took the reproofs of their brethren in good part. With
solemnity and meekness they proceeded to give all the satisfaction in
their power. Reverence of God is expressed in the form of their appeal.
This brief confession of faith would remove their brethren's suspicion
that they intended to worship other gods. Let us always speak of God
with seriousness, and mention his name with a solemn pause. Those who
make appeals to Heaven with a careless "God knows," take his name in
vain: it is very unlike this. They express great confidence of their own
uprightness in the matter of their appeal. "God knows it," for he is
perfectly acquainted with the thoughts and intents of the heart. In
every thing we do in religion, it highly concerns us to approve
ourselves to God, remembering that he knows the heart. And if our
sincerity be known to God, we should study likewise to let others know
it by its fruits, especially those who, though they mistake us, show
zeal for the glory of God. They disdained the design of which they were
suspected to be guilty, and fully explained their true intent in
building this altar. Those who have found the comfort and benefit of
God's ordinances, cannot but desire to preserve them to their seed, and
to use all possible care that their children may be looked upon as
having a part in him. Christ is the great Altar that sanctifies every
gift; the best evidence of our interest in him is the work of his Spirit
in our hearts.

[Joshua 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 22:30</span></span>

It is well that there was on both sides a disposition to peace, as there
was a zeal for God; for quarrels about religion, for want of wisdom and
love, often prove the most fierce and difficult to be made up. Proud and
peevish spirits, when they have passed any unjust blame on their
brethren, though full evidence be brought of its unfairness, can by no
means be persuaded to withdraw it. But Israel was not so prejudiced.
They looked upon their brethren's innocence as a token of God's
presence. Our brethren's zeal for the power of godliness, and faith and
love, notwithstanding the fears of their breaking the unity of the
church, are things of which we should be very glad to be satisfied. The
altar was called ED, a witness. It was a witness of their care to keep
their religion pure and entire, and would witness against their
descendants, if they should turn from following after the Lord. Happy
will it be when all professed Christians learn to copy the example of
Israel, to unite zeal and steady adherence to the cause of truth, with
candour, meekness, and readiness to understand each other, to explain
and to be satisfied with the explanations of their brethren. May the
Lord increase the number of those who endeavour to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace! may increasing grace and consolation be
with all who love Jesus Christ in sincerity!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023)

</div>
