<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos012)  [Next](jos014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 13:0</span></span>

([Jos 13:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)) Bounds of the land not
yet conquered.

(v. 7-33) Inheritance of Reuben.

[Joshua 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 13:1</span></span>

At this chapter begins the account of the dividing of the land of Canaan
among the tribes of Israel by lot; a narrative showing the performance
of the promise made to the fathers, that this land should be given to
the seed of Jacob. We are not to pass over these chapters of hard names
as useless. Where God has a mouth to speak, and a hand to write, we
should find an ear to hear, and an eye to read; and may God give us a
heart to profit! Joshua is supposed to have been about one hundred years
old at this time. It is good for those who are old and stricken in years
to be put in remembrance of their being so. God considers the frame of
his people, and would not have them burdened with work above their
strength. And all people, especially old people, should set to do that
quickly which must be done before they die, lest death prevent them,
[Ecc 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#010). God promise that he would
make the Israelites masters of all the countries yet unsubdued, through
Joshua was old, and not able to do it; old, and not likely to live to
see it done. Whatever becomes of us, and however we may be laid aside as
despised, broken vessels, God will do his own work in his own time. We
must work out our salvation, then God will work in us, and work with us;
we must resist our spiritual enemies, then God will tread them under our
feet; we must go forth to our Christian work and warfare, then God will
go forth before us.

[Joshua 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 13:7</span></span>

The land must be divided among the tribes. It is the will of God that
every man should know his own, and not take that which is another's. The
world must be governed, not by force, but right. Wherever our habitation
is placed, and in whatever honest way our portion is assigned, we should
consider them as allotted of God; we should be thankful for, and use
them as such, while every prudent method should be used to prevent
disputes about property, both at present and in future. Joshua must be
herein a type of Christ, who has not only conquered the gates of hell
for us, but has opened to us the gates of heaven, and having purchased
the eternal inheritance for all believers, will put them in possession
of it. Here is a general description of the country given to the two
tribes and a half, by Moses. Israel must know their own, and keep to it;
and may not, under pretence of their being God's peculiar people,
encroach on their neighbours. Twice in this chapter it is noticed, that
to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no inheritance: see [Num
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020). Their maintenance must be
brought out of all the tribes. The ministers of the Lord should show
themselves indifferent about worldly interests, and the people should
take care they want nothing suitable. And happy are those who have the
Lord God of Israel for their inheritance, though little of this world
falls to their lot. His providences will supply their wants, his
consolations will support their souls, till they gain heavenly joy and
everlasting pleasures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 14](jos014)

</div>
