<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos001)  [Next](jos003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 2:0</span></span>

([Jos 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)) Rahab receives and hides
two Israelites.

([Jos 2:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008)) Rahab and the spies.

([Jos 2:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#022)) The return of the
spies.

[Joshua 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 2:1</span></span>

Faith in God's promises ought not to do away, but to encourage our
diligence in the use of proper means. The providence of God directed the
spies to the house of Rahab. God knew where there was one that would be
true to them, though they did not. Rahab appears to have been an
innkeeper; and if she had formerly been one of bad life, which is
doubtful, she had left her evil courses. That which seems to us most
accidental, is often overruled by the Divine providence to serve great
ends. It was by faith that Rahab received those with peace, against whom
her king and country had war. We are sure this was a good work; it is so
spoken of by the apostle, [Jam 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025);
and she did it by faith, such a faith as set her above the fear of man.
Those only are true believers, who find in their hearts to venture for
God; they take his people for their people, and cast in their lot among
them. The spies were led by the special providence of God, and Rahab
entertained them out of regard to Israel and Israel's God, and not for
lucre or for any evil purpose. Though excuses may be offered for the
guilt of Rahab's falsehood, it seems best to admit nothing which tends
to explain it away. Her views of the Divine law must have been very dim:
a falsehood like this, told by those who enjoy the light of revelation,
whatever the motive, would deserve heavy censure.

[Joshua 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 2:8</span></span>

Rahab had heard of the miracles the Lord wrought for Israel. She
believed that his promises would certainly be fulfilled, and his
threatenings take effect; and that there was no way of escape but by
submitting to him, and joining with his people. The conduct of Rahab
proved that she had the real principle of Divine faith. Observe the
promises the spies made to her. The goodness of God is often expressed
by his kindness and truth, [Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002);
in both these we must be followers of him. Those who will be
conscientious in keeping promises, are cautious in making them. The
spies make needful conditions. The scarlet cord, like the blood upon the
doorpost at the passover, recalls to remembrance the sinner's security
under the atoning blood of Christ; and that we are to flee thereto for
refuge from the wrath of a justly offended God. The same cord Rahab used
for the saving of these Israelites, was to be used for her own safety.
What we serve and honour God with, we may expect he will bless, and make
useful to us.

[Joshua 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 2:22</span></span>

The report the spies brought was encouraging. All the people of the
country faint because of Israel; they have neither wisdom to yield, nor
courage to fight. Those terrors of conscience, and that sense of Divine
wrath, which dismay the ungodly, but bring not to repentance, are
fearful forebodings of approaching destruction. But grace yet abounds to
the chief of sinners. Let them, without delay, flee to Christ, and all
shall be well.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 3](jos003)

</div>
