<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos009)  [Next](jos011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 10:0</span></span>

([Jos 10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)) Five kings war against
Gibeon.

([Jos 10:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#007)) Joshua succours Gibeon
The sun and moon stand still.

([Jos 10:15-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#015)) The kings are taken,
their armies defeated, and they are put to death.

(v. 28-43) Seven other kings defeated and slain.

[Joshua 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 10:1</span></span>

When sinners leave the service of Satan and the friendship of the world,
that they make peace with God and join Israel, they must not marvel if
the world hate them, if their former friends become foes. By such
methods Satan discourages many who are convinced of their danger, and
almost persuaded to be Christians, but fear the cross. These things
should quicken us to apply to God for protection, help, and deliverance.

[Joshua 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 10:7</span></span>

The meanest and most feeble, who have just begun to trust the Lord, are
as much entitled to be protected as those who have long and faithfully
been his servants. It is our duty to defend the afflicted, who, like the
Gibeonites, are brought into trouble on our account, or for the sake of
the gospel. Joshua would not forsake his new vassals. How much less
shall our true Joshua fail those who trust in Him! We may be wanting in
our trust, but our trust never can want success. Yet God's promises are
not to slacken and do away, but to quicken and encourage our endeavours.
Notice the great faith of Joshua, and the power of God answering it by
the miraculous staying of the sun, that the day of Israel's victories
might be made longer. Joshua acted on this occasion by impulse on his
mind from the Spirit of God. It was not necessary that Joshua should
speak, or the miracle be recorded, according to the modern terms of
astronomy. The sun appeared to the Israelites over Gibeon, and the moon
over the valley of Ajalon, and there they appeared to be stopped on
their course for one whole day. Is any thing too hard for the Lord?
forms a sufficient answer to ten thousand difficulties, which objectors
have in every age started against the truth of God as revealed in his
written word. Proclamation was hereby made to the neighbouring nations,
Behold the works of the Lord, and say, What nation is there so great as
Israel, who has God so nigh unto them?

[Joshua 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 10:15</span></span>

None moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel. This shows
their perfect safety. The kings were called to an account, as rebels
against the Israel of God. Refuges of lies will but secure for God's
judgment. God punished the abominable wickedness of these kings, the
measure of whose iniquity was now full. And by this public act of
justice, done upon these ringleaders of the Canaanites in sin, he would
possess his people with the greater dread and detestation of the sins of
the nations that God cast out from before them. Here is a type and
figure of Christ's victories over the powers of darkness, and of
believers' victories through him. In our spiritual conflicts we must not
be satisfied with obtaining some important victory. We must pursue our
scattered enemies, searching out the remains of sin as they rise up in
our hearts, and thus pursue the conquest. In so doing, the Lord will
afford light until the warfare be accomplished.

[Joshua 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 10:28</span></span>

Joshua made speed in taking these cities. See what a great deal of work
may be done in a little time, if we will be diligent, and improve our
opportunities. God here showed his hatred of the idolatries and other
abominations of which the Canaanites had been guilty, and shows us how
great the provocation was, by the greatness of the destruction brought
upon them. Here also was typified the destruction of all the enemies of
the Lord Jesus, who, having slighted the riches of his grace, must for
ever feel the weight of his wrath. The Lord fought for Israel. They
could not have gotten the victory, if God had not undertaken the battle.
We conquer when God fights for us; if he be for us, who can be against
us?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 11](jos011)

</div>
