<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos023)  [Next](jdg000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 24:0</span></span>

([Jos 24:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001).md) God's benefits to their
fathers.

([Jos 24:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015).md) Joshua renews the
covenant between the people and God.

([Jos 24:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029).md) Joshua's death,
Joseph's bones buried, The state of Israel.

[Joshua 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 24:1</span></span>

We must never think our work for God done, till our life is done. If he
lengthen out our days beyond what we expected, like those of Joshua, it
is because he has some further service for us to do. He who aims at the
same mind which was in Christ Jesus, will glory in bearing the last
testimony to his Saviour's goodness, and in telling to all around, the
obligations with which the unmerited goodness of God has bound him. The
assembly came together in a solemn religious manner. Joshua spake to
them in God's name, and as from him. His sermon consists of doctrine and
application. The doctrinal part is a history of the great things God had
done for his people, and for their fathers before them. The application
of this history of God's mercies to them, is an exhortation to fear and
serve God, in gratitude for his favour, and that it might be continued.

[Joshua 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 24:15</span></span>

It is essential that the service of God's people be performed with a
willing mind. For LOVE is the only genuine principle whence all
acceptable service of God can spring. The Father seeks only such to
worship him, as worship him in spirit and in truth. The carnal mind of
man is enmity against God, therefore, is not capable of such spiritual
worship. Hence the necessity of being born again. But numbers rest in
mere forms, as tasks imposed upon them. Joshua puts them to their
choice; but not as if it were indifferent whether they served God or
not. Choose you whom ye will serve, now the matter is laid plainly
before you. He resolves to do this, whatever others did. Those that are
bound for heaven, must be willing to swim against the stream. They must
not do as the most do, but as the best do. And no one can behave himself
as he ought in any station, who does not deeply consider his religious
duties in family relations. The Israelites agree with Joshua, being
influenced by the example of a man who had been so great a blessing to
them; We also will serve the Lord. See how much good great men do, by
their influence, if zealous in religion. Joshua brings them to express
full purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord. They must come off from all
confidence in their own sufficiency, else their purposes would be in
vain. The service of God being made their deliberate choice, Joshua
binds them to it by a solemn covenant. He set up a monument of it. In
this affecting manner Joshua took his last leave of them; if they
perished, their blood would be upon their own heads. Though the house of
God, the Lord's table, and even the walls and trees before which we have
uttered our solemn purposes of serving him, would bear witness against
us if we deny him, yet we may trust in him, that he will put his fear
into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him. God alone can give
grace, yet he blesses our endeavours to engage men to his service.

[Joshua 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 24:29</span></span>

Joseph died in Egypt, but gave commandment concerning his bones, that
they should not rest in their grave till Israel had rest in the land of
promise. Notice also the death and burial of Joshua, and of Eleazar the
chief priest. The most useful men, having served their generation,
according to the will of God, one after another, fall asleep and see
corruption. But Jesus, having spent and ended his life on earth more
effectually than either Joshua or Joseph, rose from the dead, and saw no
corruption. And the redeemed of the Lord shall inherit the kingdom he
prepared for them from the foundation of the world. They will say in
admiration of the grace of Jesus, Unto him that loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto
God and his Father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Introduction](jdg000.md)

</div>
