<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1015)  [Next](kg1017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 16:0</span></span>

([Kg1 16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001).md) The reigns of Baasha
and Elah in Israel.

([Kg1 16:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#015).md) Reigns of Zimri and
Omri in Israel.

([Kg1 16:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#029).md) Ahab's wickedness,
Hiel rebuilds Jericho.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 16:1</span></span>

This chapter relates wholly to the kingdom of Israel, and the
revolutions of that kingdom. God calls Israel his people still, though
wretchedly corrupted. Jehu foretells the same destruction to come upon
Baasha's family, which that king had been employed to bring upon the
family of Jeroboam. Those who resemble others in their sins, may expect
to resemble them in the plagues they suffer, especially those who seem
zealous against such sins in others as they allow in themselves. Baasha
himself dies in peace, and is buried with honour. Herein plainly appears
that there are punishments after death, which are most to be dreaded.
Let Elah be a warning to drunkards, who know not but death may surprise
them. Death easily comes upon men when they are drunk. Besides the
diseases which men bring themselves into by drinking, when in that
state, men are easily overcome by an enemy, and liable to bad accidents.
Death comes terribly upon men in such a state, finding them in the act
of sin, and unfitted for any act of devotion; that day comes upon them
unawares. The word of God was fulfilled, and the sins of Baasha and Elah
were reckoned for, with which they provoked God. Their idols are called
their vanities, for idols cannot profit nor help; miserable are those
whose gods are vanities.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 16:15</span></span>

When men forsake God, they will be left to plague one another. Proud
aspiring men ruin one another. Omri struggled with Tibni some years.
Though we do not always understand the rules by which God governs
nations and individuals in his providence, we may learn useful lessons
from the history before us. When tyrants succeed each other, and
massacres, conspiracies, and civil wars, we may be sure the Lord has a
controversy with the people for their sins; they are loudly called to
repent and reform. Omri made himself infamous by his wickedness. Many
wicked men have been men of might and renown; have built cities, and
their names are found in history; but they have no name in the book of
life.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 16:29</span></span>

Ahab did evil above all that reigned before him, and did it with a
particular enmity both against Jehovah and Israel. He was not satisfied
with breaking the second commandment by image-worship, he broke the
first by worshipping other gods: making light of lesser sins makes way
for greater. Marriages with daring offenders also imbolden in
wickedness, and hurry men on to the greatest excesses. One of Ahab's
subjects, following the example of his presumption, ventured to build
Jericho. Like Achan, he meddled with the accursed thing; turned that to
his own use, which was devoted to God's honour: he began to build, in
defiance of the curse well devoted to God's honour: he began to build,
in defiance of the curse well known in Israel; but none ever hardened
his heart against God, and prospered. Let the reading of this chapter
cause us to mark the dreadful end of all the workers of iniquity. And
what does the history of all ungodly men furnish, what ever rank or
situation they move in, but sad examples of the same?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 17](kg1017.md)

</div>
