<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 13:0</span></span>

([Kg1 13:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)) Jeroboam's sin
reproved.

([Kg1 13:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)) The prophet deceived.

([Kg1 13:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023)) The disobedient
prophet is slain, Jeroboam's obstinacy.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 13:1</span></span>

In threatening the altar, the prophet threatens the founder and
worshippers. Idolatrous worship will not continue, but the word of the
Lord will endure for ever. The prediction plainly declared that the
family of David would continue, and support true religion, when the ten
tribes would not be able to resist them. If God, in justice, harden the
hearts of sinners, so that the hand they have stretched out in sin they
cannot pull in again by repentance, that is a spiritual judgment,
represented by this, and much more dreadful. Jeroboam looked for help,
not from his calves, but from God only, from his power, and his favour.
The time may come when those that hate the preaching, would be glad of
the prayers of faithful ministers. Jeroboam does not desire the prophet
to pray that his sin might be pardoned, and his heart changed, but only
that his hand might be restored. He seemed affected for the present with
both the judgment and the mercy, but the impression wore off. God
forbade his messenger to eat or drink in Bethel, to show his detestation
of their idolatry and apostacy from God, and to teach us not to have
fellowship with the works of darkness. Those have not learned
self-denial, who cannot forbear one forbidden meal.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 13:11</span></span>

The old prophet's conduct proves that he was not really a godly man.
When the change took place under Jeroboam, he preferred his ease and
interest to his religion. He took a very bad method to bring the good
prophet back. It was all a lie. Believers are most in danger of being
drawn from their duty by plausible pretences of holiness. We may wonder
that the wicked prophet went unpunished, while the holy man of God was
suddenly and severely punished. What shall we make of this? The
judgments of God are beyond our power to fathom; and there is a judgment
to come. Nothing can excuse any act of wilful disobedience. This shows
what they must expect who hearken to the great deceiver. They that yield
to him as a tempter, will be terrified by him as a tormentor. Those whom
he now fawns upon, he will afterwards fly upon; and whom he draws into
sin, he will try to drive to despair.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 13:23</span></span>

God is displeased at the sins of his own people; and no man shall be
protected in disobedience, by his office, his nearness to God, or any
services he has done for him. God warns all whom he employs, strictly to
observe their orders. We cannot judge of men by their sufferings, nor of
sins by present punishments; with some, the flesh is destroyed, that the
spirit may be saved; with others, the flesh is pampered, that the soul
may ripen for hell. Jeroboam returned not from his evil way. He promised
himself that the calves would secure the crown to his family, but they
lost it, and sunk his family. Those betray themselves who think to
support themselves by any sin whatever. Let us dread prospering in
sinful ways; pray to be kept from every delusion and temptation, and to
be enabled to walk with self-denying perseverance in the way of God's
commands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
