<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1014)  [Next](kg1016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 15:0</span></span>

([Kg1 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001).md) Wicked reign of Abijam,
king of Judah.

(v. 9-24) Good reign of Asa, king of Judah.

([Kg1 15:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#025).md) The evil reigns of
Nadab and Baasha in Israel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 15:1</span></span>

Abijam's heart was not perfect with the Lord his God; he wanted
sincerity; he began well, but he fell off, and walked in all the sins of
his father, following his bad example, though he had seen the bad
consequences of it. David's family was continued as a lamp in Jerusalem,
to maintain the true worship of God there, when the light of Divine
truth was extinguished in all other places. The Lord has still taken
care of his cause, while those who ought to have been serviceable
thereto have lived and perished in their sins. The Son of David will
still continue a light to his church, to establish it in truth and
righteousness to the end of time. There are two kinds of fulfilling the
law, one legal, the other by the gospel. Legal is, when men do all
things required in the law, and that by themselves. None ever thus
fulfilled the law but Christ, and Adam before his fall. The gospel
manner of fulfilling the law is, to believe in Christ who fulfilled the
law for us, and to endeavour in the whole man to obey God in all his
precepts. And this is accepted of God, as to all those that are in
Christ. Thus David and others are said to fulfil the law.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 15:9</span></span>

Asa did what was right in the eyes of the Lord. That is right indeed
which is so in God's eyes. Asa's times were times of reformation. He
removed that which was evil; there reformation begins, and a great deal
he found to do. When Asa found idolatry in the court, he rooted it out
thence. Reformation must begin at home. Asa honours and respects his
mother; he loves her well, but he loves God better. Those that have
power are happy when thus they have hearts to use it well. We must not
only cease to do evil, but learn to do well; not only cast away the
idols of our iniquity, but dedicate ourselves and our all to God's
honour and glory. Asa was cordially devoted to the service of God, his
sins not arising from presumption. But his league with Benhadad arose
from unbelief. Even true believers find it hard, in times of urgent
danger, to trust in the Lord with all their heart. Unbelief makes way
for carnal policy, and thus for one sin after another. Unbelief has
often led Christians to call in the help of the Lord's enemies in their
contests with their brethren; and some who once shone brightly, have
thus been covered with a dark cloud towards the end of their days.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 15:25</span></span>

During the single reign of Asa in Judah, the government of Israel was in
six or seven different hands. Observe the ruin of the family of
Jeroboam; no word of God shall fall to the ground. Divine threatenings
are not designed merely to terrify. Ungodly men execute the just
judgments of God upon each other. But in the midst of dreadful sins and
this apparent confusion, the Lord carries on his own plan: when it is
fully completed, the glorious justice, wisdom, truth, and mercy therein
displayed, shall be admired and adored through all the ages of eternity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 16](kg1016.md)

</div>
