<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2019)  [Next](kg2021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 20:0</span></span>

([Kg2 20:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)) Hezekiah's sickness,
His recovery in answer to prayer.

([Kg2 20:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012)) Hezekiah shows his
treasures to the ambassadors from Babylon, His death.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 20:1</span></span>

Hezekiah was sick unto death, in the same year in which the king of
Assyria besieged Jerusalem. A warning to prepare for death was brought
to Hezekiah by Isaiah. Prayer is one of the best preparations for death,
because by it we fetch in strength and grace from God, to enable us to
finish well. He wept sorely: some gather from hence that he was
unwilling to die; it is in the nature of man to dread the separation of
soul and body. There was also something peculiar in Hezekiah's case; he
was now in the midst of his usefulness. Let Hezekiah's prayer, see
Isaiah 38. interpret his tears; in that is nothing which is like his
having been under that fear of death, which has bondage or torment.
Hezekiah's piety made his sick-bed easy. "O Lord, remember now;" he does
not speak as if God needed to be put in mind of any thing by us; nor, as
if the reward might be demanded as due; it is Christ's righteousness
only that is the purchase of mercy and grace. Hezekiah does not pray,
Lord, spare me; but, Lord, remember me; whether I live or die, let me be
thine. God always hears the prayers of the broken in heart, and will
give health, length of days, and temporal deliverances, as much and as
long as is truly good for them. Means were to be used for Hezekiah's
recovery; yet, considering to what a height the disease was come, and
how suddenly it was checked, the cure was miraculous. It is our duty,
when sick, to use such means as are proper to help nature, else we do
not trust God, but tempt him. For the confirmation of his faith, the
shadow of the sun was carried back, and the light was continued longer
than usual, in a miraculous manner. This work of wonder shows the power
of God in heaven as well as on earth, the great notice he takes of
prayer, and the great favour he bears to his chosen.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 20:12</span></span>

The king of Babylon was at this time independent of the king of Assyria,
though shortly after subdued by him. Hezekiah showed his treasures and
armour, and other proofs of his wealth and power. This was the effect of
pride and ostentation, and departing from simple reliance on God. He
also seems to have missed the opportunity of speaking to the Chaldeans,
about Him who had wrought the miracles which excited their attention,
and of pointing out to them the absurdity and evil of idolatry. What is
more common than to show our friends our houses and possessions? But if
we do this in the pride of ours hearts, to gain applause from men, not
giving praise to God, it becomes sin in us, as it did in Hezekiah. We
may expect vexation from every object with which we are unduly pleased.
Isaiah, who had often been Hezekiah's comforter, is now is reprover. The
blessed Spirit is both, [Joh 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007),
[Joh 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008). Ministers must be both, as
there is occasion. Hezekiah allowed the justice of the sentence, and
God's goodness in the respite. Yet the prospect respecting his family
and nation must have given him many painful feelings. Hezekiah was
indeed humbled for the pride of his heart. And blessed are the dead who
die in the Lord; for they rest from their labours, and their works do
follow them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 21](kg2021)

</div>
