<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2021)  [Next](kg2023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 22:0</span></span>

([Kg2 22:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001).md) Josiah's good reign,
His care for repairing the temple, The book of the law found.

([Kg2 22:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#011).md) Josiah consults Huldah
the prophetess.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 22:1</span></span>

The different event of Josiah's early succession from that of Manasseh,
must be ascribed to the distinguishing grace of God; yet probably the
persons that trained him up were instruments in producing this
difference. His character was most excellent. Had the people joined in
the reformation as heartily as he persevered in it, blessed effects
would have followed. But they were wicked, and had become fools in
idolatry. We do not obtain full knowledge of the state of Judah from the
historical records, unless we refer to the writings of the prophets who
lived at the time. In repairing the temple, the book of the law was
found, and brought to the king. It seems, this book of the law was lost
and missing; carelessly mislaid and neglected, as some throw their
Bibles into corners, or maliciously concealed by some of the idolaters.
God's care of the Bible plainly shows his interest in it. Whether this
was the only copy in being or not, the things contained in it were new,
both to the king and to the high priest. No summaries, extracts, or
collections out of the Bible, can convey and preserve the knowledge of
God and his will, like the Bible itself. It was no marvel that the
people were so corrupt, when the book of the law was so scarce; they
that corrupted them, no doubt, used arts to get that book out of their
hands. The abundance of Bibles we possess aggravates our national sins;
for what greater contempt of God can we show, than to refuse to read his
word when put into our hands, or, reading it, not to believe and obey
it? By the holy law is the knowledge of sin, and by the blessed gospel
is the knowledge of salvation. When the former is understood in its
strictness and excellence, the sinner begins to inquire, What must I do
to be saved? And the ministers of the gospel point out to him Jesus
Christ, as the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 22:11</span></span>

The book of the law is read before the king. Those best honour their
Bibles, who study them; daily feed on that bread, and walk by that
light. Convictions of sin and wrath should put us upon this inquiry,
What shall we do to be saved? Also, what we may expect, and must provide
for. Those who are truly apprehensive of the weight of God's wrath,
cannot but be very anxious how they may be saved. Huldah let Josiah know
what judgments God had in store for Judah and Jerusalem. The generality
of the people were hardened, and their hearts unhumbled, but Josiah's
heart was tender. This is tenderness of heart, and thus he humbled
himself before the Lord. Those who most fear God's wrath, are least
likely to feel it. Though Josiah was mortally wounded in battle, yet he
died in peace with God, and went to glory. Whatever such persons suffer
or witness, they are gathered to the grave in peace, and shall enter
into the rest which remaineth for the people of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](kg2023.md)

</div>
