<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2004)  [Next](kg2006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 5:0</span></span>

([Kg2 5:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001).md) Naaman's leprosy.

([Kg2 5:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009).md) The cure of it.

([Kg2 5:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015).md) Elisha refuses Naaman's
gifts.

([Kg2 5:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020).md) Gehazi's covetousness
and falsehood.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 5:1</span></span>

Though the Syrians were idolaters, and oppressed God's people, yet the
deliverance of which Naaman had been the means, is here ascribed to the
Lord. Such is the correct language of Scripture, while those who write
common history, plainly show that God is not in all their thoughts. No
man's greatness, or honour, can place him our of the reach of the sorest
calamities of human life: there is many a sickly, crazy body under rich
and gay clothing. Every man has some but or other, something that
blemishes and diminishes him, some allay to his grandeur, some damp to
his joy. This little maid, though only a girl, could give an account of
the famous prophet the Israelites had among them. Children should be
early told of the wondrous works of God, that, wherever they go, they
may talk of them. As became a good servant, she desired the health and
welfare of her master, though she was a captive, a servant by force;
much more should servants by choice, seek their masters' good. Servants
may be blessings to the families where they are, by telling what they
know of the glory of God, and the honour of his prophets. Naaman did not
despise what she told, because of her meanness. It would be well if men
were as sensible of the burden of sin as they are of bodily disease. And
when they seek the blessings which the Lord sends in answer to the
prayers of his faithful people, they will find nothing can be had,
except they come as beggars for a free gift, not as lords to demand or
purchase.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 5:9</span></span>

Elisha knew Naaman to be a proud man, and he would let him know, that
before the great God all men stand upon the same level. All God's
commands make trial of men's spirits, especially those which direct a
sinner how to apply for the blessings of salvation. See in Naaman the
folly of pride; a cure will not content him, unless he be cured with
pomp and parade. He scorns to be healed, unless he be humoured. The way
by which a sinner is received and made holy, through the blood, and by
the Spirit of Christ, through faith alone in his name, does not
sufficiently humour or employ self, to please the sinner's heart. Human
wisdom thinks it can supply wiser and better methods of cleansing.
Observe, masters should be willing to hear reason. As we should be deaf
to the counsel of the ungodly, though given by great and respected
names, so we are to have our ears open to good advice, though brought by
those below us. Wouldst thou not do any thing? When diseased sinners are
content to do any thing, to submit to any thing, to part with any thing,
for a cure, then, and not till then, is there any hope of them. The
methods for the healing of the leprosy of sin, are so plain, that we are
without excuse if we do not observe them. It is but, Believe, and be
saved; Repent, and be pardoned; Wash, and be clean. The believer applies
for salvation, not neglecting, altering, or adding to the Saviour's
directions; he is thus made clean from guilt, while others, who neglect
them, live and die in the leprosy of sin.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 5:15</span></span>

The mercy of the cure affected Naaman more than the miracle. Those are
best able to speak of the power of Divine grace, who themselves
experience it. He also shows himself grateful to Elisha the prophet.
Elijah refused any recompence, not because he thought it unlawful, for
he received presents from others, but to show this new convert that the
servants of the God of Israel looked upon worldly wealth with a holy
contempt. The whole work was from God, in such a manner, that the
prophet would not give counsel when he had no directions from the Lord.
It is not well violently to oppose the lesser mistakes which unite with
men's first convictions; we cannot bring men forward any faster than the
Lord prepares them to receive instruction. Yet as to us, if, in
covenanting with God, we desire to reserve any known sin, to continue to
indulge ourselves in it, that is a breach of his covenant. Those who
truly hate evil, will make conscience of abstaining from all appearances
of evil.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 5:20</span></span>

Naaman, a Syrian, a courtier, a soldier, had many servants, and we read
how wise and good they were. Elisha, a holy prophet, a man of God, has
but one servant, and he proves a base liar. The love of money, that root
of all evil, was at the bottom of Gehazi's sin. He thought to impose
upon the prophet, but soon found that the Spirit of prophecy could not
be deceived, and that it was in vain to lie to the Holy Ghost. It is
folly to presume upon sin, in hopes of secrecy. When thou goest aside
into any by-path, does not thy own conscience go with thee? Does not the
eye of God go with thee? He that covers his sin, shall not prosper;
particularly, a lying tongue is but for a moment. All the foolish hopes
and contrivances of carnal worldlings are open before God. It is not a
time to increase our wealth, when we can only do it in such ways as are
dishonourable to God and religion, or injurious to others. Gehazi was
punished. If he will have Naaman's money, he shall have his disease with
it. What was Gehazi profited, though he gained two talents, when thereby
he lost his health, his honour, his peace, his service, and, if
repentance prevented not, his soul for ever? Let us beware of hypocrisy
and covetousness, and dread the curse of spiritual leprosy remaining on
our souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](kg2006.md)

</div>
