<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Lamentations Index](lam.md)  
  [Previous](lam002)  [Next](lam004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001.md)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 3:0</span></span>

The faithful lament their calamities, and hope in God's mercies.

[Lamentations 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 3:1</span></span>

The prophet relates the more gloomy and discouraging part of his
experience, and how he found support and relief. In the time of his
trial the Lord had become terrible to him. It was an affliction that was
misery itself; for sin makes the cup of affliction a bitter cup. The
struggle between unbelief and faith is often very severe. But the
weakest believer is wrong, if he thinks that his strength and hope are
perished from the Lord.

[Lamentations 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lam 3:21</span></span>

Having stated his distress and temptation, the prophet shows how he was
raised above it. Bad as things are, it is owing to the mercy of God that
they are not worse. We should observe what makes for us, as well as what
is against us. God's compassions fail not; of this we have fresh
instances every morning. Portions on earth are perishing things, but God
is a portion for ever. It is our duty, and will be our comfort and
satisfaction, to hope and quietly to wait for the salvation of the Lord.
Afflictions do and will work very much for good: many have found it good
to bear this yoke in their youth; it has made many humble and serious,
and has weaned them from the world, who otherwise would have been proud
and unruly. If tribulation work patience, that patience will work
experience, and that experience a hope that makes not ashamed. Due
thoughts of the evil of sin, and of our own sinfulness, will convince us
that it is of the Lord's mercies we are not consumed. If we cannot say
with unwavering voice, The Lord is my portion; may we not say, I desire
to have Him for my portion and salvation, and in his word do I hope?
Happy shall we be, if we learn to receive affliction as laid upon us by
the hand of God.

[Lamentations 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lam 3:37</span></span>

While there is life there is hope; and instead of complaining that
things are bad, we should encourage ourselves with the hope they will be
better. We are sinful men, and what we complain of, is far less than our
sins deserve. We should complain to God, and not of him. We are apt, in
times of calamity, to reflect on other people's ways, and blame them;
but our duty is to search and try our own ways, that we may turn from
evil to God. Our hearts must go with our prayers. If inward impressions
do not answer to outward expressions, we mock God, and deceive
ourselves.

[Lamentations 3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">lam 3:42</span></span>

The more the prophet looked on the desolations, the more he was grieved.
Here is one word of comfort. While they continued weeping, they
continued waiting; and neither did nor would expect relief and succour
from any but the Lord.

[Lamentations 3:55](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#055.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">lam 3:55</span></span>

Faith comes off conqueror, for in these verses the prophet concludes
with some comfort. Prayer is the breath of the new man, drawing in the
air of mercy in petitions, and returning it in praises; it proves and
maintains the spiritual life. He silenced their fears, and quieted their
spirits. Thou saidst, Fear not. This was the language of God's grace, by
the witness of his Spirit with their spirits. And what are all our
sorrows, compared with those of the Redeemer? He will deliver his people
from every trouble, and revive his church from every persecution. He
will save believers with everlasting salvation, while his enemies perish
with everlasting destruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 4](lam004.md)

</div>
