<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](lam004)  [Next](eze000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 5:0</span></span>

The Jewish nation supplicating the Divine favour.

[Lamentations 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 5:1</span></span>

Is any afflicted? Let him pray; and let him in prayer pour out his
complaint to God. The people of God do so here; they complain not of
evils feared, but of evils felt. If penitent and patient under what we
suffer for the sins of our fathers, we may expect that He who punishes,
will return in mercy to us. They acknowledge, Woe unto us that we have
sinned! All our woes are owing to our own sin and folly. Though our sins
and God's just displeasure cause our sufferings, we may hope in his
pardoning mercy, his sanctifying grace, and his kind providence. But the
sins of a man's whole life will be punished with vengeance at last,
unless he obtains an interest in Him who bare our sins in his own body
on the tree.

[Lamentations 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lam 5:17</span></span>

The people of God express deep concern for the ruins of the temple, more
than for any other of their calamities. But whatever changes there are
on earth, God is still the same, and remains for ever wise and holy,
just and good; with Him there is no variableness nor shadow of turning.
They earnestly pray to God for mercy and grace; Turn us to thee, O Lord.
God never leaves any till they first leave him; if he turns them to him
in a way of duty, no doubt he will quickly return to them in a way of
mercy. If God by his grace renew our hearts, he will by his favour renew
our days. Troubles may cause our hearts to be faint, and our eyes to be
dim, but the way to the mercy-seat of our reconciled God is open. Let
us, in all our trials, put our whole trust and confidence in his mercy;
let us confess our sins, and pour out our hearts before him. Let us
watch against repinings and despondency; for we surely know, that it
shall be well in the end with all that trust in, fear, love, and serve
the Lord. Are not the Lord's judgments in the earth the same as in
Jeremiah's days? Let Zion then be remembered by us in our prayers, and
her welfare be sought above every earthly joy. Spare, Lord, spare thy
people, and give not thine heritage to reproach, for the heathen to rule
over them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Introduction](eze000)

</div>
