<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev013)  [Next](lev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 14:0</span></span>

([Lev 14:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)) Of declaring the leper
to be clean.

(v. 10-32) The sacrifices to be offered by him.

(v. 33-53) The leprosy in a house.

([Lev 14:54-57](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#054)) Summary of the law
concerning leprosy.

[Leviticus 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 14:1</span></span>

The priests could not cleanse the lepers; but when the Lord removed the
plague, various rules were to be observed in admitting them again to the
ordinances of God, and the society of his people. They represent many
duties and exercises of truly repenting sinners, and the duties of
ministers respecting them. If we apply this to the spiritual leprosy of
sin, it intimates that when we withdraw from those who walk disorderly,
we must not count them as enemies, but admonish them as brethren. And
also that when God by his grace has brought to repentance, they ought
with tenderness and joy, and sincere affection, to be received again.
Care should always be taken that sinners may not be encouraged, nor
penitents discouraged. If it were found that the leprosy was healed, the
priest must declare it with the particular solemnities here described.
The two birds, one killed, and the other dipped in the blood of the bird
that was killed, and then let loose, may signify Christ shedding his
blood for sinners, and rising and ascending into heaven. The priest
having pronounced the leper clean from the disease, he must make himself
clean from all remains of it. Thus those who have comfort of the
remission of their sins, must with care and caution cleanse themselves
from sins; for every one that has this hope in him, will be concerned to
purify himself.

[Leviticus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 14:10</span></span>

The cleansed leper was to be presented to the Lord, with his offerings.
When God has restored us to enjoy public worship again, after sickness,
distance, or otherwise, we should testify our thanksgiving by our
diligent use of the liberty. And both we and our offerings must be
presented before the Lord, by the Priest that made us clean, even our
Lord Jesus. Beside the usual rites of the trespass-offering, some of the
blood, and some of the oil, was to be put upon him that was to be
cleansed. Wherever the blood of Christ is applied for justification, the
oil of the Spirit is applied for sanctification; these two cannot be
separated. We have here the gracious provision the law made for poor
lepers. The poor are as welcome to God's altar as the rich. But though a
meaner sacrifice was accepted from the poor, yet the same ceremony was
used for the rich; their souls are as precious, and Christ and his
gospel are the same to both. Even for the poor one lamb was necessary.
No sinner could be saved, had it not been for the Lamb that was slain,
and hath redeemed us to God with his blood.

[Leviticus 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 14:33</span></span>

The leprosy in a house is unaccountable to us, as well as the leprosy in
a garment; but now sin, where that reigns in a house, is a plague there,
as it is in a heart. Masters of families should be aware, and afraid of
the first appearance of sin in their families, and put it away, whatever
it is. If the leprosy is got into the house, the infected part must be
taken out. If it remain in the house, the whole must be pulled down. The
owner had better be without a dwelling, than live in one that was
infected. The leprosy of sin ruins families and churches. Thus sin is so
interwoven with the human body, that it must be taken down by death.

[Leviticus 14:54](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">lev 14:54</span></span>

When that God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us by his
grace, [Eph 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004), [Eph
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005), we shall manifest the change by
repenting, and forsaking former sins. Let us follow after holiness, and
let us compassionate other poor lepers, and desire, seek, and pray for
their cleansing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 15](lev015)

</div>
