<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev008)  [Next](lev010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 9:0</span></span>

(v. 1-21) The first offerings of Aaron for himself and the people.

([Lev 9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022).md) Moses and Aaron bless
the people, Fire cometh upon the altar from the Lord.

[Leviticus 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 9:1</span></span>

These many sacrifices, which were all done away by the death of Christ,
teach us that our best services need washing in his blood, and that the
guilt of our best sacrifices needs to be done away by one more pure and
more noble than they. Let us be thankful that we have such a High
Priest. The priests had not a day's respite from service allowed. God's
spiritual priests have constant work, which the duty of every day
requires; they that would give up their account with joy, must redeem
time. The glory of God appeared in the sight of the people, and owned
what they had done. We are not now to expect such appearances, but God
draws nigh to those who draw nigh to him, and the offerings of faith are
acceptable to him; though the sacrifices being spiritual, the tokens of
the acceptance are spiritual likewise. When Aaron had done all that was
to be done about the sacrifices, he lifted up his hands towards the
people, and blessed them. Aaron could but crave a blessing, God alone
can command it.

[Leviticus 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 9:22</span></span>

When the solemnity was finished, and the blessing pronounced, God
testified his acceptance. There came a fire out from before the Lord,
and consumed the sacrifice. This fire might justly have fastened upon
the people, and have consumed them for their sins; but its consuming the
sacrifice signified God's acceptance of it, as an atonement for the
sinner. This also was a figure of good things to come. The Spirit
descended upon the apostles in fire. And the descent of this holy fire
into our souls, to kindle in them pious and devout affections toward
God, and such a holy zeal as burns up the flesh and the lusts of it, is
a certain token of God's gracious acceptance of our persons and
performances. Nothing goes to God, but what comes from him. We must have
grace, that holy fire, from the God of grace, else we cannot serve him
acceptably, [Heb 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028.md). The people
were affected with this discovery of God's glory and grace. They
received it with the highest joy; triumphing in the assurance given them
that they had God nigh unto them. And with the lowest reverence; humbly
adoring the majesty of that God, who vouchsafed thus to manifest himself
to them. That is a sinful fear of God, which drives us from him; a
gracious fear makes us bow before him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 10](lev010.md)

</div>
