<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev000)  [Next](lev002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

([Lev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md), [Lev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002).md) The offerings.

([Lev 1:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003).md) From the herds.

([Lev 1:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010).md) From the flocks, and of
fowls.

[Leviticus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 1:1</span></span>

The offering of sacrifices was an ordinance of true religion, from the
fall of man unto the coming of Christ. But till the Israelites were in
the wilderness, no very particular regulations seem to have been
appointed. The general design of these laws is plain. The sacrifices
typified Christ; they also shadowed out the believer's duty, character,
privilege, and communion with God. There is scarcely any thing spoken of
the Lord Jesus in Scripture which has not also a reference to his
people. This book begins with the laws concerning sacrifices; the most
ancient were the burnt-offerings, about which God here gives Moses
directions. It is taken for granted that the people would be willing to
bring offerings to the Lord. The very light of nature directs man, some
way or other, to do honour to his Maker, as his Lord. Immediately after
the fall, sacrifices were ordained.

[Leviticus 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 1:3</span></span>

In the due performance of the Levitical ordinances, the mysteries of the
spiritual world are represented by corresponding natural objects; and
future events are exhibited in these rites. Without this, the whole will
seem unmeaning ceremonies. There is in these things a type of the
sufferings of the Son of God, who was to be a sacrifice for the sins of
the whole world? The burning body of an animal was but a faint
representation of that everlasting misery, which we all have deserved;
and which our blessed Lord bore in his body and in his soul, when he
died under the load of our iniquities. Observe, 1. The beast to be
offered must be without blemish. This signified the strength and purity
that were in Christ, and the holy life that should be in his people. 2.
The owner must offer it of his own free will. What is done in religion,
so as to please God, must be done by love. Christ willingly offered
himself for us. 3. It must be offered at the door of the tabernacle,
where the brazen altar of burnt-offerings stood, which sanctified the
gift: he must offer it at the door, as one unworthy to enter, and
acknowledging that a sinner can have no communion with God, but by
sacrifice. 4. The offerer must put his hand upon the head of his
offering, signifying thereby, his desire and hope that it might be
accepted from him, to make atonement for him. 5. The sacrifice was to be
killed before the Lord, in an orderly manner, and to honour God. It
signified also, that in Christians the flesh must be crucified with its
corrupt affections and lust. 6. The priests were to sprinkle the blood
upon the altar; for the blood being the life, that was it which made
atonement. This signified the pacifying and purifying of our
consciences, by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ upon them by
faith. 7. The beast was to be divided into several pieces, and then to
be burned upon the altar. The burning of the sacrifice signified the
sharp sufferings of Christ, and the devout affections with which, as a
holy fire, Christians must offer up themselves, their whole spirit,
soul, and body, unto God. 8. This is said to be an offering of a sweet
savour. As an act of obedience to a Divine command, and a type of
Christ, this was well-pleasing to God; and the spiritual sacrifices of
Christians are acceptable to God, through Christ, [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md).

[Leviticus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 1:10</span></span>

Those who could not offer a bullock, were to bring a sheep or a goat;
and those who were not able to do that, were accepted of God, if they
brought a turtle-dove, or a pigeon. Those creatures were chosen for
sacrifice which were mild, and gentle, and harmless; to show the
innocence and meekness that were in Christ, and that should be in
Christians. The offering of the poor was as typical of Christ's
atonement as the more costly sacrifices, and expressed as fully
repentance, faith, and devotedness to God. We have no excuse, if we
refuse the pleasant and reasonable service now required. But we can no
more offer the sacrifice of a broken heart, or of praise and
thanksgiving, than an Israelite could offer a bullock or a goat, except
as God hath first given to us. The more we do in the Lord's service, the
greater are our obligations to him, for the will, for the ability, and
opportunity. In many things God leaves us to fix what shall be spent in
his service, whether of our time or our substance; yet where God's
providence has put much into a man's power, scanty offerings will not be
accepted, for they are not proper expressions of a willing mind. Let us
be devoted in body and soul to his service, whatever he may call us to
give, venture, do, or suffer for his sake.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002.md)

</div>
