<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev001)  [Next](lev003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 2:0</span></span>

([Lev 2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)) The meat-offering of
flour.

([Lev 2:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012)) The offering of
first-fruits.

[Leviticus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 2:1</span></span>

Meat-offerings may typify Christ, as presented to God for us, and as
being the Bread of life to our souls; but they rather seem to denote our
obligation to God for the blessings of providence, and those good works
which are acceptable to God. The term "meat" was, and still is, properly
given to any kind of provision, and the greater part of this offering
was to be eaten for food, not burned. These meat-offerings are mentioned
after the burnt-offerings: without an interest in the sacrifice of
Christ, and devotedness of heart to God, such services cannot be
accepted. Leaven is the emblem of pride, malice, and hypocrisy, and
honey of sensual pleasure. The former are directly opposed to the graces
of humility, love, and sincerity, which God approves; the latter takes
men from the exercises of devotion, and the practice of good works.
Christ, in his character and sacrifice, was wholly free from the things
denoted by leaven; and his suffering life and agonizing death were the
very opposites to worldly pleasure. His people are called to follow, and
to be like him.

[Leviticus 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 2:12</span></span>

Salt is required in all the offerings. God hereby intimates to them that
their sacrifices, in themselves, were unsavoury. All religious services
must be seasoned with grace. Christianity is the salt of the earth.
Directions are given about offering their first-fruits at harvest. If a
man, with a thankful sense of God's goodness in giving him a plentiful
crop, was disposed to present an offering to God, let him bring the
first ripe and full ears. Whatever was brought to God must be the best
in its kind, though it were but green ears of corn. Oil and frankincense
must be put upon it. Wisdom and humility soften and sweeten the spirits
and services of young people, and their green ears of corn shall be
acceptable. God takes delight in the first ripe fruits of the Spirit,
and the expressions of early piety and devotion. Holy love to God is the
fire by which all our offerings must be made. The frankincense denotes
the mediation and intercession of Christ, by which our services are
accepted. Blessed be God that we have the substance, of which these
observances were but shadows. There is that excellency in Christ, and in
his work as Mediator, which no types and shadows can fully represent.
And our dependence thereon must be so entire, that we must never lose
sight of it in any thing we do, if we would be accepted of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 3](lev003)

</div>
