<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk014)  [Next](luk016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 15:0</span></span>

([Luk 15:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001).md) Parables of the lost
sheep, and the piece of silver.

([Luk 15:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#011).md) The prodigal son, his
wickedness and distress.

([Luk 15:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017).md) His repentance and
pardon.

([Luk 15:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#025).md) The elder brother
offended.

[Luke 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 15:1</span></span>

The parable of the lost sheep is very applicable to the great work of
man's redemption. The lost sheep represents the sinner as departed from
God, and exposed to certain ruin if not brought back to him, yet not
desirous to return. Christ is earnest in bringing sinners home. In the
parable of the lost piece of silver, that which is lost, is one piece,
of small value compared with the rest. Yet the woman seeks diligently
till she finds it. This represents the various means and methods God
makes use of to bring lost souls home to himself, and the Saviour's joy
on their return to him. How careful then should we be that our
repentance is unto salvation!

[Luke 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 15:11</span></span>

The parable of the prodigal son shows the nature of repentance, and the
Lord's readiness to welcome and bless all who return to him. It fully
sets forth the riches of gospel grace; and it has been, and will be,
while the world stands, of unspeakable use to poor sinners, to direct
and to encourage them in repenting and returning to God. It is bad, and
the beginning of worse, when men look upon God's gifts as debts due to
them. The great folly of sinners, and that which ruins them, is, being
content in their life-time to receive their good things. Our first
parents ruined themselves and all their race, by a foolish ambition to
be independent, and this is at the bottom of sinners' persisting in
their sin. We may all discern some features of our own characters in
that of the prodigal son. A sinful state is of departure and distance
from God. A sinful state is a spending state: wilful sinners misemploy
their thoughts and the powers of their souls, misspend their time and
all their opportunities. A sinful state is a wanting state. Sinners want
necessaries for their souls; they have neither food nor raiment for
them, nor any provision for hereafter. A sinful state is a vile, slavish
state. The business of the devil's servants is to make provision for the
flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof, and that is no better than feeding
swine. A sinful state is a state constant discontent. The wealth of the
world and the pleasures of the senses will not even satisfy our bodies;
but what are they to precious souls! A sinful state is a state which
cannot look for relief from any creature. In vain do we cry to the world
and to the flesh; they have that which will poison a soul, but have
nothing to give which will feed and nourish it. A sinful state is a
state of death. A sinner is dead in trespasses and sins, destitute of
spiritual life. A sinful state is a lost state. Souls that are separated
from God, if his mercy prevent not, will soon be lost for ever. The
prodigal's wretched state, only faintly shadows forth the awful ruin of
man by sin. Yet how few are sensible of their own state and character!

[Luke 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 15:17</span></span>

Having viewed the prodigal in his abject state of misery, we are next to
consider his recovery from it. This begins by his coming to himself.
That is a turning point in the sinner's conversion. The Lord opens his
eyes, and convinces him of sin; then he views himself and every object,
in a different light from what he did before. Thus the convinced sinner
perceives that the meanest servant of God is happier than he is. To look
unto God as a Father, and our Father, will be of great use in our
repentance and return to him. The prodigal arose, nor stopped till he
reached his home. Thus the repenting sinner resolutely quits the bondage
of Satan and his lusts, and returns to God by prayer, notwithstanding
fears and discouragements. The Lord meets him with unexpected tokens of
his forgiving love. Again; the reception of the humbled sinner is like
that of the prodigal. He is clothed in the robe of the Redeemer's
righteousness, made partaker of the Spirit of adoption, prepared by
peace of conscience and gospel grace to walk in the ways of holiness,
and feasted with Divine consolations. Principles of grace and holiness
are wrought in him, to do, as well as to will.

[Luke 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 15:25</span></span>

In the latter part of this parable we have the character of the
Pharisees, though not of them alone. It sets forth the kindness of the
Lord, and the proud manner in which his gracious kindness is often
received. The Jews, in general, showed the same spirit towards the
converted Gentiles; and numbers in every age object to the gospel and
its preachers, on the same ground. What must that temper be, which stirs
up a man to despise and abhor those for whom the Saviour shed his
precious blood, who are objects of the Father's choice, and temples of
the Holy Ghost! This springs from pride, self-preference, and ignorance
of a man's own heart. The mercy and grace of our God in Christ, shine
almost as bright in his tender and gentle bearing with peevish saints,
as his receiving prodigal sinners upon their repentance. It is the
unspeakable happiness of all the children of God, who keep close to
their Father's house, that they are, and shall be ever with him. Happy
will it be for those who thankfully accept Christ's invitation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 16](luk016.md)

</div>
