<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk022)  [Next](luk024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 23:0</span></span>

([Luk 23:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)) Christ before Pilate.

([Luk 23:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006)) Christ before Herod.

([Luk 23:13-25](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#013)) Barabbas preferred to
Christ.

([Luk 23:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026)) Christ speaks of the
destruction of Jerusalem.

([Luk 23:32-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#032)) The crucifixion, The
repentant malefactor.

([Luk 23:44-49](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044)) The death of Christ.

([Luk 23:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050)) The burial of Christ.

[Luke 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 23:1</span></span>

Pilate well understood the difference between armed forces and our
Lord's followers. But instead of being softened by Pilate's declaration
of his innocence, and considering whether they were not bringing the
guilt of innocent blood upon themselves, the Jews were the more angry.
The Lord brings his designs to a glorious end, even by means of those
who follow the devices of their own hearts. Thus all parties joined, so
as to prove the innocence of Jesus, who was the atoning sacrifice for
our sins.

[Luke 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 23:6</span></span>

Herod had heard many things of Jesus in Galilee, and out of curiosity
longed to see him. The poorest beggar that asked a miracle for the
relief of his necessity, was never denied; but this proud prince, who
asked for a miracle only to gratify his curiosity, is refused. He might
have seen Christ and his wondrous works in Galilee, and would not,
therefore it is justly said, Now he would see them, and shall not. Herod
sent Christ again to Pilate: the friendships of wicked men are often
formed by union in wickedness. They agree in little, except in enmity to
God, and contempt of Christ.

[Luke 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 23:13</span></span>

The fear of man brings many into this snare, that they will do an unjust
thing, against their consciences, rather than get into trouble. Pilate
declares Jesus innocent, and has a mind to release him; yet, to please
the people, he would punish him as an evil-doer. If no fault be found in
him, why chastise him? Pilate yielded at length; he had not courage to
go against so strong a stream. He delivered Jesus to their will, to be
crucified.

[Luke 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 23:26</span></span>

We have here the blessed Jesus, the Lamb of God, led as a lamb to the
slaughter, to the sacrifice. Though many reproached and reviled him, yet
some pitied him. But the death of Christ was his victory and triumph
over his enemies: it was our deliverance, the purchase of eternal life
for us. Therefore weep not for him, but let us weep for our own sins,
and the sins of our children, which caused his death; and weep for fear
of the miseries we shall bring upon ourselves, if we slight his love,
and reject his grace. If God delivered him up to such sufferings as
these, because he was made a sacrifice for sin, what will he do with
sinners themselves, who make themselves a dry tree, a corrupt and wicked
generation, and good for nothing! The bitter sufferings of our Lord
Jesus should make us stand in awe of the justice of God. The best
saints, compared with Christ, are dry trees; if he suffer, why may not
they expect to suffer? And what then shall the damnation of sinners be!
Even the sufferings of Christ preach terror to obstinate transgressors.

[Luke 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 23:32</span></span>

As soon as Christ was fastened to the cross, he prayed for those who
crucified him. The great thing he died to purchase and procure for us,
is the forgiveness of sin. This he prays for. Jesus was crucified
between two thieves; in them were shown the different effects the cross
of Christ would have upon the children of men in the preaching the
gospel. One malefactor was hardened to the last. No troubles of
themselves will change a wicked heart. The other was softened at the
last: he was snatched as a brand out of the burning, and made a monument
of Divine mercy. This gives no encouragement to any to put off
repentance to their death-beds, or to hope that they shall then find
mercy. It is certain that true repentance is never too late; but it is
as certain that late repentance is seldom true. None can be sure they
shall have time to repent at death, but every man may be sure he cannot
have the advantages this penitent thief had. We shall see the case to be
singular, if we observe the uncommon effects of God's grace upon this
man. He reproved the other for railing on Christ. He owned that he
deserved what was done to him. He believed Jesus to have suffered
wrongfully. Observe his faith in this prayer. Christ was in the depth of
disgrace, suffering as a deceiver, and not delivered by his Father. He
made this profession before the wonders were displayed which put honour
on Christ's sufferings, and startled the centurion. He believed in a
life to come, and desired to be happy in that life; not like the other
thief, to be only saved from the cross. Observe his humility in this
prayer. All his request is, Lord, remember me; quite referring it to
Jesus in what way to remember him. Thus he was humbled in true
repentance, and he brought forth all the fruits for repentance his
circumstances would admit. Christ upon the cross, is gracious like
Christ upon the throne. Though he was in the greatest struggle and
agony, yet he had pity for a poor penitent. By this act of grace we are
to understand that Jesus Christ died to open the kingdom of heaven to
all penitent, obedient believers. It is a single instance in Scripture;
it should teach us to despair of none, and that none should despair of
themselves; but lest it should be abused, it is contrasted with the
awful state of the other thief, who died hardened in unbelief, though a
crucified Saviour was so near him. Be sure that in general men die as
they live.

[Luke 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 23:44</span></span>

We have here the death of Christ magnified by the wonders that attended
it, and his death explained by the words with which he breathed out his
soul. He was willing to offer himself. Let us seek to glorify God by
true repentance and conversion; by protesting against those who crucify
the Saviour; by a sober, righteous, and godly life; and by employing our
talents in the service of Him who died for us and rose again.

[Luke 23:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 23:50</span></span>

Many, though they do not make any show in outward profession, yet, like
Joseph of Arimathea, will be far more ready to do real service, when
there is occasion, than others who make a greater noise. Christ was
buried in haste, because the sabbath drew on. Weeping must not hinder
sowing. Though they were in tears for the death of their Lord, yet they
must prepare to keep holy the sabbath. When the sabbath draws on, there
must be preparation. Our worldly affairs must be so ordered, that they
may not hinder us from our sabbath work; and our holy affections so
stirred up, that they may carry us on in it. In whatever business we
engage, or however our hearts may be affected, let us never fail to get
ready for, and to keep holy, the day of sacred rest, which is the Lord's
day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 24](luk024)

</div>
