<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk000)  [Next](luk002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

([Luk 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001).md) The Preface.

(v. 5-25) Zacharias and Elisabeth.

([Luk 1:26-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026).md) Christ's birth
announced.

(v. 39-56) Interview of Mary and Elisabeth.

([Luk 1:57-66](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#057).md) The birth of John the
Baptist.

([Luk 1:67-80](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067).md) The song of Zacharias.

[Luke 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 1:1</span></span>

Luke will not write of things about which Christians may safely differ
from one another, and hesitate within themselves; but the things which
are, and ought to be surely believed. The doctrine of Christ is what the
wisest and best of men have ventured their souls upon with confidence
and satisfaction. And the great events whereon our hopes depend, have
been recorded by those who were from the beginning eye-witnesses and
ministers of the word, and who were perfected in their understanding of
them through Divine inspiration.

[Luke 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 1:5</span></span>

The father and mother of John the Baptist were sinners as all are, and
were justified and saved in the same way as others; but they were
eminent for piety and integrity. They had no children, and it could not
be expected that Elisabeth should have any in her old age. While
Zacharias was burning incense in the temple, the whole multitude of the
people were praying without. All the prayers we offer up to God, are
acceptable and successful only by Christ's intercession in the temple of
God above. We cannot expect an interest therein if we do not pray, and
pray with our spirits, and are not earnest in prayer. Nor can we expect
that the best of our prayers should gain acceptance, and bring an answer
of peace, but through the mediation of Christ, who ever lives, making
intercession. The prayers Zacharias often made, received an answer of
peace. Prayers of faith are filed in heaven, and are not forgotten.
Prayers made when we were young and entering into the world, may be
answered when we are old and going out of the world. Mercies are doubly
sweet that are given in answer to prayer. Zacharias shall have a son in
his old age, who shall be instrumental in the conversion of many souls
to God, and preparing them to receive the gospel of Christ. He shall go
before Him with courage, zeal, holiness, and a mind dead to earthly
interests and pleasures. The disobedient and rebellious would be brought
back to the wisdom of their righteous forefathers, or rather, brought to
attend to the wisdom of that Just One who was coming among them.
Zacharias heard all that the angel said; but his unbelief spake. In
striking him dumb, God dealt justly with him, because he had objected
against God's word. We may admire the patience of God towards us. God
dealt kindly with him, for thus he prevented his speaking any more
distrustful, unbelieving words. Thus also God confirmed his faith. If by
the rebukes we are under for our sin, we are brought to give the more
credit to the word of God, we have no reason to complain. Even real
believers are apt to dishonour God by unbelief; and their mouths are
stopped in silence and confusion, when otherwise they would have been
praising God with joy and gratitude. In God's gracious dealings with us
we ought to observe his gracious regards to us. He has looked on us with
compassion and favour, and therefore has thus dealt with us.

[Luke 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 1:26</span></span>

We have here an account of the mother of our Lord; though we are not to
pray to her, yet we ought to praise God for her. Christ must be born
miraculously. The angel's address means only, Hail, thou that art the
especially chosen and favoured of the Most High, to attain the honour
Jewish mothers have so long desired. This wondrous salutation and
appearance troubled Mary. The angel then assured her that she had found
favour with God, and would become the mother of a son whose name she
should call Jesus, the Son of the Highest, one in a nature and
perfection with the Lord God. JESUS! the name that refreshes the
fainting spirits of humbled sinners; sweet to speak and sweet to hear,
Jesus, a Saviour! We know not his riches and our own poverty, therefore
we run not to him; we perceive not that we are lost and perishing,
therefore a Saviour is a word of little relish. Were we convinced of the
huge mass of guilt that lies upon us, and the wrath that hangs over us
for it, ready to fall upon us, it would be our continual thought, Is the
Saviour mine? And that we might find him so, we should trample on all
that hinders our way to him. Mary's reply to the angel was the language
of faith and humble admiration, and she asked no sign for the confirming
her faith. Without controversy, great was the mystery of godliness, God
manifest in the flesh, [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md).
Christ's human nature must be produced so, as it was fit that should be
which was to be taken into union with the Divine nature. And we must, as
Mary here, guide our desires by the word of God. In all conflicts, let
us remember that with God nothing is impossible; and as we read and hear
his promises, let us turn them into prayers, Behold the willing servant
of the Lord; let it be unto me according to thy word.

[Luke 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 1:39</span></span>

It is very good for those who have the work of grace begun in their
souls, to communicate one to another. On Mary's arrival, Elisabeth was
conscious of the approach of her who was to be the mother of the great
Redeemer. At the same time she was filled with the Holy Ghost, and under
his influence declared that Mary and her expected child were most
blessed and happy, as peculiarly honoured of and dear to the Most High
God. Mary, animated by Elisabeth's address, and being also under the
influence of the Holy Ghost, broke out into joy, admiration, and
gratitude. She knew herself to be a sinner who needed a Saviour, and
that she could no otherwise rejoice in God than as interested in his
salvation through the promised Messiah. Those who see their need of
Christ, and are desirous of righteousness and life in him, he fills with
good things, with the best things; and they are abundantly satisfied
with the blessings he gives. He will satisfy the desires of the poor in
spirit who long for spiritual blessings, while the self-sufficient shall
be sent empty away.

[Luke 1:57](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#057.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">luk 1:57</span></span>

In these verses we have an account of the birth of John the Baptist, and
the great joy among all the relations of the family. He shall be called
Johanan, or "Gracious," because he shall bring in the gospel of Christ,
wherein God's grace shines most bright. Zacharias recovered his speech.
Unbelief closed his mouth, and believing opened it again: he believers,
therefore he speaks. When God opens our lips, our mouths must show forth
his praise; and better be without speech, than not use it in praising
God. It is said, The hand of the Lord was working with John. God has
ways of working on children in their infancy, which we cannot account
for. We should observe the dealings of God, and wait the event.

[Luke 1:67](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#067.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">luk 1:67</span></span>

Zacharias uttered a prophecy concerning the kingdom and salvation of the
Messiah. The gospel brings light with it; in it the day dawns. In John
the Baptist it began to break, and increased apace to the perfect day.
The gospel is discovering; it shows that about which we were utterly in
the dark; it is to give light to those that sit in darkness, the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. It is
reviving; it brings light to those that sit in the shadow of death, as
condemned prisoners in the dungeon. It is directing; it is to guide our
feet in the way of peace, into that way which will bring us to peace at
last, [Rom 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#017.md). John gave proofs of
strong faith, vigorous and holy affections, and of being above the fear
and love of the world. Thus he ripened for usefulness; but he lived a
retired life, till he came forward openly as the forerunner of the
Messiah. Let us follow peace with all men, as well as seek peace with
God and our own consciences. And if it be the will of God that we live
unknown to the world, still let us diligently seek to grow strong in the
grace of Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 2](luk002.md)

</div>
