<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk020)  [Next](luk022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 21:0</span></span>

([Luk 21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)) Christ commends a poor
widow.

(v. 5-28) His prophecy.

([Luk 21:29-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#029)) Christ exhorts to
watchfulness.

[Luke 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 21:1</span></span>

From the offering of this poor widow, learn that what we rightly give
for the relief of the poor, and the support of God's worship, is given
unto God; and our Saviour sees with pleasure whatever we have in our
hearts to give for the relief of his members, or for his service.
Blessed Lord! the poorest of thy servants have two mites, they have a
soul and a body; persuade and enable us to offer both unto thee; how
happy shall we be in thine accepting of them!

[Luke 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 21:5</span></span>

With much curiosity those about Christ ask as to the time when the great
desolation should be. He answers with clearness and fulness, as far as
was necessary to teach them their duty; for all knowledge is desirable
as far as it is in order to practice. Though spiritual judgements are
the most common in gospel times, yet God makes use of temporal judgments
also. Christ tells them what hard things they should suffer for his
name's sake, and encourages them to bear up under their trials, and to
go on in their work, notwithstanding the opposition they would meet
with. God will stand by you, and own you, and assist you. This was
remarkably fulfilled after the pouring out of the Spirit, by whom Christ
gave his disciples wisdom and utterance. Though we may be losers for
Christ, we shall not, we cannot be losers by him, in the end. It is our
duty and interest at all times, especially in perilous, trying times, to
secure the safety of our own souls. It is by Christian patience we keep
possession of our own souls, and keep out all those impressions which
would put us out of temper. We may view the prophecy before us much as
those Old Testament prophecies, which, together with their great object,
embrace, or glance at some nearer object of importance to the church.
Having given an idea of the times for about thirty-eight years next to
come, Christ shows what all those things would end in, namely, the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the utter dispersion of the Jewish nation;
which would be a type and figure of Christ's second coming. The
scattered Jews around us preach the truth of Christianity; and prove,
that though heaven and earth shall pass away, the words of Jesus shall
not pass away. They also remind us to pray for those times when neither
the real, nor the spiritual Jerusalem, shall any longer be trodden down
by the Gentiles, and when both Jews and Gentiles shall be turned to the
Lord. When Christ came to destroy the Jews, he came to redeem the
Christians that were persecuted and oppressed by them; and then had the
churches rest. When he comes to judge the world, he will redeem all that
are his from their troubles. So fully did the Divine judgements come
upon the Jews, that their city is set as an example before us, to show
that sins will not pass unpunished; and that the terrors of the Lord,
and his threatenings against impenitent sinners, will all come to pass,
even as his word was true, and his wrath great upon Jerusalem.

[Luke 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 21:29</span></span>

Christ tells his disciples to observe the signs of the times, which they
might judge by. He charges them to look upon the ruin of the Jewish
nation as near. Yet this race and family of Abraham shall not be rooted
out; it shall survive as a nation, and be found as prophesied, when the
Son of man shall be revealed. He cautions them against being secure and
sensual. This command is given to all Christ's disciples, Take heed to
yourselves, that ye be not overpowered by temptations, nor betrayed by
your own corruptions. We cannot be safe, if we are carnally secure. Our
danger is, lest the day of death and of judgment should come upon us
when we are not prepared. Lest, when we are called to meet our Lord,
that be the furthest from our thoughts, which ought to be nearest our
hearts. For so it will come upon the most of men, who dwell upon the
earth, and mind earthly things only, and have no converse with heaven.
It will be a terror and a destruction to them. Here see what should be
our aim, that we may be accounted worthy to escape all those things;
that when the judgements of God are abroad, we may not be in the common
calamity, or it may not be that to us which it is to others. Do you ask
how you may be found worthy to stand before Christ at that day? Those
who never yet sought Christ, let them now go unto him; those who never
yet were humbled for their sins, let them now begin; those who have
already begun, let them go forward and be kept humbled. Watch therefore,
and pray always. Watch against sin; watch in every duty, and make the
most of every opportunity to do good. Pray always: those shall be
accounted worthy to live a life of praise in the other world, who live a
life of prayer in this world. May we begin, employ, and conclude each
day attending to Christ's word, obeying his precepts, and following his
example, that whenever he comes we may be found watching.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 22](luk022)

</div>
