<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk011)  [Next](luk013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 12:0</span></span>

([Luk 12:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001)) Christ reproves the
interpreters of the law.

([Luk 12:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013)) A caution against
covetousness The parable of the rich man.

(v. 22-40) Worldly care reproved.

([Luk 12:41-53](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#041)) Watchfulness enforced.

([Luk 12:54-59](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#054)) A warning to be
reconciled to God.

[Luke 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 12:1</span></span>

A firm belief of the doctrine of God's universal providence, and the
extent of it, would satisfy us when in peril, and encourage us to trust
God in the way of duty. Providence takes notice of the meanest
creatures, even of the sparrows, and therefore of the smallest interests
of the disciples of Christ. Those who confess Christ now, shall be owned
by him in the great day, before the angels of God. To deter us from
denying Christ, and deserting his truths and ways, we are here assured
that those who deny Christ, though they may thus save life itself, and
though they may gain a kingdom by it, will be great losers at last; for
Christ will not know them, will not own them, nor show them favour. But
let no trembling, penitent backslider doubt of obtaining forgiveness.
This is far different from the determined enmity that is blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven, because it will
never be repented of.

[Luke 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 12:13</span></span>

Christ's kingdom is spiritual, and not of this world. Christianity does
not meddle with politics; it obliges all to do justly, but wordly
dominion is not founded in grace. It does not encourage expectations of
worldly advantages by religion. The rewards of Christ's disciples are of
another nature. Covetousness is a sin we need constantly to be warned
against; for happiness and comfort do not depend on the wealth of this
world. The things of the world will not satisfy the desires of a soul.
Here is a parable, which shows the folly of carnal worldling while they
live, and their misery when they die. The character drawn is exactly
that of a prudent, worldly man, who has no grateful regard to the
providence of God, nor any right thought of the uncertainty of human
affairs, the worth of his soul, or the importance of eternity. How many,
even among professed Christians, point out similar characters as models
for imitation, and proper persons to form connexions with! We mistake if
we think that thoughts are hid, and thoughts are free. When he saw a
great crop upon his ground, instead of thanking God for it, or rejoicing
to be able to do more good, he afflicts himself. What shall I do now?
The poorest beggar in the country could not have said a more anxious
word. The more men have, the more perplexity they have with it. It was
folly for him to think of making no other use of his plenty, than to
indulge the flesh and gratify the sensual appetites, without any thought
of doing good to others. Carnal worldlings are fools; and the day is
coming when God will call them by their own name, and they will call
themselves so. The death of such persons is miserable in itself, and
terrible to them. Thy soul shall be required. He is loth to part with
it; but God shall require it, shall require an account of it, require it
as a guilty soul to be punished without delay. It is the folly of most
men, to mind and pursue that which is for the body and for time only,
more than that for the soul and eternity.

[Luke 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 12:22</span></span>

Christ largely insisted upon this caution not to give way to
disquieting, perplexing cares, [Mat
6:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025). The arguments here used are
for our encouragement to cast our care upon God, which is the right way
to get ease. As in our stature, so in our state, it is our wisdom to
take it as it is. An eager, anxious pursuit of the things of this world,
even necessary things, ill becomes the disciples of Christ. Fears must
not prevail; when we frighten ourselves with thoughts of evil to come,
and put ourselves upon needless cares how to avoid it. If we value the
beauty of holiness, we shall not crave the luxuries of life. Let us then
examine whether we belong to this little flock. Christ is our Master,
and we are his servants; not only working servants, but waiting
servants. We must be as men that wait for their lord, that sit up while
he stays out late, to be ready to receive him. In this Christ alluded to
his own ascension to heaven, his coming to call his people to him by
death, and his return to judge the world. We are uncertain as to the
time of his coming to us, we should therefore be always ready. If men
thus take care of their houses, let us be thus wise for our souls. Be ye
therefore ready also; as ready as the good man of the house would be, if
he knew at what hour the thief would come.

[Luke 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 12:41</span></span>

All are to take to themselves what Christ says in his word, and to
inquire concerning it. No one is left so ignorant as not to know many
things to be wrong which he does, and many things to be right which he
neglects; therefore all are without excuse in their sin. The bringing in
the gospel dispensation would occasion desolations. Not that this would
be the tendency of Christ's religion, which is pure, peaceable, and
loving; but the effect of its being contrary to men's pride and lusts.
There was to be a wide publication of the gospel. But before that took
place, Christ had a baptism to be baptized with, far different from that
of water and the Holy Spirit. He must endure sufferings and death. It
agreed not with his plan to preach the gospel more widely, till this
baptism was completed. We should be zealous in making known the truth,
for though divisions will be stirred up, and a man's own household may
be his foes, yet sinners will be converted, and God will be glorified.

[Luke 12:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 12:54</span></span>

Christ would have the people to be as wise in the concerns of their
souls as they are in outward affairs. Let them hasten to obtain peace
with God before it is too late. If any man has found that God has set
himself against him concerning his sins, let him apply to him as God in
Christ reconciling the world to himself. While we are alive, we are in
the way, and now is our time.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 13](luk013)

</div>
