<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk001)  [Next](luk003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 2:0</span></span>

([Luk 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001).md) The birth of Christ.

([Luk 2:8-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008).md) It is made known to the
shepherds.

([Luk 2:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#021).md) Christ presented in the
temple.

([Luk 2:25-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025).md) Simeon prophesies
concerning Jesus.

([Luk 2:36-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036).md) Anna prophesies
concerning him.

([Luk 2:41-52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041).md) Christ with the learned
men in the temple.

[Luke 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 2:1</span></span>

The fulness of time was now come, when God would send forth his Son,
made of a woman, and made under the law. The circumstances of his birth
were very mean. Christ was born at an inn; he came into the world to
sojourn here for awhile, as at an inn, and to teach us to do likewise.
We are become by sin like an outcast infant, helpless and forlorn; and
such a one was Christ. He well knew how unwilling we are to be meanly
lodged, clothed, or fed; how we desire to have our children decorated
and indulged; how apt the poor are to envy the rich, and how prone the
rich to disdain the poor. But when we by faith view the Son of God being
made man and lying in a manger, our vanity, ambition, and envy are
checked. We cannot, with this object rightly before us, seek great
things for ourselves or our children.

[Luke 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 2:8</span></span>

Angels were heralds of the new-born Saviour, but they were only sent to
some poor, humble, pious, industrious shepherds, who were in the
business of their calling, keeping watch over their flock. We are not
out of the way of Divine visits, when we are employed in an honest
calling, and abide with God in it. Let God have the honour of this work;
Glory to God in the highest. God's good-will to men, manifested in
sending the Messiah, redounds to his praise. Other works of God are for
his glory, but the redemption of the world is for his glory in the
highest. God's goodwill in sending the Messiah, brought peace into this
lower world. Peace is here put for all that good which flows to us from
Christ's taking our nature upon him. This is a faithful saying, attested
by an innumerable company of angels, and well worthy of all acceptation,
That the good-will of God toward men, is glory to God in the highest,
and peace on the earth. The shepherds lost no time, but came with haste
to the place. They were satisfied, and made known abroad concerning this
child, that he was the Saviour, even Christ the Lord. Mary carefully
observed and thought upon all these things, which were so suited to
enliven her holy affections. We should be more delivered from errors in
judgment and practice, did we more fully ponder these things in our
hearts. It is still proclaimed in our ears that to us is born a Saviour,
Christ the Lord. These should be glad tidings to all.

[Luke 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 2:21</span></span>

Our Lord Jesus was not born in sin, and did not need that mortification
of a corrupt nature, or that renewal unto holiness, which were signified
by circumcision. This ordinance was, in his case, a pledge of his future
perfect obedience to the whole law, in the midst of sufferings and
temptations, even unto death for us. At the end of forty days, Mary went
up to the temple to offer the appointed sacrifices for her purification.
Joseph also presented the holy child Jesus, because, as a first-born
son, he was to be presented to the Lord, and redeemed according to the
law. Let us present our children to the Lord who gave them to us,
beseeching him to redeem them from sin and death, and make them holy to
himself.

[Luke 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 2:25</span></span>

The same Spirit that provided for the support of Simeon's hope, provided
for his joy. Those who would see Christ must go to his temple. Here is a
confession of his faith, that this Child in his arms was the Saviour,
the salvation itself, the salvation of God's appointing. He bids
farewell to this world. How poor does this world look to one that has
Christ in his arms, and salvation in his view! See here, how comfortable
is the death of a good man; he departs in peace with God, peace with his
own conscience, in peace with death. Those that have welcomed Christ,
may welcome death. Joseph and Mary marvelled at the things which were
spoken of this Child. Simeon shows them likewise, what reason they had
to rejoice with trembling. And Jesus, his doctrine, and people, are
still spoken against; his truth and holiness are still denied and
blasphemed; his preached word is still the touchstone of men's
characters. The secret good affections in the minds of some, will be
revealed by their embracing Christ; the secret corruptions of others
will be revealed by their enmity to Christ. Men will be judged by the
thoughts of their hearts concerning Christ. He shall be a suffering
Jesus; his mother shall suffer with him, because of the nearness of her
relation and affection.

[Luke 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 2:36</span></span>

There was much evil then in the church, yet God left not himself without
witness. Anna always dwelt in, or at least attended at, the temple. She
was always in a praying spirit; gave herself to prayer, and in all
things she served God. Those to whom Christ is made known, have great
reason to thank the Lord. She taught others concerning him. Let the
example of the venerable saints, Simeon and Anna, give courage to those
whose hoary heads are, like theirs, a crown of glory, being found in the
way of righteousness. The lips soon to be silent in the grave, should be
showing forth the praises of the Redeemer. In all things it became
Christ to be made like unto his brethren, therefore he passed through
infancy and childhood as other children, yet without sin, and with
manifest proofs of the Divine nature in him. By the Spirit of God all
his faculties performed their offices in a manner not seen in any one
else. Other children have foolishness bound in their hearts, which
appears in what they say or do, but he was filled with wisdom, by the
influence of the Holy Ghost; every thing he said and did, was wisely
said and wisely done, above his years. Other children show the
corruption of their nature; nothing but the grace of God was upon him.

[Luke 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 2:41</span></span>

It is for the honour of Christ that children should attend on public
worship. His parents did not return till they had stayed all the seven
days of the feast. It is well to stay to the end of an ordinance, as
becomes those who say, It is good to be here. Those that have lost their
comforts in Christ, and the evidences of their having a part in him,
must bethink themselves where, and when, and how they lost them, and
must turn back again. Those that would recover their lost acquaintance
with Christ, must go to the place in which he has put his name; there
they may hope to meet him. They found him in some part of the temple,
where the doctors of the law kept their schools; he was sitting there,
hearkening to their instructions, proposing questions, and answering
inquiries, with such wisdom, that those who heard were delighted with
him. Young persons should seek the knowledge of Divine truth, attend the
ministry of the gospel, and ask such questions of their elders and
teachers as may tend to increase their knowledge. Those who seek Christ
in sorrow, shall find him with the greater joy. Know ye not that I ought
to be in my Father's house; at my Father's work; I must be about my
Father's business. Herein is an example; for it becomes the children of
God, in conformity to Christ, to attend their heavenly Father's
business, and make all other concerns give way to it. Though he was the
Son of God, yet he was subject to his earthly parents; how then will the
foolish and weak sons of men answer it, who are disobedient to their
parents? However we may neglect men's sayings, because they are obscure,
yet we must not think so of God's sayings. That which at first is dark,
may afterwards become plain and easy. The greatest and wisest, those
most eminent, may learn of this admirable and Divine Child, that it is
the truest greatness of soul to know our own place and office; to deny
ourselves amusements and pleasures not consistent with our state and
calling.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 3](luk003.md)

</div>
