<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk013)  [Next](luk015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 14:0</span></span>

([Luk 14:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001)) Christ heals a man on
the sabbath.

([Luk 14:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#007)) He teaches humility.

([Luk 14:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015)) Parable of the great
supper.

([Luk 14:25-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#025)) The necessity of
consideration and self-denial.

[Luke 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 14:1</span></span>

This Pharisee, as well as others, seems to have had an ill design in
entertaining Jesus at his house. But our Lord would not be hindered from
healing a man, though he knew a clamour would be raised at his doing it
on the sabbath. It requires care to understand the proper connexion
between piety and charity in observing the sabbath, and the distinction
between works of real necessity and habits of self-indulgence. Wisdom
from above, teaches patient perseverance in well-doing.

[Luke 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 14:7</span></span>

Even in the common actions of life, Christ marks what we do, not only in
our religious assemblies, but at our tables. We see in many cases, that
a man's pride will bring him low, and before honour is humility. Our
Saviour here teaches, that works of charity are better than works of
show. But our Lord did not mean that a proud and unbelieving liberality
should be rewarded, but that his precept of doing good to the poor and
afflicted should be observed from love to him.

[Luke 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 14:15</span></span>

In this parable observe the free grace and mercy of God shining in the
gospel of Christ, which will be food and a feast for the soul of a man
that knows its own wants and miseries. All found some pretence to put
off their attendance. This reproves the Jewish nation for their neglect
of the offers of Christ's grace. It shows also the backwardness there is
to close with the gospel call. The want of gratitude in those who slight
gospel offers, and the contempt put upon the God of heaven thereby,
justly provoke him. The apostles were to turn to the Gentiles, when the
Jews refused the offer; and with them the church was filled. The
provision made for precious souls in the gospel of Christ, has not been
made in vain; for if some reject, others will thankfully accept the
offer. The very poor and low in the world, shall be as welcome to Christ
as the rich and great; and many times the gospel has the greatest
success among those that labour under worldly disadvantages and bodily
infirmities. Christ's house shall at last be filled; it will be so when
the number of the elect is completed.

[Luke 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 14:25</span></span>

Though the disciples of Christ are not all crucified, yet they all bear
their cross, and must bear it in the way of duty. Jesus bids them count
upon it, and then consider of it. Our Saviour explains this by two
similitudes; the former showing that we must consider the expenses of
our religion; the latter, that we must consider the perils of it. Sit
down and count the cost; consider it will cost the mortifying of sin,
even the most beloved lusts. The proudest and most daring sinner cannot
stand against God, for who knows the power of his anger? It is our
interest to seek peace with him, and we need not send to ask conditions
of peace, they are offered to us, and are highly to our advantage. In
some way a disciple of Christ will be put to the trial. May we seek to
be disciples indeed, and be careful not to grow slack in our profession,
or afraid of the cross; that we may be the good salt of the earth, to
season those around us with the savour of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 15](luk015)

</div>
