<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk018)  [Next](luk020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 19:0</span></span>

([Luk 19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001).md) The conversion of
Zaccheus.

(v. 11-27) The parable of the nobleman and his servants.

([Luk 19:28-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028).md) Christ enters
Jerusalem.

([Luk 19:41-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041).md) Christ laments over
Jerusalem.

[Luke 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 19:1</span></span>

Those who sincerely desire a sight of Christ, like Zaccheus, will break
through opposition, and take pains to see him. Christ invited himself to
Zaccheus' house. Wherever Christ comes he opens the heart, and inclines
it to receive him. He that has a mind to know Christ, shall be known of
him. Those whom Christ calls, must humble themselves, and come down. We
may well receive him joyfully, who brings all good with him. Zaccheus
gave proofs publicly that he was become a true convert. He does not look
to be justified by his works, as the Pharisee; but by his good works he
will, through the grace of God, show the sincerity of his faith and
repentance. Zaccheus is declared to be a happy man, now he is turned
from sin to God. Now that he is saved from his sins, from the guilt of
them, from the power of them, all the benefits of salvation are his.
Christ is come to his house, and where Christ comes he brings salvation
with him. He came into this lost world to seek and to save it. His
design was to save, when there was no salvation in any other. He seeks
those that sought him not, and asked not for him.

[Luke 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 19:11</span></span>

This parable is like that of the talents, Matthew 25. Those that are
called to Christ, he furnishes with gifts needful for their business;
and from those to whom he gives power, he expects service. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, [Co1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007.md). And as every one has received
the gift, so let him minister the same, [Pe1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010.md). The account required, resembles
that in the parable of the talents; and the punishment of the avowed
enemies of Christ, as well as of false professors, is shown. The
principal difference is, that the pound given to each seems to point out
the gift of the gospel, which is the same to all who hear it; but the
talents, distributed more or less, seem to mean that God gives different
capacities and advantages to men, by which this one gift of the gospel
may be differently improved.

[Luke 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 19:28</span></span>

Christ has dominion over all creatures, and may use them as he pleases.
He has all men's hearts both under his eye and in his hand. Christ's
triumphs, and his disciples' joyful praises, vex proud Pharisees, who
are enemies to him and to his kingdom. But Christ, as he despises the
contempt of the proud, so he accepts the praises of the humble.
Pharisees would silence the praises of Christ, but they cannot; for as
God can out of stones raise up children unto Abraham, and turn the stony
heart to himself, so he can bring praise out of the mouths of children.
And what will be the feelings of men when the Lord returns in glory to
judge the world!

[Luke 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 19:41</span></span>

Who can behold the holy Jesus, looking forward to the miseries that
awaited his murderers, weeping over the city where his precious blood
was about to be shed, without seeing that the likeness of God in the
believer, consists much in good-will and compassion? Surely those cannot
be right who take up any doctrines of truth, so as to be hardened
towards their fellow-sinners. But let every one remember, that though
Jesus wept over Jerusalem, he executed awful vengeance upon it. Though
he delights not in the death of a sinner, yet he will surely bring to
pass his awful threatenings on those who neglect his salvation. The Son
of God did not weep vain and causeless tears, nor for a light matter,
nor for himself. He knows the value of souls, the weight of guilt, and
how low it will press and sink mankind. May he then come and cleanse our
hearts by his Spirit, from all that defiles. May sinners, on every side,
become attentive to the words of truth and salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 20](luk020.md)

</div>
