<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk005)  [Next](luk007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 6:0</span></span>

([Luk 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001).md) The disciples pluck corn
on the sabbath.

([Luk 6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006).md) Works of mercy suitable
to the sabbath day.

([Luk 6:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012).md) The apostles chosen.

([Luk 6:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020).md) Blessings and woes
declared.

([Luk 6:27-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027).md) Christ exhorts to
mercy.

([Luk 6:37-49](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037).md) And to justice and
sincerity.

[Luke 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 6:1</span></span>

Christ justifies his disciples in a work of necessity for themselves on
the sabbath day, and that was plucking the ears of corn when they were
hungry. But we must take heed that we mistake not this liberty for leave
to commit sin. Christ will have us to know and remember that it is his
day, therefore to be spent in his service, and to his honour.

[Luke 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 6:6</span></span>

Christ was neither ashamed nor afraid to own the purposes of his grace.
He healed the poor man, though he knew that his enemies would take
advantage against him for it. Let us not be drawn either from our duty
or from our usefulness by any opposition. We may well be amazed, that
the sons of men should be so wicked.

[Luke 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 6:12</span></span>

We often think one half hour a great deal to spend in meditation and
secret prayer, but Christ was whole nights engaged in these duties. In
serving God, our great care should be not to lose time, but to make the
end of one good duty the beginning of another. The twelve apostles are
here named; never were men so privileged, yet one of them had a devil,
and proved a traitor. Those who have not faithful preaching near them,
had better travel far than be without it. It is indeed worth while to go
a great way to hear the word of Christ, and to go out of the way of
other business for it. They came to be cured by him, and he healed them.
There is a fulness of grace in Christ, and healing virtue in him, ready
to go out from him, that is enough for all, enough for each. Men regard
the diseases of the body as greater evils than those of their souls; but
the Scripture teaches us differently.

[Luke 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 6:20</span></span>

Here begins a discourse of Christ, most of which is also found in
Matthew 5 and 7. But some think that this was preached at another time
and place. All believers that take the precepts of the gospel to
themselves, and live by them, may take the promises of the gospel to
themselves, and live upon them. Woes are denounced against prosperous
sinners as miserable people, though the world envies them. Those are
blessed indeed whom Christ blesses, but those must be dreadfully
miserable who fall under his woe and curse! What a vast advantage will
the saint have over the sinner in the other world! and what a wide
difference will there be in their rewards, how much soever the sinner
may prosper, and the saint be afflicted here!

[Luke 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 6:27</span></span>

These are hard lessons to flesh and blood. But if we are thoroughly
grounded in the faith of Christ's love, this will make his commands easy
to us. Every one that comes to him for washing in his blood, and knows
the greatness of the mercy and the love there is in him, can say, in
truth and sincerity, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? Let us then aim
to be merciful, even according to the mercy of our heavenly Father to
us.

[Luke 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 6:37</span></span>

All these sayings Christ often used; it was easy to apply them. We ought
to be very careful when we blame others; for we need allowance
ourselves. If we are of a giving and a forgiving spirit, we shall
ourselves reap the benefit. Though full and exact returns are made in
another world, not in this world, yet Providence does what should
encourage us in doing good. Those who follow the multitude to do evil,
follow in the broad way that leads to destruction. The tree is known by
its fruits; may the word of Christ be so grafted in our hearts, that we
may be fruitful in every good word and work. And what the mouth commonly
speaks, generally agrees with what is most in the heart. Those only make
sure work for their souls and eternity, and take the course that will
profit in a trying time, who think, speak, and act according to the
words of Christ. Those who take pains in religion, found their hope upon
Christ, who is the Rock of Ages, and other foundation can no man lay. In
death and judgment they are safe, being kept by the power of Christ
through faith unto salvation, and they shall never perish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 7](luk007.md)

</div>
