<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar005)  [Next](mar007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 6:0</span></span>

([Mar 6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)) Christ despised in his
own country.

([Mar 6:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#007)) The apostles sent forth.

(v. 14-29) John the Baptist put to death.

([Mar 6:30-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030)) The apostles return,
Five thousand fed by a miracle.

([Mar 6:45-56](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045)) Christ walks on the
sea, He heals those that touch him.

[Mark 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 6:1</span></span>

Our Lord's countrymen tried to prejudice the minds of people against
him. Is not this the carpenter? Our Lord Jesus probably had worked in
that business with his father. He thus put honour upon mechanics, and
encouraged all persons who eat by the labour of their hands. It becomes
the followers of Christ to content themselves with the satisfaction of
doing good, although they are denied the praise of it. How much did
these Nazarenes lose by obstinate prejudices against Jesus! May Divine
grace deliver us from that unbelief, which renders Christ a savour of
death, rather than of life to the soul. Let us, like our Master, go and
teach cottages and peasants the way of salvation.

[Mark 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 6:7</span></span>

Though the apostles were conscious to themselves of great weakness, and
expected no wordly advantage, yet, in obedience to their Master, and in
dependence upon his strength, they went out. They did not amuse people
with curious matters, but told them they must repent of their sins, and
turn to God. The servants of Christ may hope to turn many from darkness
unto God, and to heal souls by the power of the Holy Ghost.

[Mark 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 6:14</span></span>

Herod feared John while he lived, and feared him still more when he was
dead. Herod did many of those things which John in his preaching taught
him; but it is not enough to do many things, we must have respect to all
the commandments. Herod respected John, till he touched him in his
Herodias. Thus many love good preaching, if it keep far away from their
beloved sin. But it is better that sinners persecute ministers now for
faithfulness, than curse them eternally for unfaithfulness. The ways of
God are unsearchable; but we may be sure he never can be at a loss to
repay his servants for what they endure or lose for his sake. Death
could not come so as to surprise this holy man; and the triumph of the
wicked was short.

[Mark 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 6:30</span></span>

Let not ministers do any thing or teach any thing, but what they are
willing should be told to their Lord. Christ notices the frights of
some, and the toils of others of his disciples, and provides rest for
those that are tired, and refuge for those that are terrified. The
people sought the spiritual food of Christ's word, and then he took care
that they should not want bodily food. If Christ and his disciples put
up with mean things, surely we may. And this miracle shows that Christ
came into the world, not only to restore, but to preserve and nourish
spiritual life; in him there is enough for all that come. None are sent
empty away from Christ but those who come to him full of themselves.
Though Christ had bread enough at command, he teaches us not to waste
any of God's bounties, remembering how many are in want. We may, some
time, need the fragments that we now throw away.

[Mark 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mar 6:45</span></span>

The church is often like a ship at sea, tossed with tempests, and not
comforted: we may have Christ for us, yet wind and tide against us; but
it is a comfort to Christ's disciples in a storm, that their Master is
in the heavenly mount, interceding for them. And no difficulties can
hinder Christ's appearance for his people, when the set time is come. He
silenced their fears, by making himself known to them. Our fears are
soon satisfied, if our mistakes are set right, especially our mistakes
as to Christ. Let the disciples have their Master with them, and all is
well. It is for want of rightly understanding Christ's former works,
that we view his present works as if there never were the like before.
If Christ's ministers now could cure people's bodily diseases, what
multitudes would flock after them! It is sad to think how much more most
care about their bodies than about their souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 7](mar007)

</div>
