<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar002)  [Next](mar004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 3:0</span></span>

([Mar 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001).md) The withered hand healed.

([Mar 3:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006).md) The people resort to
Christ.

([Mar 3:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013).md) The apostles called.

([Mar 3:22-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022).md) The blasphemy of the
scribes.

([Mar 3:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031).md) Christ's relatives.

[Mark 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 3:1</span></span>

This man's case was piteous; he had a withered hand, which disabled him
from working for his living; and those that are so, are the most proper
objects of charity. Let those be helped that cannot help themselves. But
stubborn infidels, when they can say nothing against the truth, yet will
not yield. We hear what is said amiss, and see what is done amiss; but
Christ looks at the root of bitterness in the heart, the blindness and
hardness of that, and is grieved. Let hard-hearted sinners tremble to
think of the anger with which he will look upon them shortly, when the
day of his wrath comes. The great healing day now is the sabbath, and
the healing place the house of prayer; but the healing power is of
Christ. The gospel command is like that recorded here: though our hands
are withered, yet, if we will not stretch them out, it is our own fault
that we are not healed. But if we are healed, Christ, his power and
grace, must have all the glory.

[Mark 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 3:6</span></span>

All our sicknesses and calamities spring from the anger of God against
our sins. Their removal, or the making them blessings to us, was
purchased to us by the blood of Christ. But the plagues and diseases of
our souls, of our hearts, are chiefly to be dreaded; and He can heal
them also by a word. May more and more press to Christ to be healed of
these plagues, and to be delivered from the enemies of their souls.

[Mark 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 3:13</span></span>

Christ calls whom he will; for his grace is his own. He had called the
apostles to separate themselves from the crowd, and they came unto him.
He now gave them power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils. May
the Lord send forth more and more of those who have been with him, and
have learned of him to preach his gospel, to be instruments in his
blessed work. Those whose hearts are enlarged in the work of God, can
easily bear with what is inconvenient to themselves, and will rather
lose a meal than an opportunity of doing good. Those who go on with zeal
in the work of God, must expect hinderances, both from the hatred of
enemies, and mistaken affections of friends, and need to guard against
both.

[Mark 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 3:22</span></span>

It was plain that the doctrine of Christ had a direct tendency to break
the devil's power; and it was as plain, that casting of him out of the
bodies of people, confirmed that doctrine; therefore Satan could not
support such a design. Christ gave an awful warning against speaking
such dangerous words. It is true the gospel promises, because Christ has
purchased, forgiveness for the greatest sins and sinners; but by this
sin, they would oppose the gifts of the Holy Ghost after Christ's
ascension. Such is the enmity of the heart, that unconverted men pretend
believers are doing Satan's work, when sinners are brought to repentance
and newness of life.

[Mark 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 3:31</span></span>

It is a great comfort to all true Christians, that they are dearer to
Christ than mother, brother, or sister as such, merely as relations in
the flesh would have been, even had they been holy. Blessed be God, this
great and gracious privilege is ours even now; for though Christ's
bodily presence cannot be enjoyed by us, his spiritual presence is not
denied us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 4](mar004.md)

</div>
