<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar011)  [Next](mar013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 12:0</span></span>

([Mar 12:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)) The parable of the
vineyard and husbandmen.

([Mar 12:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013)) Question about
tribute.

([Mar 12:18-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018)) Concerning the
resurrection.

([Mar 12:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)) The great command of
the law.

([Mar 12:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035)) Christ the Son and yet
the Lord of David.

([Mar 12:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041)) The poor widow
commended.

[Mark 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 12:1</span></span>

Christ showed in parables, that he would lay aside the Jewish church. It
is sad to think what base usage God's faithful ministers have met with
in all ages, from those who have enjoyed the privileges of the church,
but have not brought forth fruit answerable. God at length sent his Son,
his Well-beloved; and it might be expected that he whom their Master
loved, they also should respect and love; but instead of honouring him
because he was the Son and Heir, they therefore hated him. But the
exaltation of Christ was the Lord's doing; and it is his doing to exalt
him in our hearts, and to set up his throne there; and if this be done,
it cannot but be marvellous in our eyes. The Scriptures, and faithful
preachers, and the coming of Christ in the flesh, call on us to render
due praise to God in our lives. Let sinners beware of a proud, carnal
spirit; if they revile or despise the preachers of Christ, they would
have done so their Master, had they lived when he was upon earth.

[Mark 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 12:13</span></span>

The enemies of Christ would be thought desirous to know their duty, when
really they hoped that which soever side he took of the question, they
might find occasion to accuse him. Nothing is more likely to insnare the
followers of Christ, than bringing them to meddle with disputes about
worldly politics. Jesus avoided the snare, by referring to the
submission they had already made as a nation; and all that heard him,
marvelled at the great wisdom of his answer. Many will praise the words
of a sermon, who will not be commanded by the doctrines of it.

[Mark 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 12:18</span></span>

A right knowledge of the Scripture, as the fountain whence all revealed
religion now flows, and the foundation on which it is built, is the best
preservative against error. Christ put aside the objection of the
Sadducees, who were the scoffing infidels of that day, by setting the
doctrine of the future state in a true light. The relation between
husband and wife, though appointed in the earthly paradise, will not be
known in the heavenly one. It is no wonder if we confuse ourselves with
foolish errors, when we form our ideas of the world of spirits by the
affairs of this world of sense. It is absurd to think that the living
God should be the portion and happiness of a man if he is for ever dead;
and therefore it is certain that Abraham's soul exists and acts, though
now for a time separate from the body. Those that deny the resurrection
greatly err, and ought to be told so. Let us seek to pass through this
dying world, with a joyful hope of eternal happiness, and of a glorious
resurrection.

[Mark 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 12:28</span></span>

Those who sincerely desire to be taught their duty, Christ will guide in
judgment, and teach his way. He tells the scribe that the great
commandment, which indeed includes all, is, that of loving God with all
our hearts. Wherever this is the ruling principle in the soul, there is
a disposition to every other duty. Loving God with all our heart, will
engage us to every thing by which he will be pleased. The sacrifices
only represented the atonements for men's transgressions of the moral
law; they were of no power except as they expressed repentance and faith
in the promised Saviour, and as they led to moral obedience. And because
we have not thus loved God and man, but the very reverse, therefore we
are condemned sinners; we need repentance, and we need mercy. Christ
approved what the scribe said, and encouraged him. He stood fair for
further advance; for this knowledge of the law leads to conviction of
sin, to repentance, to discovery of our need of mercy, and understanding
the way of justification by Christ.

[Mark 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 12:35</span></span>

When we attend to what the Scriptures declare, as to the person and
offices of Christ, we shall be led to confess him as our Lord and God;
to obey him as our exalted Redeemer. If the common people hear these
things gladly, while the learned and distinguished oppose, the former
are happy, and the latter to be pitied. And as sin, disguised with a
show of piety, is double iniquity, so its doom will be doubly heavy.

[Mark 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 12:41</span></span>

Let us not forget that Jesus still sees the treasury. He knows how much,
and from what motives, men give to his cause. He looks at the heart, and
what our views are, in giving alms; and whether we do it as unto the
Lord, or only to be seen of men. It is so rare to find any who would not
blame this widow, that we cannot expect to find many who will do like to
her; and yet our Saviour commends her, therefore we are sure that she
did well and wisely. The feeble efforts of the poor to honour their
Saviour, will be commended in that day, when the splendid actions of
unbelievers will be exposed to contempt.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 13](mar013)

</div>
