<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar003)  [Next](mar005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 4:0</span></span>

(v. 1-20) The parable of the sower.

([Mar 4:21-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021).md) Other parables.

([Mar 4:35-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035).md) Christ stills the
tempest.

[Mark 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 4:1</span></span>

This parable contained instruction so important, that all capable of
hearing were bound to attend to it. There are many things we are
concerned to know; and if we understand not the plain truths of the
gospel, how shall we learn those more difficult! It will help us to
value the privileges we enjoy as disciples of Christ, if we seriously
consider the deplorable state of all who have not such privileges. In
the great field of the church, the word of God is dispensed to all. Of
the many that hear the word of the gospel, but few receive it, so as to
bring forth fruit. Many are much affected with the word for the present,
who yet receive no abiding benefit. The word does not leave abiding
impressions upon the minds of men, because their hearts are not duly
disposed to receive it. The devil is very busy about careless hearers,
as the fowls of the air go about the seed that lies above ground. Many
continue in a barren, false profession, and go down to hell. Impressions
that are not deep, will not last. Many do not mind heart-work, without
which religion is nothing. Others are hindered from profiting by the
word of God, by abundance of the world. And those who have but little of
the world, may yet be ruined by indulging the body. God expects and
requires fruit from those who enjoy the gospel, a temper of mind and
Christian graces daily exercised, Christian duties duly performed. Let
us look to the Lord, that by his new-creating grace our hearts may
become good ground, and that the good seed of the word may produce in
our lives those good words and works which are through Jesus Christ, to
the praise and glory of God the Father.

[Mark 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 4:21</span></span>

These declarations were intended to call the attention of the disciples
to the word of Christ. By his thus instructing them, they were made able
to instruct others; as candles are lighted, not to be covered, but to be
placed on a candlestick, that they may give light to a room. This
parable of the good seed, shows the manner in which the kingdom of God
makes progress in the world. Let but the word of Christ have the place
it ought to have in a soul, and it will show itself in a good
conversation. It grows gradually: first the blade; then the ear; after
that the full corn in the ear. When it is sprung up, it will go forward.
The work of grace in the soul is, at first, but the day of small things;
yet it has mighty products even now, while it is in its growth; but what
will there be when it is perfected in heaven!

[Mark 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 4:35</span></span>

Christ was asleep in the storm, to try the faith of his disciples, and
to stir them up to pray. Their faith appeared weak, and their prayers
strong. When our wicked hearts are like the troubled sea which cannot
rest, when our passions are unruly, let us think we hear the law of
Christ, saying, Be silent, be dumb. When without are fightings, and
within are fears, and the spirits are in a tumult, if he say, "Peace, be
still," there is a great calm at once. Why are ye so fearful? Though
there may be cause for some fear, yet not for such fear as this. Those
may suspect their faith, who can have such a thought as that Jesus
careth not though his people perish. How imperfect are the best of
saints! Faith and fear take their turns while we are in this world; but
ere long, fear will be overcome, and faith will be lost in sight.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 5](mar005.md)

</div>
