<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar009)  [Next](mar011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 10:0</span></span>

([Mar 10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001).md) The Pharisees' question
concerning divorce.

([Mar 10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013).md) Christ's love to
little children.

([Mar 10:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017).md) Christ's discourse
with the rich young man.

([Mar 10:23-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#023).md) The hinderance of
riches.

([Mar 10:32-45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032).md) Christ foretells his
sufferings.

([Mar 10:46-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046).md) Bartimaeus healed.

[Mark 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 10:1</span></span>

Wherever Jesus was, the people flocked after him in crowds, and he
taught them. Preaching was Christ's constant practice. He here shows
that the reason why Moses' law allowed divorce, was such that they ought
not to use the permission; it was only for the hardness of their hearts.
God himself joined man and wife together; he has fitted them to be
comforts and helps for each other. The bond which God has tied, is not
to be lightly untied. Let those who are for putting away their wives
consider what would become of themselves, if God should deal with them
in like manner.

[Mark 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 10:13</span></span>

Some parents or nurses brought little children to Christ, that he should
touch them, in token of his blessing them. It does not appear that they
needed bodily cures, nor were they capable of being taught: but those
who had the care of them believed that Christ's blessing would do their
souls good; therefore they brought them to him. Jesus ordered that they
should be brought to him, and that nothing should be said or done to
hinder it. Children should be directed to the Saviour as soon as they
are able to understand his words. Also, we must receive the kingdom of
God as little children; we must stand affected to Christ and his grace,
as little children to their parents, nurses, and teachers.

[Mark 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 10:17</span></span>

This young ruler showed great earnestness. He asked what he should do
now, that he might be happy for ever. Most ask for good to be had in
this world; any good, [Psa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006.md); he
asks for good to be done in this world, in order to enjoy the greatest
good in the other world. Christ encouraged this address by assisting his
faith, and by directing his practice. But here is a sorrowful parting
between Jesus and this young man. He asks Christ what he shall do more
than he has done, to obtain eternal life; and Christ puts it to him,
whether he has indeed that firm belief of, and that high value for
eternal life which he seems to have. Is he willing to bear a present
cross, in expectation of future crown? The young man was sorry he could
not be a follower of Christ upon easier terms; that he could not lay
hold on eternal life, and keep hold of his worldly possessions too. He
went away grieved. See [Mat 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md), Ye
cannot serve God and mammon.

[Mark 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 10:23</span></span>

Christ took this occasion to speak to his disciples about the difficulty
of the salvation of those who have abundance of this world. Those who
thus eagerly seek the wealth of the world, will never rightly prize
Christ and his grace. Also, as to the greatness of the salvation of
those who have but little of this world, and leave it for Christ. The
greatest trial of a good man's constancy is, when love to Jesus calls
him to give up love to friends and relatives. Even when gainers by
Christ, let them still expect to suffer for him, till they reach heaven.
Let us learn contentment in a low state, and to watch against the love
of riches in a high one. Let us pray to be enabled to part with all, if
required, in Christ's service, and to use all we are allowed to keep in
his service.

[Mark 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 10:32</span></span>

Christ's going on with his undertaking for the salvation of mankind,
was, is, and will be, the wonder of all his disciples. Worldly honour is
a glittering thing, with which the eyes of Christ's own disciples have
many times been dazzled. Our care must be, that we may have wisdom and
grace to know how to suffer with him; and we may trust him to provide
what the degrees of our glory shall be. Christ shows them that dominion
was generally abused in the world. If Jesus would gratify all our
desires, it would soon appear that we desire fame or authority, and are
unwilling to taste of his cup, or to have his baptism; and should often
be ruined by having our prayers answered. But he loves us, and will only
give his people what is good for them.

[Mark 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mar 10:46</span></span>

Bartimaeus had heard of Jesus and his miracles, and learning that he was
passing by, hoped to recover his eyesight. In coming to Christ for help
and healing, we should look to him as the promised Messiah. The gracious
calls Christ gives us to come to him, encourage our hope, that if we
come to him we shall have what we come for. Those who would come to
Jesus, must cast away the garment of their own sufficiency, must free
themselves from every weight, and the sin that, like long garments, most
easily besets them, [Heb 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001.md). He
begged that his eyes might be opened. It is very desirable to be able to
earn our bread; and where God has given men limbs and senses, it is a
shame, by foolishness and slothfulness, to make themselves, in effect,
blind and lame. His eyes were opened. Thy faith has made thee whole:
faith in Christ as the Son of David, and in his pity and power; not thy
repeated words, but thy faith; Christ setting thy faith to work. Let
sinners be exhorted to imitate blind Bartimaeus. Where the gospel is
preached, or the written words of truth circulated, Jesus is passing by,
and this is the opportunity. It is not enough to come to Christ for
spiritual healing, but, when we are healed, we must continue to follow
him; that we may honour him, and receive instruction from him. Those who
have spiritual eyesight, see that beauty in Christ which will draw them
to run after him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 11](mar011.md)

</div>
