<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar013)  [Next](mar015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 14:0</span></span>

([Mar 14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001).md) Christ anointed at
Bethany.

([Mar 14:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012).md) The passover, Jesus
declares that Judas would betray him.

([Mar 14:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022).md) The Lord's supper
instituted.

([Mar 14:32-42](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032).md) Christ's agony in the
garden.

([Mar 14:43-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043).md) He is betrayed and
taken.

([Mar 14:53-65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#053).md) Christ before the high
priest.

([Mar 14:66-72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066).md) Peter denies Christ.

[Mark 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 14:1</span></span>

Did Christ pour out his soul unto death for us, and shall we think any
thing too precious for him? Do we give him the precious ointment of our
best affections? Let us love him with all the heart, though it is common
for zeal and affection to be misunderstood and blamed; and remember that
charity to the poor will not excuse any from particular acts of piety to
the Lord Jesus. Christ commended this woman's pious attention to the
notice of believers in all ages. Those who honour Christ he will honour.
Covetousness was Judas' master lust, and that betrayed him to the sin of
betraying his Master; the devil suited his temptation to that, and so
conquered him. And see what wicked contrivances many have in their
sinful pursuits; but what appears to forward their plans, will prove
curses in the end.

[Mark 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 14:12</span></span>

Nothing could be less the result of human foresight than the events here
related. But our Lord knows all things about us before they come to
pass. If we admit him, he will dwell in our hearts. The Son of man goes,
as it is written of him, as a lamb to the slaughter; but woe to that man
by whom he is betrayed! God's permitting the sins of men, and bringing
glory to himself out of them, does not oblige them to sin; nor will this
be any excuse for their guilt, or lessen their punishment.

[Mark 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 14:22</span></span>

The Lord's supper is food for the soul, therefore a very little of that
which is for the body, as much as will serve for a sign, is enough. It
was instituted by the example and the practice of our Master, to remain
in force till his second coming. It was instituted with blessing and
giving of thanks, to be a memorial of Christ's death. Frequent mention
is made of his precious blood, as the price of our redemption. How
comfortable is this to poor repenting sinners, that the blood of Christ
is shed for many! If for many, why not for me? It was a sign of the
conveyance of the benefits purchased for us by his death. Apply the
doctrine of Christ crucified to yourselves; let it be meat and drink to
your souls, strengthening and refreshing your spiritual life. It was to
be an earnest and foretaste of the happiness of heaven, and thereby to
put us out of taste for the pleasures and delights of sense. Every one
that has tasted spiritual delights, straightway desires eternal ones.
Though the great Shepherd passed through his sufferings without one
false step, yet his followers often have been scattered by the small
measure of sufferings allotted to them. How very apt we are to think
well of ourselves, and to trust our own hearts! It was ill done of Peter
thus to answer his Master, and not with fear and trembling. Lord, give
me grace to keep me from denying thee.

[Mark 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 14:32</span></span>

Christ's sufferings began with the sorest of all, those in his soul. He
began to be sorely amazed; words not used in St. Matthew, but very full
of meaning. The terrors of God set themselves in array against him, and
he allowed him to contemplate them. Never was sorrow like unto his at
this time. Now he was made a curse for us; the curses of the law were
laid upon him as our Surety. He now tasted death, in all the bitterness
of it. This was that fear of which the apostle speaks, the natural fear
of pain and death, at which human nature startles. Can we ever entertain
favourable, or even slight thoughts of sin, when we see the painful
sufferings which sin, though but reckoned to him, brought on the Lord
Jesus? Shall that sit light upon our souls, which sat so heavy upon his?
Was Christ in such agony for our sins, and shall we never be in agony
about them? How should we look upon Him whom we have pierced, and mourn!
It becomes us to be exceedingly sorrowful for sin, because He was so,
and never to mock at it. Christ, as Man, pleaded, that, if it were
possible, his sufferings might pass from him. As Mediator, he submitted
to the will of God, saying, Nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou
wilt; I bid it welcome. See how the sinful weakness of Christ's
disciples returns, and overpowers them. What heavy clogs these bodies of
ours are to our souls! But when we see trouble at the door, we should
get ready for it. Alas, even believers often look at the Redeemer's
sufferings in a drowsy manner, and instead of being ready to die with
Christ, they are not even prepared to watch with him one hour.

[Mark 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 14:43</span></span>

Because Christ appeared not as a temporal prince, but preached
repentance, reformation, and a holy life, and directed men's thoughts,
and affections, and aims to another world, therefore the Jewish rulers
sought to destroy him. Peter wounded one of the band. It is easier to
fight for Christ than to die for him. But there is a great difference
between faulty disciples and hypocrites. The latter rashly and without
thought call Christ Master, and express great affection for him, yet
betray him to his enemies. Thus they hasten their own destruction.

[Mark 14:53](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#053.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mar 14:53</span></span>

We have here Christ's condemnation before the great council of the Jews.
Peter followed; but the high priest's fire-side was no proper place, nor
his servants proper company, for Peter: it was an entrance into
temptation. Great diligence was used to procure false witnesses against
Jesus, yet their testimony was not equal to the charge of a capital
crime, by the utmost stretch of their law. He was asked, Art thou the
Son of the Blessed? that is, the Son of God. For the proof of his being
the Son of God, he refers to his second coming. In these outrages we
have proofs of man's enmity to God, and of God's free and unspeakable
love to man.

[Mark 14:66](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">mar 14:66</span></span>

Peter's denying Christ began by keeping at a distance from him. Those
that are shy of godliness, are far in the way to deny Christ. Those who
think it dangerous to be in company with Christ's disciples, because
thence they may be drawn in to suffer for him, will find it much more
dangerous to be in company with his enemies, because there they may be
drawn in to sin against him. When Christ was admired and flocked after,
Peter readily owned him; but will own no relation to him now he is
deserted and despised. Yet observe, Peter's repentance was very speedy.
Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall; and let him
that has fallen think of these things, and of his own offences, and
return to the Lord with weeping and supplication, seeking forgiveness,
and to be raised up by the Holy Spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 15](mar015.md)

</div>
