<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar008)  [Next](mar010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 9:0</span></span>

([Mar 9:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001).md) The transfiguration.

(v. 14-29) An evil spirit cast out.

([Mar 9:30-40](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030).md) The apostles reproved.

([Mar 9:41-50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041).md) Pain to be preferred to
sin.

[Mark 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 9:1</span></span>

Here is a prediction of the near approach Christ's kingdom. A glimpse of
that kingdom was given in the transfiguration of Christ. It is good to
be away from the world, and alone with Christ: and how good to be with
Christ glorified in heaven with all the saints! But when it is well with
us, we are apt not to care for others, and in the fulness of our
enjoyments, we forget the many wants of our brethren. God owns Jesus,
and accepts him as his beloved Son, and is ready to accept us in him.
Therefore we must own and accept him as our beloved Saviour, and must
give up ourselves to be ruled by him. Christ does not leave the soul,
when joys and comforts leave it. Jesus explained to the disciples the
prophecy about Elias. This was very suitable to the ill usage of John
Baptist.

[Mark 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 9:14</span></span>

The father of the suffering youth reflected on the want of power in the
disciples; but Christ will have him reckon the disappointment to the
want of faith. Very much is promised to our believing. If thou canst
believe, it is possible that thy hard heart may be softened, thy
spiritual diseases may be cured; and, weak as thou art, thou mayest be
able to hold out to the end. Those that complain of unbelief, must look
up to Christ for grace to help them against it, and his grace will be
sufficient for them. Whom Christ cures, he cures effectually. But Satan
is unwilling to be driven from those that have been long his slaves,
and, when he cannot deceive or destroy the sinner, he will cause him all
the terror that he can. The disciples must not think to do their work
always with the same ease; some services call for more than ordinary
pains.

[Mark 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 9:30</span></span>

The time of Christ's suffering drew nigh. Had he been delivered into the
hands of devils, and they had done this, it had not been so strange; but
that men should thus shamefully treat the Son of man, who came to redeem
and save them, is wonderful. Still observe that when Christ spake of his
death, he always spake of his resurrection, which took the reproach of
it from himself, and should have taken the grief of it from his
disciples. Many remain ignorant because they are ashamed to inquire.
Alas! that while the Saviour teaches so plainly the things which belong
to his love and grace, men are so blinded that they understand not his
sayings. We shall be called to account about our discourses, and to
account for our disputes, especially about being greater than others.
Those who are most humble and self-denying, most resemble Christ, and
shall be most tenderly owned by him. This Jesus taught them by a sign;
whoever shall receive one like this child, receives me. Many have been
like the disciples, ready to silence men who have success in preaching
to sinners repentance in Christ's name, because they follow not with
them. Our Lord blamed the apostles, reminding them that he who wrought
miracles in his name would not be likely to hurt his cause. If sinners
are brought to repent, to believe in the Saviour, and to live sober,
righteous, and godly lives, we then see that the Lord works by the
preacher.

[Mark 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 9:41</span></span>

It is repeatedly said of the wicked, Their worm dieth not, as well as,
The fire is never quenched. Doubtless, remorse of conscience and keen
self-reflection are this never-dying worm. Surely it is beyond compare
better to undergo all possible pain, hardship, and self-denial here, and
to be happy for ever hereafter, than to enjoy all kinds of worldly
pleasure for a season, and to be miserable for ever. Like the
sacrifices, we must be salted with salt; our corrupt affections must be
subdued and mortified by the Holy Spirit. Those that have the salt of
grace, must show they have a living principle of grace in their hearts,
which works out corrupt dispositions in the soul that would offend God,
or our own consciences.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 10](mar010.md)

</div>
