<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat007)  [Next](mat009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 8:0</span></span>

([Mat 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)) Multitudes follow Christ.

([Mat 8:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002)) He heals a leper.

([Mat 8:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005)) A centurion's servant
healed.

([Mat 8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014)) Cure of Peter's wife's
mother.

([Mat 8:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018)) The scribe's zealous
proposal.

([Mat 8:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023)) Christ in a storm.

([Mat 8:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028)) He heals two possessed
with devils.

[Matthew 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 8:1</span></span>

This verse refers to the close of the foregoing sermon. Those to whom
Christ has made himself known, desire to know more of him.

[Matthew 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 8:2</span></span>

In these verses we have an account of Christ's cleansing a leper, who
came and worshipped him, as one clothed with Divine power. This
cleansing directs us, not only to apply to Christ, who has power over
bodily diseases, for the cure of them, but it also teaches us in what
manner to apply to him. When we cannot be sure of God's will, we may be
sure of his wisdom and mercy. No guilt is so great, but there is that in
Christ's blood which atones for it; no corruption so strong, but there
is that in his grace which can subdue it. To be made clean we must
commend ourselves to his pity; we cannot demand it as a debt, but we
must humbly request it as a favour. Those who by faith apply to Christ
for mercy and grace, may be sure that he is freely willing to give them
the mercy and grace they thus seek. And those afflictions are blessed
that bring us to know Christ, and cause us to seek help and salvation
from him. Let those who are cleansed from their spiritual leprosy, go to
Christ's ministers and open their case, that they may advise, comfort,
and pray for them.

[Matthew 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 8:5</span></span>

This centurion was a heathen, a Roman soldier. Though he was a soldier,
yet he was a godly man. No man's calling or place will be an excuse for
unbelief and sin. See how he states his servant's case. We should
concern ourselves for the souls of our children and servants, who are
spiritually sick, who feel not spiritual evils, who know not that which
is spiritually good; and we should bring them to Christ by faith and
prayers. Observe his self-abasement. Humble souls are made more humble
by Christ's gracious dealings with them. Observe his great faith. The
more diffident we are of ourselves, the stronger will be our confidence
in Christ. Herein the centurion owns him to have Divine power, and a
full command of all the creatures and powers of nature, as a master over
his servants. Such servants we all should be to God; we must go and
come, according to the directions of his word and the disposals of his
providence. But when the Son of man comes he finds little faith,
therefore he finds little fruit. An outward profession may cause us to
be called children of the kingdom; but if we rest in that, and have
nothing else to show, we shall be cast out. The servant got a cure of
his disease, and the master got the approval of his faith. What was said
to him, is said to all, Believe, and ye shall receive; only believe. See
the power of Christ, and the power of faith. The healing of our souls is
at once the effect and evidence of our interest in the blood of Christ.

[Matthew 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 8:14</span></span>

Peter had a wife, yet was an apostle of Christ, who showed that he
approved of the married state, by being thus kind to Peter's wife's
relations. The church of Rome, which forbids ministers to marry, goes
contrary to that apostle upon whom they rest so much. He had his wife's
mother with him in his family, which is an example to be kind to our
relations. In spiritual healing, the Scripture speaks the word, the
Spirit gives the touch, touches the heart, touches the hand. Those who
recover from fevers, commonly are weak and feeble some time after; but
to show that this cure was above the power of nature, the woman was at
once so well as to go about the business of the house. The miracles
which Jesus did being noised abroad, many thronged to him. He healed all
that were sick, though the patient was ever so mean, and the case ever
so bad. Many are the diseases and calamities to which we are liable in
the body; and there is more, in those words of the gospel, that Jesus
Christ bore our sicknesses and carried our sorrows, to support and
comfort us under them, than in all the writings of the philosophers. Let
us not grudge labour, trouble, or expense in doing good to others.

[Matthew 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 8:18</span></span>

One of the scribes was too hasty in promising; he proffers himself to be
a close follower of Christ. He seems to be very resolute. Many
resolutions for religion are produced by sudden conviction, and taken up
without due consideration; these come to nothing. When this scribe
offered to follow Christ, one would think he should have been
encouraged; one scribe might do more credit and service than twelve
fishermen; but Christ saw his heart, and answered to its thoughts, and
therein teaches all how to come to Christ. His resolve seems to have
been from a worldly, covetous principle; but Christ had not a place to
lay his head on, and if he follows him, he must not expect to fare
better than he fared. We have reason to think this scribe went away.
Another was too slow. Delay in doing is as bad on the one hand, as
hastiness in resolving is on the other. He asked leave to attend his
father to his grave, and then he would be at Christ's service. This
seemed reasonable, yet it was not right. He had not true zeal for the
work. Burying the dead, especially a dead father, is a good work, but it
is not thy work at this time. If Christ requires our service, affection
even for the nearest and dearest relatives, and for things otherwise our
duty, must give way. An unwilling mind never wants an excuse. Jesus said
to him, Follow me; and, no doubt, power went with this word to him as to
others; he did follow Christ, and cleaved to him. The scribe said, I
will follow thee; to this man Christ said, Follow me; comparing them
together, it shows that we are brought to Christ by the force of his
call to us, [Rom 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016).

[Matthew 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 8:23</span></span>

It is a comfort to those who go down to the sea in ships, and are often
in perils there, to reflect that they have a Saviour to trust in and
pray to, who knows what it is to be on the water, and to be in storms
there. Those who are passing with Christ over the ocean of this world,
must expect storms. His human nature, like to ours in every thing but
sin, was wearied, and he slept at this time to try the faith of his
disciples. They, in their fear, came to their Master. Thus is it in a
soul; when lusts and temptations are swelling and raging, and God is, as
it were, asleep to it, this brings it to the brink of despair. Then it
cries for a word from his mouth, Lord Jesus, keep not silence to me, or
I am undone. Many that have true faith, are weak in it. Christ's
disciples are apt to be disquieted with fears in a stormy day; to
torment themselves that things are bad with them, and with dismal
thoughts that they will be worse. Great storms of doubt and fear in the
soul, under the power of the spirit of bondage, sometimes end in a
wonderful calm, created and spoken by the Spirit of adoption. They were
astonished. They never saw a storm so turned at once into a perfect
calm. He that can do this, can do any thing, which encourages confidence
and comfort in him, in the most stormy day, within or without, [Isa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004).

[Matthew 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 8:28</span></span>

The devils have nothing to do with Christ as a Saviour; they neither
have, nor hope for any benefit from him. Oh the depth of this mystery of
Divine love; that fallen man has so much to do with Christ, when fallen
angels have nothing to do with him! [Heb
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016). Surely here was torment, to be
forced to own the excellence that is in Christ, and yet they had no part
in him. The devils desire not to have any thing to do with Christ as a
Ruler. See whose language those speak, who will have nothing to do with
the gospel of Christ. But it is not true that the devils have nothing to
do with Christ as a Judge; for they have, and they know it, and thus it
is with all the children of men. Satan and his instruments can go no
further than he permits; they must quit possession when he commands.
They cannot break his hedge of protection about his people; they cannot
enter even a swine without his leave. They had leave. God often, for
wise and holy ends, permits the efforts of Satan's rage. Thus the devil
hurries people to sin; hurries them to what they have resolved against,
which they know will be shame and grief to them: miserable is the
condition of those who are led captive by him at his will. There are a
great many who prefer their swine before the Saviour, and so come short
of Christ and salvation by him. They desire Christ to depart out of
their hearts, and will not suffer his word to have place in them,
because he and his word would destroy their brutish lusts, those swine
which they give themselves up to feed. And justly will Christ forsake
all that are weary of him; and say hereafter, Depart, ye cursed, to
those who now say to the Almighty, Depart from us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 9](mat009)

</div>
