<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat008)  [Next](mat010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 9:0</span></span>

([Mat 9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)) Jesus returns to
Capernaum, and heals a paralytic.

([Mat 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)) Matthew called.

([Mat 9:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)) Matthew, or Levi's
feast.

([Mat 9:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014)) Objections of John's
disciples.

([Mat 9:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)) Christ raises the
daughter of Jairus, He heals the issue of blood.

([Mat 9:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027)) He heals two blind men.

([Mat 9:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032)) Christ casts out a dumb
spirit.

([Mat 9:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035)) He sends forth the
apostles.

[Matthew 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 9:1</span></span>

The faith of the friends of the paralytic in bringing him to Christ, was
a strong faith; they firmly believed that Jesus Christ both could and
would heal him. A strong faith regards no obstacles in pressing after
Christ. It was a humble faith; they brought him to attend on Christ. It
was an active faith. Sin may be pardoned, yet the sickness not be
removed; the sickness may be removed, yet the sin not pardoned: but if
we have the comfort of peace with God, with the comfort of recovery from
sickness, this makes the healing a mercy indeed. This is no
encouragement to sin. If thou bring thy sins to Jesus Christ, as thy
malady and misery to be cured of, and delivered from, it is well; but to
come with them, as thy darlings and delight, thinking still to retain
them and receive him, is a gross mistake, a miserable delusion. The
great intention of the blessed Jesus in the redemption he wrought, is to
separate our hearts from sin. Our Lord Jesus has perfect knowledge of
all that we say within ourselves. There is a great deal of evil in
sinful thoughts, which is very offensive to the Lord Jesus. Christ
designed to show that his great errand to the world was, to save his
people from their sins. He turned from disputing with the scribes, and
spake healing to the sick man. Not only he had no more need to be
carried upon his bed, but he had strength to carry it. God must be
glorified in all the power that is given to do good.

[Matthew 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 9:9</span></span>

Matthew was in his calling, as the rest of those whom Christ called. As
Satan comes with his temptations to the idle, so Christ comes with his
calls to those who are employed. We are all naturally averse from thee,
O God; do thou bid us to follow thee; draw us by thy powerful word, and
we shall run after thee. Speak by the word of the Spirit to our hearts,
the world cannot hold us down, Satan cannot stop our way, we shall arise
and follow thee. A saving change is wrought in the soul, by Christ as
the author, and his word as the means. Neither Matthew's place, nor his
gains by it, could detain him, when Christ called him. He left it, and
though we find the disciples, who were fishers, occasionally fishing
again afterwards, we never more find Matthew at his sinful gain.

[Matthew 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 9:10</span></span>

Some time after his call, Matthew sought to bring his old associates to
hear Christ. He knew by experience what the grace of Christ could do,
and would not despair concerning them. Those who are effectually brought
to Christ, cannot but desire that others also may be brought to him.
Those who suppose their souls to be without disease will not welcome the
spiritual Physician. This was the case with the Pharisees; they despised
Christ, because they thought themselves whole; but the poor publicans
and sinners felt that they wanted instruction and amendment. It is easy,
and too common, to put the worst constructions upon the best words and
actions. It may justly be suspected that those have not the grace of God
themselves, who are not pleased with others' obtaining it. Christ's
conversing with sinners is here called mercy; for to promote the
conversion of souls is the greatest act of mercy. The gospel call is a
call to repentance; a call to us to change our minds, and to change our
ways. If the children of men had not been sinners, there had been no
need for Christ to come among them. Let us examine whether we have found
out our sickness, and have learned to follow the directions of our great
Physician.

[Matthew 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 9:14</span></span>

John was at this time in prison; his circumstances, his character, and
the nature of the message he was sent to deliver, led those who were
peculiarly attached to him, to keep frequent fasts. Christ referred them
to John's testimony of him, [Joh 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029).
Though there is no doubt that Jesus and his disciples lived in a spare
and frugal manner, it would be improper for his disciples to fast while
they had the comfort of his presence. When he is with them, all is well.
The presence of the sun makes day, and its absence produces night. Our
Lord further reminded them of common rules of prudence. It was not usual
to take a piece of rough woolen cloth, which had never been prepared, to
join to an old garment, for it would not join well with the soft, old
garment, but would tear it further, and the rent would be made worse.
Nor would men put new wine into old leathern bottles, which were going
to decay, and would be liable to burst from the fermenting of the wine;
but putting the new wine into strong, new, skin bottles, both would be
preserved. Great caution and prudence are necessary, that young converts
may not receive gloomy and forbidding ideas of the service of our Lord;
but duties are to be urged as they are able to bear them.

[Matthew 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 9:18</span></span>

The death of our relations should drive us to Christ, who is our life.
And it is high honour to the greatest rulers to attend on the Lord
Jesus; and those who would receive mercy from Christ, must honour him.
The variety of methods Christ took in working his miracles, perhaps was
because of the different frames and tempers of mind, which those were in
who came to him, and which He who searches the heart perfectly knew. A
poor woman applied herself to Christ, and received mercy from him by the
way. If we do but touch, as it were, the hem of Christ's garment by
living faith, our worst evils will be healed; there is no other real
cure, nor need we fear his knowing things which are a grief and burden
to us, but which we would not tell to any earthly friend. When Christ
entered the ruler's house, he said, Give place. Sometimes, when the
sorrow of the world prevails, it is difficult for Christ and his
comforts to enter. The ruler's daughter was really dead, but not so to
Christ. The death of the righteous is in a special manner to be looked
on as only a sleep. The words and works of Christ may not at first be
understood, yet they are not therefore to be despised. The people were
put forth. Scorners who laugh at what they do not understand, are not
proper witnesses of the wonderful works of Christ. Dead souls are not
raised to spiritual life, unless Christ take them by the hand: it is
done in the day of his power. If this single instance of Christ's
raising one newly dead so increased his fame, what will be his glory
when all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and come forth;
those that have done good to the resurrection of life, and those that
have done evil to the resurrection of damnation!

[Matthew 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 9:27</span></span>

At this time the Jews expected Messiah would appear; these blind men
knew and proclaimed in the streets of Capernaum that he was come, and
that Jesus was he. Those who, by the providence of God, have lost their
bodily sight, may, by the grace of God, have the eyes of their
understanding fully enlightened. And whatever our wants and burdens are,
we need no more for supply and support, than to share in the mercy of
our Lord Jesus. In Christ is enough for all. They followed him crying
aloud. He would try their faith, and would teach us always to pray, and
not to faint, though the answer does not come at once. They followed
Christ, and followed him crying; but the great question is, Do ye
believe? Nature may make us earnest, but it is only grace that can work
faith. Christ touched their eyes. He gives sight to blind souls by the
power of his grace going with his word, and he puts the cure upon their
faith. Those who apply to Jesus Christ, shall be dealt with, not
according to their fancies, nor according to their profession, but
according to their faith. Christ sometimes concealed his miracles,
because he would not indulge the conceit which prevailed among the Jews,
that their Messiah should be a temporal prince, and so give occasion to
the people to attempt tumults and seditions.

[Matthew 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 9:32</span></span>

Of the two, better a dumb devil than a blaspheming one. Christ's cures
strike at the root, and remove the effect by taking away the cause; they
open the lips, by breaking Satan's power in the soul. Nothing can
convince those who are under the power of pride. They will believe
anything, however false or absurd, rather than the Holy Scriptures; thus
they show the enmity of their hearts against a holy God.

[Matthew 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 9:35</span></span>

Jesus visited not only the great and wealthy cities, but the poor,
obscure villages; and there he preached, there he healed. The souls of
the meanest in the world are as precious to Christ, and should be so to
us, as the souls of those who make the greatest figure. There were
priests, Levites, and scribes, all over the land; but they were idol
shepherds, [Zac 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017); therefore
Christ had compassion on the people as sheep scattered, as men perishing
for lack of knowledge. To this day vast multitudes are as sheep not
having a shepherd, and we should have compassion and do all we can to
help them. The multitudes desirous of spiritual instruction formed a
plenteous harvest, needing many active labourers; but few deserved that
character. Christ is the Lord of the harvest. Let us pray that many may
be raised up and sent forth, who will labour in bringing souls to
Christ. It is a sign that God is about to bestow some special mercy upon
a people, when he stirs them up to pray for it. And commissions given to
labourers in answer to prayer, are most likely to be successful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 10](mat010)

</div>
