<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat013)  [Next](mat015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 14:0</span></span>

([Mat 14:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)) Death of John the
Baptist.

([Mat 14:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)) Five thousand people
miraculously fed.

([Mat 14:22-33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022)) Jesus walks upon the
sea.

([Mat 14:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034)) Jesus healing the
sick.

[Matthew 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 14:1</span></span>

The terror and reproach of conscience, which Herod, like other daring
offenders, could not shake off, are proofs and warnings of a future
judgment, and of future misery to them. But there may be the terror of
convictions, where there is not the truth of conversion. When men
pretend to favour the gospel, yet live in evil, we must not favour their
self-delusion, but must deliver our consciences as John did. The world
may call this rudeness and blind zeal. False professors, or timid
Christians, may censure it as want of civility; but the most powerful
enemies can go no further than the Lord sees good to permit. Herod
feared that the putting of John to death might raise a rebellion among
the people, which it did not; but he never feared it might stir up his
own conscience against him, which it did. Men fear being hanged for what
they do not fear being damned for. And times of carnal mirth and jollity
are convenient times for carrying on bad designs against God's people.
Herod would profusely reward a worthless dance, while imprisonment and
death were the recompence of the man of God who sought the salvation of
his soul. But there was real malice to John beneath his consent, or else
Herod would have found ways to get clear of his promise. When the under
shepherds are smitten, the sheep need not be scattered while they have
the Great Shepherd to go to. And it is better to be drawn to Christ by
want and loss, than not to come to him at all.

[Matthew 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 14:13</span></span>

When Christ and his word withdraw, it is best for us to follow, seeking
the means of grace for our souls before any worldly advantages. The
presence of Christ and his gospel, makes a desert not only tolerable,
but desirable. This little supply of bread was increased by Christ's
creating power, till the whole multitude were satisfied. In seeking the
welfare of men's souls, we should have compassion on their bodies
likewise. Let us also remember always to crave a blessing on our meals,
and learn to avoid all waste, as frugality is the proper source of
liberality. See in this miracle an emblem of the Bread of life, which
came down from heaven to sustain our perishing souls. The provisions of
Christ's gospel appear mean and scanty to the world, yet they satisfy
all that feed on him in their hearts by faith with thanksgiving.

[Matthew 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 14:22</span></span>

Those are not Christ's followers who cannot enjoy being alone with God
and their own hearts. It is good, upon special occasions, and when we
find our hearts enlarged, to continue long in secret prayer, and in
pouring out our hearts before the Lord. It is no new thing for Christ's
disciples to meet with storms in the way of duty, but he thereby shows
himself with the more grace to them and for them. He can take what way
he pleases to save his people. But even appearances of deliverance
sometimes occasion trouble and perplexity to God's people, from mistakes
about Christ. Nothing ought to affright those that have Christ near
them, and know he is theirs; not death itself. Peter walked upon the
water, not for diversion or to boast of it, but to go to Jesus; and in
that he was thus wonderfully borne up. Special supports are promised,
and are to be expected, but only in spiritual pursuits; nor can we ever
come to Jesus, unless we are upheld by his power. Christ bade Peter
come, not only that he might walk upon the water, and so know his Lord's
power, but that he might know his own weakness. And the Lord often lets
his servants have their choice, to humble and prove them, and to show
the greatness of his power and grace. When we look off from Christ, and
look at the greatness of opposing difficulties, we shall begin to fall;
but when we call to him, he will stretch out his arm, and save us.
Christ is the great Saviour; those who would be saved, must come to him,
and cry to him, for salvation; we are never brought to this, till we
find ourselves sinking: the sense of need drives us to him. He rebuked
Peter. Could we but believe more, we should suffer less. The weakness of
faith, and the prevailing of our doubts, displease our Lord Jesus, for
there is no good reason why Christ's disciples should be of a doubtful
mind. Even in a stormy day he is to them a very present help. None but
the world's Creator could multiply the loaves, none but its Governor
could tread upon the waters of the sea: the disciples yield to the
evidence, and confess their faith. They were suitably affected, and
worshipped Christ. He that comes to God, must believe; and he that
believes in God, will come, [Heb 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006).

[Matthew 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 14:34</span></span>

Whithersoever Christ went, he was doing good. They brought unto him all
that were diseased. They came humbly beseeching him to help them. The
experiences of others may direct and encourage us in seeking for Christ.
As many as touched, were made perfectly whole. Those whom Christ heals,
he heals perfectly. Were men more acquainted with Christ, and with the
diseased state of their souls, they would flock to receive his healing
influences. The healing virtue was not in the finger, but in their
faith; or rather, it was in Christ, whom their faith took hold upon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 15](mat015)

</div>
