<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat012)  [Next](mat014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 13:0</span></span>

(v. 1-23) The parable of the sower.

([Mat 13:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024); [Mat
13:36-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036)) The parable of the tares.

([Mat 13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)) The parables of the
mustard-seed and the leaven.

([Mat 13:44-52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)) The parables of the
hidden treasure, the pearl of great price, the net cast into the sea,
and the householder.

([Mat 13:53-58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053)) Jesus is again
rejected at Nazareth.

[Matthew 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 13:1</span></span>

Jesus entered into a boat that he might be the less pressed, and be the
better heard by the people. By this he teaches us in the outward
circumstances of worship not to covet that which is stately, but to make
the best of the conveniences God in his providence allots to us. Christ
taught in parables. Thereby the things of God were made more plain and
easy to those willing to be taught, and at the same time more difficult
and obscure to those who were willingly ignorant. The parable of the
sower is plain. The seed sown is the word of God. The sower is our Lord
Jesus Christ, by himself, or by his ministers. Preaching to a multitude
is sowing the corn; we know not where it will light. Some sort of
ground, though we take ever so much pains with it, brings forth no fruit
to purpose, while the good soil brings forth plentifully. So it is with
the hearts of men, whose different characters are here described by four
sorts of ground. Careless, trifling hearers, are an easy prey to Satan;
who, as he is the great murderer of souls, so he is the great thief of
sermons, and will be sure to rob us of the word, if we take not care to
keep it. Hypocrites, like the stony ground, often get the start of true
Christians in the shows of profession. Many are glad to hear a good
sermon, who do not profit by it. They are told of free salvation, of the
believer's privileges, and the happiness of heaven; and, without any
change of heart, without any abiding conviction of their own depravity,
their need of a Saviour, or the excellence of holiness, they soon
profess an unwarranted assurance. But when some heavy trial threatens
them, or some sinful advantage may be had, they give up or disguise
their profession, or turn to some easier system. Worldly cares are fitly
compared to thorns, for they came in with sin, and are a fruit of the
curse; they are good in their place to stop a gap, but a man must be
well armed that has much to do with them; they are entangling, vexing,
scratching, and their end is to be burned, [Heb
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008). Worldly cares are great
hinderances to our profiting by the word of God. The deceitfulness of
riches does the mischief; they cannot be said to deceive us unless we
put our trust in them, then they choke the good seed. What distinguished
the good ground was fruitfulness. By this true Christians are
distinguished from hypocrites. Christ does not say that this good ground
has no stones in it, or no thorns; but none that could hinder its
fruitfulness. All are not alike; we should aim at the highest, to bring
forth most fruit. The sense of hearing cannot be better employed than in
hearing God's word; and let us look to ourselves that we may know what
sort of hearers we are.

[Matthew 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 13:24</span></span>

(also [Mat 13:36-43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036)). This parable
represents the present and future state of the gospel church; Christ's
care of it, the devil's enmity against it, the mixture there is in it of
good and bad in this world, and the separation between them in the other
world. So prone is fallen man to sin, that if the enemy sow the tares,
he may go his way, they will spring up, and do hurt; whereas, when good
seed is sown, it must be tended, watered, and fenced. The servants
complained to their master; Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy
field? No doubt he did; whatever is amiss in the church, we are sure it
is not from Christ. Though gross transgressors, and such as openly
oppose the gospel, ought to be separated from the society of the
faithful, yet no human skill can make an exact separation. Those who
oppose must not be cut off, but instructed, and that with meekness. And
though good and bad are together in this world, yet at the great day
they shall be parted; then the righteous and the wicked shall be plainly
known; here sometimes it is hard to distinguish between them. Let us,
knowing the terrors of the Lord, not do iniquity. At death, believers
shall shine forth to themselves; at the great day they shall shine forth
before all the world. They shall shine by reflection, with light
borrowed from the Fountain of light. Their sanctification will be made
perfect, and their justification published. May we be found of that
happy number.

[Matthew 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 13:31</span></span>

The scope of the parable of the seed sown, is to show that the
beginnings of the gospel would be small, but its latter end would
greatly increase; in this way the work of grace in the heart, the
kingdom of God within us, would be carried on. In the soul where grace
truly is, it will grow really; though perhaps at first not to be
discerned, it will at last come to great strength and usefulness. The
preaching of the gospel works like leaven in the hearts of those who
receive it. The leaven works certainly, so does the word, yet gradually.
It works silently, and without being seen, [Mar
4:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#026), yet strongly; without noise,
for so is the way of the Spirit, but without fail. Thus it was in the
world. The apostles, by preaching the gospel, hid a handful of leaven in
the great mass of mankind. It was made powerful by the Spirit of the
Lord of hosts, who works, and none can hinder. Thus it is in the heart.
When the gospel comes into the soul, it works a thorough change; it
spreads itself into all the powers and faculties of the soul, and alters
the property even of the members of the body, [Rom
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013). From these parables we are
taught to expect a gradual progress; therefore let us inquire, Are we
growing in grace? and in holy principles and habits?

[Matthew 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 13:36</span></span>

See note on [Mat 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024).

[Matthew 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 13:44</span></span>

Here are four parables. 1. That of the treasure hid in the field. Many
slight the gospel, because they look only upon the surface of the field.
But all who search the Scriptures, so as in them to find Christ and
eternal life, [Joh 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039), will discover
such treasure in this field as makes it unspeakably valuable; they make
it their own upon any terms. Though nothing can be given as a price for
this salvation, yet much must be given up for the sake of it. 2. All the
children of men are busy; one would be rich, another would be
honourable, another would be learned; but most are deceived, and take up
with counterfeits for pearls. Jesus Christ is a Pearl of great price; in
having him, we have enough to make us happy here and for ever. A man may
buy gold too dear, but not this Pearl of great price. When the convinced
sinner sees Christ as the gracious Saviour, all things else become
worthless to his thoughts. 3. The world is a vast sea, and men, in their
natural state, are like the fishes. Preaching the gospel is casting a
net into this sea, to catch something out of it, for His glory who has
the sovereignty of this sea. Hypocrites and true Christians shall be
parted: miserable is the condition of those that shall then be cast
away. 4. A skilful, faithful minister of the gospel, is a scribe, well
versed in the things of the gospel, and able to teach them. Christ
compares him to a good householder, who brings forth fruits of last
year's growth and this year's gathering, abundance and variety, to
entertain his friends. Old experiences and new observations, all have
their use. Our place is at Christ's feet, and we must daily learn old
lessons over again, and new ones also.

[Matthew 13:53](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">mat 13:53</span></span>

Christ repeats his offer to those who have repulsed them. They upbraid
him, Is not this the carpenter's son? Yes, it is true he was reputed to
be so; and no disgrace to be the son of an honest tradesman; they should
have respected him the more because he was one of themselves, but
therefore they despised him. He did not many mighty works there, because
of their unbelief. Unbelief is the great hinderance to Christ's favours.
Let us keep faithful to him as the Saviour who has made our peace with
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 14](mat014)

</div>
