<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat020)  [Next](mat022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 21:0</span></span>

([Mat 21:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001).md) Christ enters
Jerusalem.

([Mat 21:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012).md) He drives out those
who profaned the temple.

([Mat 21:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#018).md) The barren fig-tree
cursed.

([Mat 21:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023).md) Jesus' discourse in
the temple.

([Mat 21:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#028).md) The parable of the two
sons.

([Mat 21:33-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033).md) The parable of the
wicked husbandmen.

[Matthew 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 21:1</span></span>

This coming of Christ was described by the prophet Zechariah, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md). When Christ would appear in his
glory, it is in his meekness, not in his majesty, in mercy to work
salvation. As meekness and outward poverty were fully seen in Zion's
King, and marked his triumphal entrance to Jerusalem, how wrong
covetousness, ambition, and the pride of life must be in Zion's
citizens! They brought the ass, but Jesus did not use it without the
owner's consent. The trappings were such as came to hand. We must not
think the clothes on our backs too dear to part with for the service of
Christ. The chief priests and the elders afterwards joined with the
multitude that abused him upon the cross; but none of them joined the
multitude that did him honour. Those that take Christ for their King,
must lay their all under his feet. Hosanna signifies, Save now, we
beseech thee! Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord! But of
how little value is the applause of the people! The changing multitude
join the cry of the day, whether it be Hosanna, or Crucify him.
Multitudes often seem to approve the gospel, but few become consistent
disciples. When Jesus was come into Jerusalem all the city was moved;
some perhaps were moved with joy, who waited for the Consolation of
Israel; others, of the Pharisees, were moved with envy. So various are
the motions in the minds of men upon the approach of Christ's kingdom.

[Matthew 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 21:12</span></span>

Christ found some of the courts of the temple turned into a market for
cattle and things used in the sacrifices, and partly occupied by the
money-changers. Our Lord drove them from the place, as he had done at
his entering upon his ministry, [Joh
2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013.md). His works testified of him
more than the hosannas; and his healing in the temple was the fulfilling
the promise, that the glory of the latter house should be greater than
the glory of the former. If Christ came now into many parts of his
visible church, how many secret evils he would discover and cleanse! And
how many things daily practised under the cloak of religion, would he
show to be more suitable to a den of thieves than to a house of prayer!

[Matthew 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 21:18</span></span>

This cursing of the barren fig-tree represents the state of hypocrites
in general, and so teaches us that Christ looks for the power of
religion in those who profess it, and the savour of it from those that
have the show of it. His just expectations from flourishing professors
are often disappointed; he comes to many, seeking fruit, and finds
leaves only. A false profession commonly withers in this world, and it
is the effect of Christ's curse. The fig-tree that had no fruit, soon
lost its leaves. This represents the state of the nation and people of
the Jews in particular. Our Lord Jesus found among them nothing but
leaves. And after they rejected Christ, blindness and hardness grew upon
them, till they were undone, and their place and nation rooted up. The
Lord was righteous in it. Let us greatly fear the doom denounced on the
barren fig-tree.

[Matthew 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 21:23</span></span>

As our Lord now openly appeared as the Messiah, the chief priests and
scribes were much offended, especially because he exposed and removed
the abuses they encouraged. Our Lord asked what they thought of John's
ministry and baptism. Many are more afraid of the shame of lying than of
the sin, and therefore scruple not to speak what they know to be false,
as to their own thoughts, affections, and intentions, or their
remembering and forgetting. Our Lord refused to answer their inquiry. It
is best to shun needless disputes with wicked opposers.

[Matthew 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 21:28</span></span>

Parables which give reproof, speak plainly to the offenders, and judge
them out of their own mouths. The parable of the two sons sent to work
in the vineyard, is to show that those who knew not John's baptism to be
of God, were shamed by those who knew it, and owned it. The whole human
race are like children whom the Lord has brought up, but they have
rebelled against him, only some are more plausible in their disobedience
than others. And it often happens, that the daring rebel is brought to
repentance and becomes the Lord's servant, while the formalist grows
hardened in pride and enmity.

[Matthew 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 21:33</span></span>

This parable plainly sets forth the sin and ruin of the Jewish nation;
and what is spoken to convict them, is spoken to caution all that enjoy
the privileges of the outward church. As men treat God's people, they
would treat Christ himself, if he were with them. How can we, if
faithful to his cause, expect a favourable reception from a wicked
world, or from ungodly professors of Christianity! And let us ask
ourselves, whether we who have the vineyard and all its advantages,
render fruits in due season, as a people, as a family, or as separate
persons. Our Saviour, in his question, declares that the Lord of the
vineyard will come, and when he comes he will surely destroy the wicked.
The chief priests and the elders were the builders, and they would not
admit his doctrine or laws; they threw him aside as a despised stone.
But he who was rejected by the Jews, was embraced by the Gentiles.
Christ knows who will bring forth gospel fruits in the use of gospel
means. The unbelief of sinners will be their ruin. But God has many ways
of restraining the remainders of wrath, as he has of making that which
breaks out redound to his praise. May Christ become more and more
precious to our souls, as the firm Foundation and Cornerstone of his
church. May we be willing to follow him, though despised and hated for
his sake.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 22](mat022.md)

</div>
