<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat018)  [Next](mat020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 19:0</span></span>

([Mat 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001), [Mat
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#002)) Jesus enters Judea.

([Mat 19:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003)) The Pharisees' question
about divorces.

([Mat 19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013)) Young children brought
to Jesus.

([Mat 19:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016)) The rich young man's
inquiry.

([Mat 19:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023)) The recompence of
Christ's followers.

[Matthew 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 19:1</span></span>

Great multitudes followed Christ. When Christ departs, it is best for us
to follow him. They found him as able and ready to help elsewhere, as he
had been in Galilee; wherever the Sun of Righteousness arose, it was
with healing in his wings.

[Matthew 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 19:3</span></span>

The Pharisees were desirous of drawing something from Jesus which they
might represent as contrary to the law of Moses. Cases about marriage
have been numerous, and sometimes perplexed; made so, not by the law of
God, but by the lusts and follies of men; and often people fix what they
will do, before they ask for advice. Jesus replied by asking whether
they had not read the account of the creation, and the first example of
marriage; thus pointing out that every departure therefrom was wrong.
That condition is best for us, and to be chosen and kept to accordingly,
which is best for our souls, and tends most to prepare us for, and
preserve us to, the kingdom of heaven. When the gospel is really
embraced, it makes men kind relatives and faithful friends; it teaches
them to bear the burdens, and to bear with the infirmities of those with
whom they are connected, to consider their peace and happiness more than
their own. As to ungodly persons, it is proper that they should be
restrained by laws, from breaking the peace of society. And we learn
that the married state should be entered upon with great seriousness and
earnest prayer.

[Matthew 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 19:13</span></span>

It is well when we come to Christ ourselves, and bring our children.
Little children may be brought to Christ as needing, and being capable
of receiving blessings from him, and having an interest in his
intercession. We can but beg a blessing for them: Christ only can
command the blessing. It is well for us, that Christ has more love and
tenderness in him than the best of his disciples have. And let us learn
of him not to discountenance any willing, well-meaning souls, in their
seeking after Christ, though they are but weak. Those who are given to
Christ, as part of his purchase, he will in no wise cast out. Therefore
he takes it ill of all who forbid, and try to shut out those whom he has
received. And all Christians should bring their children to the Saviour
that he may bless them with spiritual blessings.

[Matthew 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 19:16</span></span>

Christ knew that covetousness was the sin which most easily beset this
young man; though he had got honestly what he possessed, yet he could
not cheerfully part with it, and by this his want of sincerity was
shown. Christ's promises make his precepts easy, and his yoke pleasant
and very comfortable; yet this promise was as much a trial of the young
man's faith, as the precept was of his charity and contempt of the
world. It is required of us in following Christ, that we duly attend his
ordinances, strictly follow his pattern, and cheerfully submit to his
disposals; and this from love to him, and in dependence on him. To sell
all, and give to the poor, will not serve, but we are to follow Christ.
The gospel is the only remedy for lost sinners. Many abstain from gross
vices who do not attend to their obligations to God. Thousands of
instances of disobedience in thought, word, and deed, are marked against
them in the book of God. Thus numbers forsake Christ, loving this
present world: they feel convictions and desires, but they depart
sorrowful, perhaps trembling. It behoves us to try ourselves in these
matters, for the Lord will try us.

[Matthew 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 19:23</span></span>

Though Christ spoke so strongly, few that have riches do not trust in
them. How few that are poor are not tempted to envy! But men's
earnestness in this matter is like their toiling to build a high wall to
shut themselves and their children out of heaven. It should be
satisfaction to those who are in a low condition, that they are not
exposed to the temptations of a high and prosperous condition. If they
live more hardly in this world than the rich, yet, if they get more
easily to a better world, they have no reason to complain. Christ's
words show that it is hard for a rich man to be a good Christian, and to
be saved. The way to heaven is a narrow way to all, and the gate that
leads into it, a strait gate; particularly so to rich people. More
duties are expected from them than from others, and more sins easily
beset them. It is hard not to be charmed with a smiling world. Rich
people have a great account to make up for their opportunities above
others. It is utterly impossible for a man that sets his heart upon his
riches, to get to heaven. Christ used an expression, denoting a
difficulty altogether unconquerable by the power of man. Nothing less
than the almighty grace of God will enable a rich man to get over this
difficulty. Who then can be saved? If riches hinder rich people, are not
pride and sinful lusts found in those not rich, and as dangerous to
them? Who can be saved? say the disciples. None, saith Christ, by any
created power. The beginning, progress, and perfecting the work of
salvation, depend wholly on the almighty power of God, to which all
things are possible. Not that rich people can be saved in their
worldliness, but that they should be saved from it. Peter said, We have
forsaken all. Alas! it was but a poor all, only a few boats and nets;
yet observe how Peter speaks, as if it had been some mighty thing. We
are too apt to make the most of our services and sufferings, our
expenses and losses, for Christ. However, Christ does not upbraid them;
though it was but little that they had forsaken, yet it was their all,
and as dear to them as if it had been more. Christ took it kindly that
they left it to follow him; he accepts according to what a man hath. Our
Lord's promise to the apostles is, that when the Son of man shall sit on
the throne of his glory, he will make all things new, and they shall sit
with him in judgement on those who will be judged according to their
doctrine. This sets forth the honour, dignity, and authority of their
office and ministry. Our Lord added, that every one who had forsaken
possessions or comforts, for his sake and the gospel, would be
recompensed at last. May God give us faith to rest our hope on this his
promise; then we shall be ready for every service or sacrifice. Our
Saviour, in the last verse, does away a mistake of some. The heavenly
inheritance is not given as earthly ones are, but according to God's
pleasure. Let us not trust in promising appearances or outward
profession. Others may, for aught we know, become eminent in faith and
holiness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 20](mat020)

</div>
