<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat015)  [Next](mat017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 16:0</span></span>

([Mat 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)) The Pharisees and
Sadducees ask a sign.

([Mat 16:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#005)) Jesus cautions against
the doctrine of the Pharisees.

([Mat 16:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)) Peter's testimony that
Jesus was the Christ.

([Mat 16:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)) Christ foretells his
sufferings, and rebukes Peter.

([Mat 16:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)) The necessity of
self-denial.

[Matthew 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 16:1</span></span>

The Pharisees and Sadducees were opposed to each other in principles and
in conduct; yet they joined against Christ. But they desired a sign of
their own choosing: they despised those signs which relieved the
necessity of the sick and sorrowful, and called for something else which
would gratify the curiosity of the proud. It is great hypocrisy, when we
slight the signs of God's ordaining, to seek for signs of our own
devising.

[Matthew 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 16:5</span></span>

Christ speaks of spiritual things under a similitude, and the disciples
misunderstand him of carnal things. He took it ill that they should
think him as thoughtful about bread as they were; that they should be so
little acquainted with his way of preaching. Then understood they what
he meant. Christ teaches by the Spirit of wisdom in the heart, opening
the understanding to the Spirit of revelation in the word.

[Matthew 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 16:13</span></span>

Peter, for himself and his brethren, said that they were assured of our
Lord's being the promised Messiah, the Son of the living God. This
showed that they believed Jesus to be more than man. Our Lord declared
Peter to be blessed, as the teaching of God made him differ from his
unbelieving countrymen. Christ added that he had named him Peter, in
allusion to his stability or firmness in professing the truth. The word
translated "rock," is not the same word as Peter, but is of a similar
meaning. Nothing can be more wrong than to suppose that Christ meant the
person of Peter was the rock. Without doubt Christ himself is the Rock,
the tried foundation of the church; and woe to him that attempts to lay
any other! Peter's confession is this rock as to doctrine. If Jesus be
not the Christ, those that own him are not of the church, but deceivers
and deceived. Our Lord next declared the authority with which Peter
would be invested. He spoke in the name of his brethren, and this
related to them as well as to him. They had no certain knowledge of the
characters of men, and were liable to mistakes and sins in their own
conduct; but they were kept from error in stating the way of acceptance
and salvation, the rule of obedience, the believer's character and
experience, and the final doom of unbelievers and hypocrites. In such
matters their decision was right, and it was confirmed in heaven. But
all pretensions of any man, either to absolve or retain men's sins, are
blasphemous and absurd. None can forgive sins but God only. And this
binding and loosing, in the common language of the Jews, signified to
forbid and to allow, or to teach what is lawful or unlawful.

[Matthew 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 16:21</span></span>

Christ reveals his mind to his people gradually. From that time, when
the apostles had made the full confession of Christ, that he was the Son
of God, he began to show them of his sufferings. He spake this to set
right the mistakes of his disciples about the outward pomp and power of
his kingdom. Those that follow Christ, must not expect great or high
things in this world. Peter would have Christ to dread suffering as much
as he did; but we mistake, if we measure Christ's love and patience by
our own. We do not read of any thing said or done by any of his
disciples, at any time, that Christ resented so much as this. Whoever
takes us from that which is good, and would make us fear to do too much
for God, speaks Satan's language. Whatever appears to be a temptation to
sin, must be resisted with abhorrence, and not be parleyed with. Those
that decline suffering for Christ, savour more of the things of man than
of the things of God.

[Matthew 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 16:24</span></span>

A true disciple of Christ is one that does follow him in duty, and shall
follow him to glory. He is one that walks in the same way Christ walked
in, is led by his Spirit, and treads in his steps, whithersoever he
goes. "Let him deny himself." If self-denial be a hard lesson, it is no
more than what our Master learned and practised, to redeem us, and to
teach us. "Let him take up his cross." The cross is here put for every
trouble that befalls us. We are apt to think we could bear another's
cross better than our own; but that is best which is appointed us, and
we ought to make the best of it. We must not by our rashness and folly
pull crosses down upon our own heads, but must take them up when they
are in our way. If any man will have the name and credit of a disciple,
let him follow Christ in the work and duty of a disciple. If all worldly
things are worthless when compared with the life of the body, how
forcible the same argument with respect to the soul and its state of
never-ending happiness or misery! Thousands lose their souls for the
most trifling gain, or the most worthless indulgence, nay, often from
mere sloth and negligence. Whatever is the object for which men forsake
Christ, that is the price at which Satan buys their souls. Yet one soul
is worth more than all the world. This is Christ's judgment upon the
matter; he knew the price of souls, for he redeemed them; nor would he
underrate the world, for he made it. The dying transgressor cannot
purchase one hour's respite to seek mercy for his perishing soul. Let us
then learn rightly to value our souls, and Christ as the only Saviour of
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 17](mat017)

</div>
