<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Micah Index](mic.md)  
  [Previous](mic006)  [Next](nah000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001.md)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 7:0</span></span>

([Mic 7:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001).md) The general prevalence of
wickedness.

([Mic 7:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008).md) Reliance on God, and
triumph over enemies.

([Mic 7:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014).md) Promises and
encouragements for Israel.

[Micah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 7:1</span></span>

The prophet bemoans himself that he lived among a people ripening apace
for ruin, in which many good persons would suffer. Men had no comfort,
no satisfaction in their own families or in their nearest relations.
Contempt and violation of domestic duties are a sad symptom of universal
corruption. Those are never likely to come to good who are undutiful to
their parents. The prophet saw no safety or comfort but in looking to
the Lord, and waiting on God his salvation. When under trials, we should
look continually to our Divine Redeemer, that we may have strength and
grace to trust in him, and to be examples to those around us.

[Micah 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 7:8</span></span>

Those truly penitent for sin, will see great reason to be patient under
affliction. When we complain to the Lord of the badness of the times, we
ought to complain against ourselves for the badness of our hearts. We
must depend upon God to work deliverance for us in due time. We must not
only look to him, but look for him. In our greatest distresses, we shall
see no reason to despair of salvation, if by faith we look to the Lord
as the God of our salvation. Though enemies triumph and insult, they
shall be silenced and put to shame. Though Zion's walls may long be in
ruins, there will come a day when they shall be repaired. Israel shall
come from all the remote parts, not turning back for discouragements.
Though our enemies may seem to prevail against us, and to rejoice over
us, we should not despond. Though cast down, we are not destroyed; we
may join hope in God's mercy, with submission to his correction. No
hinderances can prevent the favours the Lord intends for his church.

[Micah 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 7:14</span></span>

When God is about to deliver his people, he stirs up their friends to
pray for them. Apply spiritually the prophet's prayer to Christ, to take
care of his church, as the great Shepherd of the sheep, and to go before
them, while they are here in this world as in a wood, in this world but
not of it. God promises in answer to this prayer, he will do that for
them which shall be repeating the miracles of former ages. As their sin
brought them into bondage, so God's pardoning their sin brought them
out. All who find pardoning mercy, cannot but wonder at that mercy; we
have reason to stand amazed, if we know what it is. When the Lord takes
away the guilt of sin, that it may not condemn us, he will break the
power of sin, that it may not have dominion over us. If left to
ourselves, our sins will be too hard for us; but God's grace shall be
sufficient to subdue them, so that they shall not rule us, and then they
shall not ruin us. When God forgives sin, he takes care that it never
shall be remembered any more against the sinner. He casts their sins
into the sea; not near the shore-side, where they may appear again, but
into the depth of the sea, never to rise again. All their sins shall be
cast there, for when God forgives sin, he forgives all. He will perfect
that which concerns us, and with this good work will do all for us which
our case requires, and which he has promised. These engagements relate
to Christ, and the success of the gospel to the end of time, the future
restoration of Israel, and the final prevailing of true religion in all
lands. The Lord will perform his truth and mercy, not one jot or tittle
of it shall fall to the ground: faithful is He that has promised, who
also will do it. Let us remember that the Lord has given the security of
his covenant, for strong consolation to all who flee for refuge to lay
hold on the hope set before them in Christ Jesus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Introduction](nah000.md)

</div>
