<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic005)  [Next](mic007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 6:0</span></span>

([Mic 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)) God's controversy with
Israel.

([Mic 6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006)) The duties God requires.

([Mic 6:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)) The wickedness of
Israel.

[Micah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 6:1</span></span>

The people are called upon to declare why they were weary of God's
worship, and prone to idolatry. Sin causes the controversy between God
and man. God reasons with us, to teach us to reason with ourselves. Let
them remember God's many favours to them and their fathers, and compare
with them their unworthy, ungrateful conduct toward him.

[Micah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 6:6</span></span>

These verses seem to contain the substance of Balak's consultation with
Balaam how to obtain the favour of Israel's God. Deep conviction of
guilt and wrath will put men upon careful inquiries after peace and
pardon, and then there begins to be some ground for hope of them. In
order to God's being pleased with us, our care must be for an interest
in the atonement of Christ, and that the sin by which we displease him
may be taken away. What will be a satisfaction to God's justice? In
whose name must we come, as we have nothing to plead as our own? In what
righteousness shall we appear before him? The proposals betray
ignorance, though they show zeal. They offer that which is very rich and
costly. Those who are fully convinced of sin, and of their misery and
danger by reason of it, would give all the world, if they had it, for
peace and pardon. Yet they do not offer aright. The sacrifices had value
from their reference to Christ; it was impossible that the blood of
bulls and goats should take away sin. And all proposals of peace, except
those according to the gospel, are absurd. They could not answer the
demands of Divine justice, nor satisfy the wrong done to the honour of
God by sin, nor would they serve at all in place of holiness of the
heart and reformation of the life. Men will part with any thing rather
than their sins; but they part with nothing so as to be accepted of God,
unless they do part with their sins. Moral duties are commanded because
they are good for man. In keeping God's commandments there is a great
reward, as well as after keeping them. God has not only made it known,
but made it plain. The good which God requires of us is, not the paying
a price for the pardon of sin and acceptance with God, but love to
himself; and what is there unreasonable, or hard, in this? Every thought
within us must be brought down, to be brought into obedience to God, if
we would walk comfortably with him. We must do this as penitent sinners,
in dependence on the Redeemer and his atonement. Blessed be the Lord
that he is ever ready to give his grace to the humble, waiting penitent.

[Micah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 6:9</span></span>

God, having showed how necessary it was that they should do justly, here
shows how plain it was that they had done unjustly. This voice of the
Lord says to all, Hear the rod when it is coming, before you see it, and
feel it. Hear the rod when it is come, and you are sensible of the
smart; hear what counsels, what cautions it speaks. The voice of God is
to be heard in the rod of God. Those who are dishonest in their dealings
shall never be reckoned pure, whatever shows of devotion they may make.
What is got by fraud and oppression, cannot be kept or enjoyed with
satisfaction. What we hold closest we commonly lose soonest. Sin is a
root of bitterness, soon planted, but not soon plucked up again. Their
being the people of God in name and profession, while they kept
themselves in his love, was an honour to them; but now, being
backsliders, their having been once the people of God turns to their
reproach.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 7](mic007)

</div>
