<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic004)  [Next](mic006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 5:0</span></span>

([Mic 5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)) The birth of Christ and
conversion of the Gentiles.

([Mic 5:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)) The triumphs of Israel.

[Micah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 5:1</span></span>

Having showed how low the house of David would be brought, a prediction
of the Messiah and his kingdom is added to encourage the faith of God's
people. His existence from eternity as God, and his office as Mediator,
are noticed. Here is foretold that Bethlehem should be his birthplace.
Hence it was universally known among the Jews, [Mat
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005). Christ's government shall be very
happy for his subjects; they shall be safe and easy. Under the shadow of
protection from the Assyrians, is a promise of protection to the gospel
church and all believers, from the designs and attempts of the powers of
darkness. Christ is our Peace as a Priest, making atonement for sin, and
reconciling us to God; and he is our Peace as a King, conquering our
enemies: hence our souls may dwell at ease in him. Christ will find
instruments to protect and deliver. Those that threaten ruin to the
church of God, soon bring ruin on themselves. This may include the past
powerful effects of the preached gospel, its future spread, and the ruin
of all antichristian powers. This is, perhaps, the most important single
prophecy in the Old Testament: it respects the personal character of the
Messiah, and the discoveries of himself to the world. It distinguishes
his human birth from his existing from eternity; it foretells the
rejection of the Israelites and Jews for a season, their final
restoration, and the universal peace to prevail through the whole earth
in the latter days. In the mean time let us trust our Shepherd's care
and power. If he permits the assault of our enemies, he will supply
helpers and assistance for us.

[Micah 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 5:7</span></span>

The remnant of Israel, converted to Christ in the primitive times, were
among many nations as the drops of dew, and were made instruments in
calling a large increase of spiritual worshippers. But to those who
neglected or opposed this salvation, they would, as lions, cause terror,
their doctrine condemning them. The Lord also declares that he would
cause not only the reformation of the Jews, but the purification of the
Christian church. In like manner shall we be assured of victory in our
personal conflicts, as we simply depend upon the Lord our salvation,
worship him, and serve him with diligence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 6](mic006)

</div>
