<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nahum Index](nah.md)  
  [Previous](nah000)  [Next](nah002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001.md)

([Nah 1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001).md) The justice and power of
the Lord.

([Nah 1:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009).md) The overthrow of the
Assyrians.

[Nahum 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 1:1</span></span>

About a hundred years before, at Jonah's preaching, the Ninevites
repented, and were spared, yet, soon after, they became worse than ever.
Nineveh knows not that God who contends with her, but is told what a God
he is. It is good for all to mix faith with what is here said concerning
Him, which speaks great terror to the wicked, and comfort to believers.
Let each take his portion from it: let sinners read it and tremble; and
let saints read it and triumph. The anger of the Lord is contrasted with
his goodness to his people. Perhaps they are obscure and little regarded
in the world, but the Lord knows them. The Scripture character of
Jehovah agrees not with the views of proud reasoners. The God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ is slow to wrath and ready to forgive, but he
will by no means acquit the wicked; and there is tribulation and anguish
for every soul that doeth evil: but who duly regards the power of his
wrath?

[Nahum 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">nah 1:9</span></span>

There is a great deal plotted against the Lord by the gates of hell, and
against his kingdom in the world; but it will prove in vain. With some
sinners God makes quick despatch; and one way or other, he will make an
utter end of all his enemies. Though they are quiet, and many very
secure, and not in fear, they shall be cut down as grass and corn, when
the destroying angel passes through. God would hereby work great
deliverance for his own people. But those who make themselves vile by
scandalous sins, God will make vile by shameful punishments. The tidings
of this great deliverance shall be welcomed with abundant joy. These
words are applied to the great redemption wrought out by our Lord Jesus
and the everlasting gospel, [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015.md). Christ's ministers are
messengers of good tidings, that preach peace by Jesus Christ. How
welcome to those who see their misery and danger by sin! And the promise
they made in the day of trouble must be made good. Let us be thankful
for God's ordinances, and gladly attend them. Let us look forward with
cheerful hope to a world where the wicked never can enter, and sin and
temptation will no more be known.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 2](nah002.md)

</div>
