<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh007)  [Next](neh009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 8:0</span></span>

([Neh 8:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001).md) The reading and
expounding the law.

([Neh 8:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009).md) The people called upon
to be joyful.

([Neh 8:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013).md) The feast of
tabernacles, The joy of the people.

[Nehemiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 8:1</span></span>

Sacrifices were to be offered only at the door of the temple; but
praying and preaching were, and are, services of religion, as acceptably
performed in one place as in another. Masters of families should bring
their families with them to the public worship of God. Women and
children have souls to save, and are therefore to acquaint themselves
with the word of God, and to attend on the means of grace. Little ones,
as they come to reason, must be trained up in religion. Ministers when
they go to the pulpit, should take their Bibles with them; Ezra did so.
Thence they must fetch their knowledge; according to that rule they must
speak, and must show that they do so. Reading the Scriptures in
religious assemblies is an ordinance of God, whereby he is honoured, and
his church edified. Those who hear the word, should understand it, else
it is to them but an empty sound of words. It is therefore required of
teachers that they explain the word, and give the sense of it. Reading
is good, and preaching is good, but expounding makes reading the better
understood, and preaching the more convincing. It has pleased God in
almost every age of the church to raise up, not only those who have
preached the gospel, but also those who have given their views of Divine
truth in writing; and though many who have attempted to explain
Scripture, have darkened counsel by words without knowledge, yet the
labours of others are of excellent use. All that we hear must, however,
be brought to the test of Scripture. They heard readily, and minded
every word. The word of God demands attention. If through carelessness
we let much slip in hearing, there is danger that through forgetfulness
we shall let all slip after hearing.

[Nehemiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 8:9</span></span>

It was a good sign that their hearts were tender, when they heard the
words of the law. The people were to send portions to those for whom
nothing was prepared. It is the duty of a religious feast, as well as of
a religious fast, to draw out the soul to the hungry; God's bounty
should make us bountiful. We must not only give to those that offer
themselves, but send to those out of sight. Their strength consisted in
joy in the Lord. The better we understand God's word, the more comfort
we find in it; the darkness of trouble arises from the darkness of
ignorance.

[Nehemiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 8:13</span></span>

They found written in the law about the feast of tabernacles. Those who
diligently search the Scriptures, find things written there which they
have forgotten. This feast of tabernacles was a representation of the
believer's tabernacle state in this world, and a type of the holy joy of
the gospel church. The conversion of the nations to the faith of Christ,
is foretold under the figure of this feast, [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016.md). True religion will render us
strangers and pilgrims upon earth. We read and hear the word acceptably
and profitably, when we do according to what is written therein; when
what appears to be our duty is revived, after it has been neglected.
They minded the substance; else the ceremony had been of no use. They
did it, rejoicing in God and his goodness. These are the means which the
Spirit of God crowns with success, in bringing the hearts of sinners to
tremble and to become humbled before God. But those are enemies to their
own growth in holiness, who always indulge sorrow, even for sin, and put
away from them the consolations tendered by the word and Spirit of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 9](neh009.md)

</div>
