<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh.md)  
  [Previous](neh003)  [Next](neh005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001.md)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 4:0</span></span>

([Neh 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001).md) Opposition of Sanballat
and others.

([Neh 4:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007).md) The designs of the
adversaries.

([Neh 4:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016).md) Nehemiah's precautions.

[Nehemiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 4:1</span></span>

Many a good work has been looked upon with contempt by proud and haughty
scorners. Those who disagree in almost every thing, will unite in
persecution. Nehemiah did not answer these fools according to their
folly, but looked up to God by prayer. God's people have often been a
despised people, but he hears all the slights that are put upon them,
and it is their comfort that he does so. Nehemiah had reason to think
that the hearts of those sinners were desperately hardened, else he
would not have prayed that their sins might never be blotted out. Good
work goes on well, when people have a mind to it. The reproaches of
enemies should quicken us to our duty, not drive us from it.

[Nehemiah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 4:7</span></span>

The hindering good work is what bad men aim at, and promise themselves
success in; but good work is God's work, and it shall prosper. God has
many ways of bringing to light, and so of bringing to nought, the
devices and designs of his church's enemies. If our enemies cannot
frighten us from duty, or deceive us into sin, they cannot hurt us.
Nehemiah put himself and his cause under the Divine protection. It was
the way of this good man, and should be our way. All his cares, all his
griefs, all his fears, he spread before God. Before he used any means,
he made his prayer to God. Having prayed, he set a watch against the
enemy. If we think to secure ourselves by prayer, without watchfulness,
we are slothful, and tempt God; if by watchfulness, without prayer, we
are proud, and slight God: either way, we forfeit his protection. God's
care of our safety, should engage and encourage us to go on with vigour
in our duty. As soon as a danger is over, let us return to our work, and
trust God another time.

[Nehemiah 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 4:16</span></span>

We must watch always against spiritual enemies, and not expect that our
warfare will be over till our work is ended. The word of God is the
sword of the Spirit, which we ought to have always at hand, and never to
have to seek for it, either in our labours, or in our conflicts, as
Christians. Every true Christian is both a labourer and a soldier,
working with one hand, and fighting with the other. Good work is likely
to go on with success, when those who labour in it, make a business of
it. And Satan fears to assault the watchful Christian; or, if attacked,
the Lord fights for him. Thus must we wait to the close of life, never
putting off our armour till our work and warfare are ended; then we
shall be welcomed to the rest and joy of our Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 5](neh005.md)

</div>
