<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh005)  [Next](neh007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 6:0</span></span>

([Neh 6:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001)) Sanballat's plot to
hinder Nehemiah.

([Neh 6:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010)) False prophets try to
frighten Nehemiah.

([Neh 6:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015)) The wall finished,
Treachery of some among the Jews.

[Nehemiah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 6:1</span></span>

Let those who are tempted to idle merry meetings by vain companions,
thus answer the temptation, We have work to do, and must not neglect it.
We must never suffer ourselves to be overcome, by repeated urgency, to
do anything sinful or imprudent; but when attacked with the same
temptation, must resist it with the same reason and resolution. It is
common for that which is desired only by the malicious, to be falsely
represented by them as desired by the many. But Nehemiah knew at what
they aimed, he not only denied that such things were true, but that they
were reported; he was better known than to be thus suspected. We must
never omit any known duty for fear it should be misconstrued; but, while
we keep a good conscience, let us trust God with our good name. God's
people, though loaded with reproach, are not really fallen so low in
reputation as some would have them thought to be. Nehemiah lifted up his
heart to Heaven in a short prayer. When, in our Christian work and
warfare, we enter upon any service or conflict, this is a good prayer, I
have such a duty to do, such a temptation to grapple with; now,
therefore, O God, strengthen my hands. Every temptation to draw us from
duty, should quicken us the more to duty.

[Nehemiah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 6:10</span></span>

The greatest mischief our enemies can do us, is, to frighten us from our
duty, and to lead us to do what is sinful. Let us never decline a good
work, never do a bad one. We ought to try all advice, and to reject what
is contrary to the word of God. Every man should study to be consistent.
Should I, a professed Christian, called to be a saint, a child of God, a
member of Christ, a temple of the Holy Ghost, should I be covetous,
sensual, proud, or envious? Should I yield to impatience, discontent, or
anger? Should I be slothful, unbelieving, or unmerciful? What effects
will such conduct have upon others? All that God has done for us, or by
us, or given to us, should lead us to watchfulness, self-denial, and
diligence. Next to the sinfulness of sin, we should dread the scandal.

[Nehemiah 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 6:15</span></span>

The wall was begun and finished in fifty-two days, though they rested on
the sabbaths. A great deal of work may be done in a little time, if we
set about it in earnest, and keep close to it. See the mischief of
marrying with strangers. When men once became akin to Tobiah, they soon
became sworn to him. A sinful love leads to a sinful league. The enemy
of souls employs many instruments, and forms many projects, to bring
reproach on the active servants of God, or to take them from their work.
But we should follow the example of Him who laid down his life for the
sheep. Those that simply cleave to the Lord and his work will be
supported.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 7](neh007)

</div>
