<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num032)  [Next](num034.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 33:0</span></span>

(v. 1-49) Encampments of the Israelites.

([Num 33:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050).md) The Canaanites to be
destroyed.

[Numbers 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 33:1</span></span>

This is a brief review of the travels of the children of Israel through
the wilderness. It is a memorable history. In their travels towards
Canaan they were continually on the remove. Such is our state in this
world; we have here no continuing city, and all our removes in this
world are but from one part a desert to another. They were led to and
fro, forward and backward, yet were all the while under the direction of
the pillar of cloud and fire. God led them about, yet led them the right
way. The way God takes in bringing his people to himself is always the
best way, though it does not always seem to us the nearest way. Former
events are mentioned. Thus we ought to keep in mind the providences of
God concerning us and families, us and our land, and the many instances
of that Divine care which has led us, and fed us, and kept us all our
days hitherto. Few periods of our lives can be thought upon, without
reminding us of the Lord's goodness, and our own ingratitude and
disobedience: his kindness leaves us without excuse for our sins. We
could not wish to travel over again the stages we have passed, unless we
could hope, by the grace of God, to shun the sins we then committed, and
to embrace such opportunities of doing good as we have let slip. Soon
will our wanderings end, and our eternal state be fixed beyond recall;
how important then is the present moment! Happy are those whom the Lord
now guides with his counsel, and will at length receive to his glory. To
this happiness the gospel calls us. Behold now is the accepted time, now
is the day of salvation. Let sinners seize the opportunity, and flee for
refuge to the hope set before them. Let us redeem our time, to glorify
God and serve our generation; and he will carry us safely through all,
to his eternal kingdom.

[Numbers 33:50](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">num 33:50</span></span>

Now that they were to pass over Jordan, they were entering again into
temptation to follow idols; and they are threatened that, if they spared
either the idols or the idolaters, their sin would certainly be their
punishment. They would foster vipers in their own bosoms. The remnant of
the Canaanites, if they made any peace with them, though but for a time,
would be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides. We must expect
trouble and affliction from whatever sin we indulge; that which we are
willing should tempt us, will vex us. It was intended that the
Canaanites should be put out of the land; but if the Israelites learned
their wicked ways, they also would be put out. Let us hear this and
fear. If we do not drive out sin, sin will drive us out. If we are not
the death of our lusts, our lusts will be the death of our souls.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 34](num034.md)

</div>
