<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num010)  [Next](num012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 11:0</span></span>

([Num 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001).md) The burning at Taberah.

([Num 11:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004).md) The people lust for
flesh, and loathe the manna.

([Num 11:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#010).md) Moses complains of his
charge.

([Num 11:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016).md) Elders appointed to
divide the charge. Flesh meat promised.

([Num 11:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#024).md) The Spirit rests on
the elders.

([Num 11:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031).md) Quails are given.

[Numbers 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 11:1</span></span>

Here is the people's sin; they complained. See the sinfulness of sin,
which takes occasion from the commandment to be provoking. The weakness
of the law discovered sin, but could not destroy it; checked, but could
not conquer it. They complained. Those who are of a discontented spirit,
will always find something to quarrel or fret about, though the
circumstances of their outward condition be ever so favourable. The Lord
heard it, though Moses did not. God knows the secret frettings and
murmurings of the heart, though concealed from men. What he noticed, he
was much displeased with, and he chastised them for this sin. The fire
of their wrath against God burned in their minds; justly did the fire of
God's wrath fasten on their bodies; but God's judgments came on them
gradually, that they might take warning. It appeared that God delights
not in punishing; when he begins, he is soon prevailed with to let it
fall.

[Numbers 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 11:4</span></span>

Man, having forsaken his proper rest, feels uneasy and wretched, though
prosperous. They were weary of the provision God had made for them,
although wholesome food and nourishing. It cost no money or care, and
the labour of gathering it was very little indeed; yet they talked of
Egypt's cheapness, and the fish they ate there freely; as if that cost
them nothing, when they paid dearly for it with hard service! While they
lived on manna, they seemed exempt from the curse sin has brought on
man, that in the sweat of his face he should eat bread; yet they speak
of it with scorn. Peevish, discontented minds will find fault with that
which has no fault in it, but that it is too good for them. Those who
might be happy, often make themselves miserable by discontent. They
could not be satisfied unless they had flesh to eat. It is evidence of
the dominion of the carnal mind, when we want to have the delights and
satisfaction of sense. We should not indulge in any desire which we
cannot in faith turn into prayer, as we cannot when we ask meat for our
lust. What is lawful of itself becomes evil, when God does not allot it
to us, yet we desire it.

[Numbers 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 11:10</span></span>

The provocation was very great; yet Moses expressed himself otherwise
than became him. He undervalued the honour God had put upon him. He
magnified his own performances, while he had the Divine wisdom to direct
him, and Almighty power to dispense rewards and punishments. He speaks
distrustfully of the Divine grace. Had the work been much less he could
not have gone through it in his own strength; but had it been much
greater, through God strengthening him, he might have done it. Let us
pray, Lord, lead us not into temptation.

[Numbers 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 11:16</span></span>

Moses is to choose such as he knew to be elders, that is, wise and
experienced men. God promises to qualify them. If they were not found
fit for the employ, they should be made fit. Even the discontented
people shall be gratified too, that every mouth may be stopped. See
here, I. The vanity of all the delights of sense; they will cloy, but
they will not satisfy. Spiritual pleasures alone will satisfy and last.
As the world passes away, so do the lusts of it. 2. What brutish sins
gluttony and drunkenness are! they make that to hurt the body which
should be its health. Moses objects. Even true and great believers
sometimes find it hard to trust God under the discouragements of second
causes, and against hope to believe in hope. God here brings Moses to
this point, The Lord God is Almighty; and puts the proof upon the issue,
Thou shalt see whether my word shall come to pass or not. If he speaks,
it is done.

[Numbers 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 11:24</span></span>

We have here the fulfilment of God's word to Moses, that he should have
help in the government of Israel. He gave of his Spirit to the seventy
elders. They discoursed to the people of the things of God, so that all
who heard them might say, that God was with them of a truth. Two of the
elders, Eldad and Medad, went not out unto the tabernacle, as the rest,
being sensible of their own weakness and unworthiness. But the Spirit of
God found them in the camp, and there they exercised their gift of
praying, preaching, and praising God; they spake as moved by the Holy
Ghost. The Spirit of God is not confined to the tabernacle, but, like
the wind, blows where He listeth. And they that humble themselves shall
be exalted; and those who are most fit for government, are least
ambitious of it. Joshua does not desire that they should be punished,
but only restrained for the future. This motion he made out of zeal for
what he thought to be the unity of the church. He would have them
silenced, lest they should occasion a schism, or should rival Moses; but
Moses was not afraid of any such effects from that Spirit which God had
put upon them. Shall we reject those whom Christ has owned, or restrain
any from doing good, because they are not in every thing of our mind?
Moses wishes all the Lord's people were prophets, that he would put his
Spirit upon all of them. Let the testimony of Moses be believed by those
who desire to be in power; that government is a burden. It is a burden
of care and trouble to those who make conscience of the duty of it; and
to those who do not, it will prove a heavier burden in the day of
account. Let the example of Moses be followed by those in power; let
them not despise the advice and assistance of others, but desire it, and
be thankful for it. If all the present number of the Lord's people were
rendered prophets, or ministers, by the Spirit of Christ, though not all
agreed in outward matters, there is work enough for all, in calling
sinners to repentance, and faith in our Lord Jesus.

[Numbers 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 11:31</span></span>

God performed his promise to the people, in giving them flesh. How much
more diligent men are in collecting the meat that perishes, than in
labouring for meat which endures to everlasting life! We are
quick-sighted in the affairs of time; but stupidity blinds us as to the
concerns of eternity. To pursue worldly advantages, we need no
arguments; but when we are to secure the true riches, then we are all
forgetfulness. Those who are under the power of a carnal mind, will have
their lusts fulfilled, though it be to the certain damage and ruin of
their precious souls. They paid dearly for their feasts. God often
grants the desires of sinners in wrath, while he denies the desires of
his own people in love. What we unduly desire, if we obtain it, we have
reason to fear, will be some way or other a grief and cross to us. And
what multitudes there are in all places, who shorten their lives by
excess of one kind or other! Let us seek for those pleasures which
satisfy, but never surfeit; and which will endure for evermore.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 12](num012.md)

</div>
