<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num031)  [Next](num033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 32:0</span></span>

([Num 32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)) The tribes of Reuben and
Gad request an inheritance on the east of Jordan.

([Num 32:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006)) Moses reproves the
Reubenites and Gadites.

([Num 32:16-27](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)) They explain their
views, Moses consents.

([Num 32:28-42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028)) They take possession
of the land to the east of Jordan.

[Numbers 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 32:1</span></span>

Here is a proposal made by the Reubenites and Gadites, that the land
lately conquered might be allotted to them. Two things common in the
world might lead these tribes to make this choice; the lust of the eye,
and the pride of life. There was much amiss in the principle they went
upon; they consulted their own private convenience more than the public
good. Thus to the present time, many seek their own things more than the
things of Jesus Christ; and are led by worldly interests and advantages
to take up short of the heavenly Canaan.

[Numbers 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 32:6</span></span>

The proposal showed disregard to the land of Canaan, distrust of the
Lord's promise, and unwillingness to encounter the difficulties and
dangers of conquering and driving out the inhabitants of that land.
Moses is wroth with them. It will becomes any of God's Israel to sit
down unconcerned about the difficult and perilous concerns of their
brethren, whether public or personal. He reminds them of the fatal
consequences of the unbelief and faint-heartedness of their fathers,
when they were, as themselves, just ready to enter Canaan. If men
considered as they ought what would be the end of sin, they would be
afraid of the beginning of it.

[Numbers 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 32:16</span></span>

Here is the good effect of plain dealing. Moses, by showing their sin,
and the danger of it, brought them to their duty, without murmuring or
disputing. All men ought to consider the interests of others as well as
their own; the law of love requires us to labour, venture, or suffer for
each other as there may be occasion. They propose that their men of war
should go ready armed before the children of Israel into the land of
Canaan, and that they should not return till the conquest of Canaan was
ended. Moses grants their request, but he warns them of the danger of
breaking their word. If you fail, you sin against the Lord, and not
against your brethren only; God will certainly reckon with you for it.
Be sure your sin will find you out. Sin will surely find out the sinner
sooner or later. It concerns us now to find our sins out, that we may
repent of them, and forsake them, lest they find us out to our ruin.

[Numbers 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 32:28</span></span>

Concerning the settlement of these tribes, observe, that they built the
cities, that is, repaired them. They changed the names of them; probably
they were idolatrous, therefore they should be forgotten. A spirit of
selfishness, of seeking our own, not the things of Christ, when each one
ought to assist others, is as dangerous as it is common. It is
impossible to be sincere in the faith, sensible of the goodness of God,
constrained by the love of Christ, sanctified by the power of the Holy
Ghost, and yet be indifferent to the progress of religion, and the
spiritual success of others, through love of ease, or fear of conflict.
Let then your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 33](num033)

</div>
