<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num015)  [Next](num017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 16:0</span></span>

([Num 16:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)) The rebellion of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram Korah contends for the priesthood.

([Num 16:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)) Disobedience of Dathan
and Abiram.

([Num 16:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016)) The glory of the Lord
appears The intercession of Moses and Aaron.

([Num 16:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#023)) The earth swallows up
Dathan and Abiram.

([Num 16:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)) The company of Korah
consumed.

([Num 16:41-50](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)) The people murmur A
plague sent.

[Numbers 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 16:1</span></span>

Pride and ambition occasion a great deal of mischief both in churches
and states. The rebels quarrel with the settlement of the priesthood
upon Aaron and his family. Small reason they had to boast of the
people's purity, or of God's favour, as the people had been so often and
so lately polluted with sin, and were now under the marks of God's
displeasure. They unjustly charge Moses and Aaron with taking honour to
themselves; whereas they were called of God to it. See here, 1. What
spirit levellers are of; those who resist the powers God has set over
them. 2. What usage they have been serviceable. Moses sought instruction
from God. The heart of the wise studies to answer, and asks counsel of
God. Moses shows their privileges as Levites, and convicts them of the
sin of undervaluing these privileges. It will help to keep us from
envying those above us, duly to consider how many there are below us.

[Numbers 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 16:12</span></span>

Moses summoned Dathan and Abiram to bring their complaints; but they
would not obey. They bring very false charges against Moses. Those often
fall under the heaviest censures, who in truth deserve the highest
praise. Moses, though the meekest man, yet, finding God reproached in
him, was very wroth; he could not bear to see the people ruining
themselves. He appeals to God as to his own integrity. He bade them
appear with Aaron next morning, at the time of offering the morning
incense. Korah undertook thus to appear. Proud ambitious men, while
projecting their own advancement, often hurry on their own shameful
fall.

[Numbers 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 16:16</span></span>

The same glory of the Lord that appeared to place Aaron in his office at
first, [Lev 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023), now appeared to
confirm him in it; and to confound those who set up against him. Nothing
is more terrible to those who are conscious of guilt, than the
appearance of the Divine glory. See how dangerous it is to have
fellowship with sinners, and to partake with them. Though the people had
treacherously deserted them, yet Moses and Aaron approved themselves
faithful shepherds of Israel. If others fail in their duty to us, that
does not take away the obligations we are under to seek their welfare.
Their prayer was a pleading prayer, and it proved a prevailing one.

[Numbers 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 16:23</span></span>

The seventy elders of Israel attend Moses. It is our duty to do what we
can to countenance and support lawful authority when it is opposed. And
those who would not perish with sinners, must come out from among them,
and be separate. It was in answer to the prayer of Moses, that God
stirred up the hearts of the congregation to remove for their own
safety. Grace to separate from evil-doers is one of the things that
accompany salvation. God, in justice, left the rebels to the obstinacy
and hardness of their own hearts. Moses, by Divine direction, when all
Israel were waiting the event, declares that if the rebels die a common
death, he will be content to be called and counted an imposter. As soon
as Moses had spoken the word, God caused the earth to open and swallow
them all up. The children perished with their parents; in which, though
we cannot tell how bad they might be to deserve it, or how good God
might be otherwise to them; yet of this we are sure, that Infinite
Justice did them no wrong. It was altogether miraculous. God has, when
he pleases, strange punishments for the workers of iniquity. It was very
significant. Considering how the earth is still in like manner loaded
with the weight of man's sins, we have reason to wonder that it does not
now sink under its load. The ruin of others should be our warning. Could
we, by faith, hear the outcries of those that are gone down to the
bottomless pit, we should give more diligence than we do to escape for
our lives, lest we also come into their condemnation.

[Numbers 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 16:35</span></span>

A fire went out from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty
men that offered incense, while Aaron, who stood with them, was
preserved alive. God is jealous of the honour of his own institutions,
and will not have them invaded. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord. The censers are devoted, and, as all devoted
things, must be made serviceable to the glory of God. This covering of
the altar would remind the children of Israel of this event, that others
might hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. They brought
destruction on themselves both in body and soul. Thus all who break the
law and neglect the gospel choose and love death.

[Numbers 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 16:41</span></span>

The gaping earth was scarcely closed, before the same sins are again
committed, and all these warnings slighted. They called the rebels the
people of the Lord; and find fault with Divine justice. The obstinacy of
Israel notwithstanding the terrors of God's law, as given on mount
Sinai, and the terrors of his judgments, shows how necessary the grace
of God is to change men's hearts and lives. Love will do what fear
cannot. Moses and Aaron interceded with God for mercy, knowing how great
the provocation was. Aaron went, and burned incense between the living
and the dead, not to purify the air, but to pacify an offended God. As
one tender of the life of every Israelite, Aaron made all possible
speed. We must render good for evil. Observe especially, that Aaron was
a type of Christ. There is an infection of sin in the world, which only
the cross and intercession of Jesus Christ can stay and remove. He
enters the defiled and dying camp. He stands between the dead and the
living; between the eternal Judge and the souls under condemnation. We
must have redemption through His blood, even the remission of sins. We
admire the ready devotion of Aaron: shall we not bless and praise the
unspeakable grace and love which filled the Saviour's heart, when he
placed himself in our stead, and bought us with his life? Greatly indeed
hath God commended his love towards us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us, [Rom 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 17](num017)

</div>
