<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num012)  [Next](num014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 13:0</span></span>

(v. 1-20) Twelve men sent to search the land of Canaan, Their
instructions.

([Num 13:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021).md) Their proceedings.

([Num 13:26-33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026).md) Their account of the
land.

[Numbers 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 13:1</span></span>

A memorable and melancholy history is related in this and the following
chapter, of the turning back of Israel from the borders of Canaan, and
the sentencing them to wander and perish in the wilderness, for their
unbelief and murmuring. It appears, [Deu
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022.md), that the motion to search out
the land came from the people. They had a better opinion of their own
policy than of God's wisdom. Thus we ruin ourselves by believing the
reports and representations of sense rather than Divine revelation. We
walk by sight not by faith. Moses gave the spies this charge, Be of good
courage. It was not only a great undertaking they were put upon, which
required good management and resolution; but a great trust was reposed
in them, which required that they should be faithful. Courage in such
circumstances can only spring from strong faith, which Caleb and Joshua
alone possessed.

[Numbers 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 13:21</span></span>

The searchers of the land brought a bunch of grapes with them, and other
fruits, as proofs of the goodness of the country; which was to Israel
both the earnest and the specimen of all the fruits of Canaan. Such are
the present comforts we have in communion with God, foretastes of the
fulness of joy we expect in the heavenly Canaan. We may see by them what
heaven is.

[Numbers 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 13:26</span></span>

We may wonder that the people of Israel staid forty days for the return
of their spies, when they were ready to enter Canaan, under all the
assurances of success they could have from the Divine power, and the
miracles that had hitherto attended them. But they distrusted God's
power and promise. How much we stand in our own light by our unbelief!
At length the messengers returned; but the greater part discouraged the
people from going forward to Canaan. Justly are the Israelites left to
this temptation, for putting confidence in the judgment of men, when
they had the word of God to trust in. Though they had found the land as
good as God had said, yet they would not believe it to be as sure as he
had said, but despaired of having it, though Eternal Truth had engaged
it to them. This was the representation of the evil spies. Caleb,
however, encouraged them to go forward, though seconded by Joshua only.
He does not say, Let us go up and conquer it; but, Let us go and possess
it. Difficulties that are in the way of salvation, dwindle and vanish
before a lively, active faith in the power and promise of God. All
things are possible, if they are promised, to him that believes; but
carnal sense and carnal professors are not to be trusted. Unbelief
overlooks the promises and power of God, magnifies every danger and
difficulty, and fills the heart with discouragement. May the Lord help
us to believe! we shall then find all things possible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 14](num014.md)

</div>
