<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num034)  [Next](num036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 35:0</span></span>

([Num 35:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)) The cities of the
Levites.

(v. 9-34) The cities of refuge, The laws about murder.

[Numbers 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 35:1</span></span>

The cities of the priests and Levites were not only to accommodate them,
but to place them, as religious teachers, in several parts of the land.
For though the typical service of the tabernacle or temple was only in
one place, the preaching of the word of God, and prayer and praise, were
not thus confined. These cities were to be given out of each tribe. Each
thus made a grateful acknowledgement to God. Each tribe had the benefit
of the Levites dwelling amongst them, to teach them the knowledge of the
Lord; thus no parts of the country were left to sit in darkness. The
gospel provides that he who is taught in the word, should communicate to
him that teaches, in all good things, [Gal
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006). We are to free God's ministers
from distracting cares, and to leave them at leisure for the duties of
their station; so that they may be wholly employed therein, and avail
themselves of every opportunity, by acts of kindness, to gain the
good-will of the people, and to draw their attention.

[Numbers 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 35:9</span></span>

To show plainly the abhorrence of murder, and to provide the more
effectually for the punishment of the murderer, the nearest relation of
the deceased, under the title of avenger of blood, (or the redeemer of
blood,) in notorious cases, might pursue, and execute vengeance. A
distinction is made, not between sudden anger and malice aforethought,
both which are the crime of murder; but between intentionally striking a
man with any weapon likely to cause death, and an unintentional blow. In
the latter case alone, the city of refuge afforded protection. Murder in
all its forms, and under all disguises, pollutes a land. Alas! that so
many murders, under the name of duels, prize-fights, etc. should pass
unpunished. There were six cities of refuge; one or other might be
reached in less than a day's journey from any part of the land. To
these, man-slayers might flee for refuge, and be safe, till they had a
fair trial. If acquitted from the charge, they were protected from the
avenger of blood; yet they must continue within the bounds of the city
till the death of the high priest. Thus we are reminded that the death
of the great High Priest is the only means whereby sins are pardoned,
and sinners set at liberty. These cities are plainly alluded to, both in
the Old and New Testament, we cannot doubt the typical character of
their appointment. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope,
saith the voice of mercy, [Zac 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012),
alluding to the city of refuge. St. Paul describes the strong
consolation of fleeing for refuge to the hope set before us, in a
passage always applied to the gracious appointment of the cities of
refuge, [Heb 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). The rich mercies of
salvation, through Christ, prefigured by these cities, demand our
regard. 1. Did the ancient city rear its towers of safety on high? See
Christ raised up on the cross; and is he not exalted at the right hand
of his Father, to be a Prince and a Saviour, to give repentance and
remission of sins? 2. Does not the highway of salvation, resemble the
smooth and plain path to the city of refuge? Survey the path that leads
to the Redeemer. Is there any stumbling-block to be found therein,
except that which an evil heart of unbelief supplies for its own fall?
3. Waymarks were set up pointing to the city. And is it not the office
of the ministers of the gospel to direct sinners to Him? 4. The gate of
the city stood open night and day. Has not Christ declared, Him that
cometh unto me I will in nowise cast out? 5. The city of refuge afforded
support to every one who entered its walls. Those who have reached the
refuge, may live by faith on Him whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose
blood is drink indeed. 6. The city was a refuge for all. In the gospel
there is no respect of persons. That soul lives not which deserves not
Divine wrath; that soul lives not which may not in simple faith hope for
salvation and life eternal, through the Son of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 36](num036)

</div>
