<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num023)  [Next](num025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 24:0</span></span>

([Num 24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001).md) Balaam, leaving
divinations, prophesies the happiness of Israel.

([Num 24:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#010).md) Balak dismisses Balaam
in anger.

([Num 24:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#015).md) Balaam's prophecies.

[Numbers 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 24:1</span></span>

Now Balaam spake not his own sense, but the language of the Spirit that
came upon him. Many have their eyes open who have not their hearts open;
are enlightened, but not sanctified. That knowledge which puffs men up
with pride, will but serve to light them to hell, whither many go with
their eyes open. The blessing is nearly the same as those given before.
He admires in Israel, their beauty. The righteous, doubtless, is more
excellent than his neighbour. Their fruitfulness and increase. Their
honour and advancement. Their power and victory. He looks back upon what
had been done for them. Their power and victory. He looks back upon what
had been done for them. Their courage and security. The righteous are
bold as a lion, not when assaulting others, but when at rest, because
God maketh them to dwell in safety. Their influence upon their
neighbours. God takes what is done to them, whether good or evil, as
done to himself.

[Numbers 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 24:10</span></span>

This vain attempt to curse Israel is ended. Balak broke out into a rage
against Balaam, and expressed great vexation. Balaam has a very full
excuse; God restrained him from saying what he would have said, and
constrained him to say what he would not have uttered.

[Numbers 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 24:15</span></span>

Under the powerful influence of the Spirit of prophecy, Balaam foretold
the future prosperity and extensive dominion of Israel. Balaam boasts
that his eyes are open. The prophets were in old times called seers. He
had heard the words of God, which many do who neither heed them, nor
hear God in them. He knew the knowledge of the Most High. A man may be
full of the knowledge of God, yet utterly destitute of the grace of God.
He calls God the Most High and the Almighty. No man could seem to
express a greater respect to God; yet he had no true fear of him, love
to him, nor faith in him; so far a man may go toward heaven, and yet
come short of it at last. Here is Balaam's prophecy concerning Him who
should be the crown and glory of his people Israel; who is David in the
type; but our Lord Jesus, the promised Messiah, is chiefly pointed at,
and of him it is an illustrious prophecy. Balaam, a wicked man, shall
see Christ, but shall not see him nigh; not see him as Job, who saw him
as his Redeemer, and saw him for himself. When he comes in the clouds,
every eye shall see him; but many will see him, as the rich man in hell
saw Abraham, afar off. He shall come out of Jacob, and Israel, as a Star
and a Sceptre; the former denoting his glory and lustre; the latter his
power and authority. Christ shall be King, not only of Jacob and Israel,
but of all the world; so that all shall be either governed by his golden
sceptre, or dashed in pieces by his iron rod. Balaam prophesied
concerning the Amalekites and Kenites, part of whose country he had now
in view. Even a nest in a rock will not be a lasting security. Here is a
prophecy that looks as far forward as to the Greeks and Romans. He
acknowledges all the revolutions of states and kingdoms to be the Lord's
doing. These events will make such desolations, that scarcely any will
escape. They that live then, will be as brands plucked out of the fire.
May God fit us for the worst of times! Thus Balaam, instead of cursing
the church, curses Amalek the first, and Rome the last enemy of the
church. Not Rome pagan only, but Rome papal also; antichrist and all the
antichristian powers. Let us ask ourselves, Do we in knowledge,
experience, or profession, excel Balaam? No readiness of speech, even in
preaching or prayer, no gifts of knowledge or prophecy, are in
themselves different from, or superior to the boasted gifts of him who
loved the wages of unrighteousness, and died the enemy of God. Simple
dependence on the Redeemer's atoning blood and sanctifying grace,
cheerful submission to the Divine will, constant endeavours to glorify
God and benefit his people, these are less splendid, but far more
excellent gifts, and always accompany salvation. No boasting hypocrite
ever possessed these; yet the feeblest believer has something of them,
and is daily praying for more of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 25](num025.md)

</div>
