<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num005)  [Next](num007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 6:0</span></span>

(v. 1-21) The law concerning the Nazarites.

([Num 6:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022).md) The form of blessing
the people.

[Numbers 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 6:1</span></span>

The word Nazarite signifies separation. Some were appointed of God,
before their birth, to be Nazarites all their days, as Samson and John
the Baptist. But, in general, it was a vow of separation from the world
and devotedness to the services of religion, for a limited time, and
under certain rules, which any person might make if they pleased. A
Nazarite is spoken of as well known; but his obligation is brought to a
greater certainty than before. That the fancies of superstitious men
might not multiply the restraints endlessly, God gives them rules. They
must not drink wine or strong drink, nor eat grapes. Those who separate
themselves to God, must not gratify the desires of the body, but keep it
under. Let all Christians be very moderate in the use of wine and strong
drink; for if the love of these once gets the mastery of a man, he
becomes an easy prey to Satan. The Nazarites were to eat nothing that
came of the vine; this may teach the utmost care to avoid sin, and all
that borders upon it, and leads to it, or may be a temptation to us.
They must not cut their hair. They must neither poll their heads, nor
shave their beards; this was the mark of Samson being a Nazarite. This
signified neglect of the body, and of the ease and ornament of it. Those
who separate themselves to God, must keep their consciences pure from
dead works, and not touch unclean things. All the days of their
separation they must be holy to the Lord. This was the meaning of those
outward observances, and without this they were of no account. No
penalty or sacrifice was appointed for those who wilfully broke their
vow of being Nazarites; they must answer another day for such profane
trifling with the Lord their God; but those were to be relieved who did
not sin wilfully. There is nothing in Scripture that bears the least
resemblance to the religious orders of the church of Rome, except these
Nazarites. But mark the difference, or rather how completely opposed!
The religious of that church are forbidden to marry; but no such
restriction is laid upon the Nazarites. They are commanded to abstain
from meats; but the Nazarites might eat any food allowed other
Israelites. They are not generally forbidden wine, not even on their
fasting days; but the Nazarites might not have wine at any time. Their
vow is lasting, even to the end of their lives; the Nazarites' vow was
only for a limited time, at their own will; and in certain cases not
unless allowed by husbands or parents. Such a thorough difference there
is between rules of man's invention and those directed in Scripture, Let
us not forget that the Lord Jesus is not only our Surety, but also our
example. For his sake we must renounce worldly pleasures, abstain from
fleshy lusts, be separate from sinners, make open profession of our
faith, moderate natural affections, be spiritually-minded, and devoted
to God's service, and desirous to be an example all around us.

[Numbers 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 6:22</span></span>

The priests were solemnly to bless the people in the name of the Lord.
To be under the almighty protection of God our Saviour; to enjoy his
favour as the smile of a loving Father, or as the cheering beams of the
sun; while he mercifully forgives our sins, supplies our wants, consoles
the heart, and prepares us by his grace for eternal glory; these things
form the substance of this blessing, and the sum total of all blessings.
In so rich a list of mercies worldly joys are not worthy to be
mentioned. Here is a form of prayer. The name Jehovah is three times
repeated. The Jews think there is some mystery; and we know what it is,
the New Testament having explained it. There we are directed to expect
the blessing from the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of the
Father, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, [Co2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md); each of which Persons is
Jehovah, and yet they are not three Lords, but one Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 7](num007.md)

</div>
