<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num013)  [Next](num015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 14:0</span></span>

([Num 14:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001).md) The people murmur at the
account of the spies.

([Num 14:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005).md) Joshua and Caleb labour
to still the people.

([Num 14:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011).md) The Divine
threatenings, The intercession of Moses.

(v. 20-35) The murmurers forbidden to enter the promised land.

([Num 14:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#036).md) Death of the evil
spies.

([Num 14:40-45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#040).md) Defeat of the people,
who now would invade the land.

[Numbers 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 14:1</span></span>

Those who do not trust God, continually vex themselves. The sorrow of
the world worketh death. The Israelites murmured against Moses and
Aaron, and in them reproached the Lord. They look back with causeless
discontent. See the madness of unbridled passions, which makes men
prodigal of what nature accounts most dear, life itself. They wish
rather to die criminals under God's justice, than to live conquerors in
his favour. At last they resolve, that, instead of going forward to
Canaan, they would go back to Egypt. Those who walk not in God's
counsels, seek their own ruin. Could they expect that God's cloud would
lead them, or his manna attend them? Suppose the difficulties of
conquering Canaan were as they imagined, those of returning to Egypt
were much greater. We complain of our place and lot, and we would
change; but is there any place or condition in this world, that has not
something in it to make us uneasy, if we are disposed to be so? The way
to better our condition, is to get our spirits in a better frame. See
the folly of turning from the ways of God. But men run on the certain
fatal consequences of a sinful course.

[Numbers 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 14:5</span></span>

Moses and Aaron were astonished to see a people throw away their own
mercies. Caleb and Joshua assured the people of the goodness of the
land. They made nothing of the difficulties in the way of their gaining
it. If men were convinced of the desirableness of the gains of religion,
they would not stick at the services of it. Though the Canaanites dwell
in walled cities, their defence was departed from them. The other spies
took notice of their strength, but these of their wickedness. No people
can be safe, when they have provoked God to leave them. Though Israel
dwell in tents, they are fortified. While we have the presence of God
with us, we need not fear the most powerful force against us. Sinners
are ruined by their own rebellion. But those who, like Caleb and Joshua,
faithfully expose themselves for God, are sure to be taken under his
special protection, and shall be hid from the rage of men, either under
heaven or in heaven.

[Numbers 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 14:11</span></span>

Moses made humble intercession for Israel. Herein he was a type of
Christ, who prayed for those that despitefully used him. The pardon of a
nation's sin, is the turning away the nation's punishment; and for that
Moses is here so earnest. Moses argued that, consistently with God's
character, in his abundant mercies, he could forgive them.

[Numbers 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 14:20</span></span>

The Lord granted the prayer of Moses so far as not at once to destroy
the congregation. But disbelief of the promise forbids the benefit.
Those who despise the pleasant land shall be shut out of it. The promise
of God should be fulfilled to their children. They wished to die in the
wilderness; God made their sin their ruin, took them at their word, and
their carcases fell in the wilderness. They were made to groan under the
burden of their own sin, which was too heavy for them to bear. Ye shall
know my breach of promise, both the causes of it, that it is procured by
your sin, for God never leaves any till they first leave him; and the
consequences of it, that will produce your ruin. But your little ones,
now under twenty years old, which ye, in your unbelief, said should be a
prey, them will I bring in. God will let them know that he can put a
difference between the guilty and the innocent, and cut them off without
touching their children. Thus God would not utterly take away his loving
kindness.

[Numbers 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 14:36</span></span>

Here is the sudden death of the ten evil spies. They sinned in bringing
a slander upon the land of promise. Those greatly provoke God, who
misrepresent religion, raise dislike in men's minds toward it, or give
opportunity to those to do so, who seek occasion. Justly are murmurers
made mourners. If they had mourned for the sin, when they were
faithfully reproved, the sentence had been prevented; but as they
mourned for the judgment only, it did them no service. There is in hell
such mourning as this; but tears will not quench the flames, nor cool
the tongue.

[Numbers 14:40](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 14:40</span></span>

Some of the Israelites were now earnest to go forward toward Canaan. But
it came too late. If men would but be as earnest for heaven while their
day of grace lasts, as they will be when it is over, how well would it
be for them! That which has been duty in its season, when mistimed, may
be turned into sin. Those who are out of the way of their duty, are not
under God's protection, and go at their peril. God bade them go, and
they would not; he forbade them, and they would go. Thus is the carnal
mind enmity against God. They had distrusted God's strength; they now
presume upon their own without his. And the expedition fails
accordingly; now the sentence began to be executed, that their carcases
should fall in the wilderness. That affair can never end well, which
begins with sin. The way to obtain peace with our friends, and success
against our enemies, is, to have God, as our Friend, and to keep in his
love. Let us take warning from the fate of Israel, lest we perish after
the same example of unbelief. Let us go forth, depending on God's mercy,
power, promise, and truth; he will be with us, and bring our souls to
everlasting rest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 15](num015.md)

</div>
