<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1003)  [Next](pe1005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 4:0</span></span>

([Pe1 4:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)) The consideration of
Christ's sufferings is urged for purity and holiness.

([Pe1 4:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007)) And the approaching end
of the Jewish state, as a reason for sobriety, watchfulness, and prayer.

([Pe1 4:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012)) Believers encouraged to
rejoice and glory in reproaches and sufferings for Christ, and to commit
their souls to the care of a faithful God.

[1 Peter 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 4:1</span></span>

The strongest and best arguments against sin, are taken from the
sufferings of Christ. He died to destroy sin; and though he cheerfully
submitted to the worst sufferings, yet he never gave way to the least
sin. Temptations could not prevail, were it not for man's own
corruption; but true Christians make the will of God, not their own lust
or desires, the rule of their lives and actions. And true conversion
makes a marvellous change in the heart and life. It alters the mind,
judgment, affections, and conversation. When a man is truly converted,
it is very grievous to him to think how the time past of his life has
been spent. One sin draws on another. Six sins are here mentioned which
have dependence one upon another. It is a Christian's duty, not only to
keep from gross wickedness, but also from things that lead to sin, or
appear evil. The gospel had been preached to those since dead, who by
the proud and carnal judgment of wicked men were condemned as
evil-doers, some even suffering death. But being quickened to Divine
life by the Holy Spirit, they lived to God as his devoted servants. Let
not believers care, though the world scorns and reproaches them.

[1 Peter 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 4:7</span></span>

The destruction of the Jewish church and nation, foretold by our
Saviour, was very near. And the speedy approach of death and judgment
concerns all, to which these words naturally lead our minds. Our
approaching end, is a powerful argument to make us sober in all worldly
matters, and earnest in religion. There are so many things amiss in all,
that unless love covers, excuses, and forgives in others, the mistakes
and faults for which every one needs the forbearance of others, Satan
will prevail to stir up divisions and discords. But we are not to
suppose that charity will cover or make amends for the sins of those who
exercise it, so as to induce God to forgive them. The nature of a
Christian's work, which is high work and hard work, the goodness of the
Master, and the excellence of the reward, all require that our
endeavours should be serious and earnest. And in all the duties and
services of life, we should aim at the glory of God as our chief end. He
is a miserable, unsettled wretch, who cleaves to himself, and forgets
God; is only perplexed about his credit, and gain, and base ends, which
are often broken, and which, when he attains, both he and they must
shortly perish together. But he who has given up himself and his all to
God, may say confidently that the Lord is his portion; and nothing but
glory through Christ Jesus, is solid and lasting; that abideth for ever.

[1 Peter 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 4:12</span></span>

By patience and fortitude in suffering, by dependence on the promises of
God, and keeping to the word the Holy Spirit hath revealed, the Holy
Spirit is glorified; but by the contempt and reproaches cast upon
believers, he is evil spoken of, and is blasphemed. One would think such
cautions as these were needless to Christians. But their enemies falsely
charged them with foul crimes. And even the best of men need to be
warned against the worst of sins. There is no comfort in sufferings,
when we bring them upon ourselves by our own sin and folly. A time of
universal calamity was at hand, as foretold by our Saviour, [Mat
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009), [Mat
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010). And if such things befall in
this life, how awful will the day of judgment be! It is true that the
righteous are scarcely saved; even those who endeavour to walk uprightly
in the ways of God. This does not mean that the purpose and performance
of God are uncertain, but only the great difficulties and hard
encounters in the way; that they go through so many temptations and
tribulations, so many fightings without and fears within. Yet all
outward difficulties would be as nothing, were it not for lusts and
corruptions within. These are the worst clogs and troubles. And if the
way of the righteous be so hard, then how hard shall be the end of the
ungodly sinner, who walks in sin with delight, and thinks the righteous
is a fool for all his pains! The only way to keep the soul well, is, to
commit it to God by prayer, and patient perseverance in well-doing. He
will overrule all to the final advantage of the believer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 5](pe1005)

</div>
