<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1000)  [Next](pe1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

([Pe1 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)) The apostle blesses God
for his special benefits through Christ.

([Pe1 1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)) Salvation by Christ
foretold in ancient prophecy.

([Pe1 1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013)) All are exhorted to
holy conversation.

([Pe1 1:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)) Such as is suitable to
their principles, privileges, and obligations.

[1 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 1:1</span></span>

This epistle is addressed to believers in general, who are strangers in
every city or country where they live, and are scattered through the
nations. These are to ascribe their salvation to the electing love of
the Father, the redemption of the Son, and the sanctification of the
Holy Ghost; and so to give glory to one God in three Persons, into whose
name they had been baptized. Hope, in the world's phrase, refers only to
an uncertain good, for all worldly hopes are tottering, built upon sand,
and the worldling's hopes of heaven are blind and groundless
conjectures. But the hope of the sons of the living God is a living
hope; not only as to its object, but as to its effect also. It enlivens
and comforts in all distresses, enables to meet and get over all
difficulties. Mercy is the spring of all this; yea, great mercy and
manifold mercy. And this well-grounded hope of salvation, is an active
and living principle of obedience in the soul of the believer. The
matter of a Christian's joy, is the remembrance of the happiness laid up
for him. It is incorruptible, it cannot come to nothing, it is an estate
that cannot be spent. Also undefiled; this signifies its purity and
perfection. And it fadeth not; is not sometimes more or less pleasant,
but ever the same, still like itself. All possessions here are stained
with defects and failings; still something is wanting: fair houses have
sad cares flying about the gilded and ceiled roofs; soft beds and full
tables, are often with sick bodies and uneasy stomachs. All possessions
are stained with sin, either in getting or in using them. How ready we
are to turn the things we possess into occasions and instruments of sin,
and to think there is no liberty or delight in their use, without
abusing them! Worldly possessions are uncertain and soon pass away, like
the flowers and plants of the field. That must be of the greatest worth,
which is laid up in the highest and best place, in heaven. Happy are
those whose hearts the Holy Spirit sets on this inheritance. God not
only gives his people grace, but preserves them unto glory. Every
believer has always something wherein he may greatly rejoice; it should
show itself in the countenance and conduct. The Lord does not willingly
afflict, yet his wise love often appoints sharp trials, to show his
people their hearts, and to do them good at the latter end. Gold does
not increase by trial in the fire, it becomes less; but faith is made
firm, and multiplied, by troubles and afflictions. Gold must perish at
last, and can only purchase perishing things, while the trial of faith
will be found to praise, and honour, and glory. Let this reconcile us to
present afflictions. Seek then to believe Christ's excellence in
himself, and his love to us; this will kindle such a fire in the heart
as will make it rise up in a sacrifice of love to him. And the glory of
God and our own happiness are so united, that if we sincerely seek the
one now, we shall attain the other when the soul shall no more be
subject to evil. The certainty of this hope is as if believers had
already received it.

[1 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 1:10</span></span>

Jesus Christ was the main subject of the prophets' studies. Their
inquiry into the sufferings of Christ and the glories that should
follow, would lead to a view of the whole gospel, the sum whereof is,
That Christ Jesus was delivered for our offences, and raised again for
our justification. God is pleased to answer our necessities rather than
our requests. The doctrine of the prophets, and that of the apostles,
exactly agree, as coming from the same Spirit of God. The gospel is the
ministration of the Spirit; its success depends upon his operation and
blessing. Let us then search diligently those Scriptures which contain
the doctrines of salvation.

[1 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 1:13</span></span>

As the traveller, the racer, the warrior, and the labourer, gathered in
their long and loose garments, that they might be ready in their
business, so let Christians do by their minds and affections. Be sober,
be watchful against all spiritual dangers and enemies, and be temperate
in all behaviour. Be sober-minded in opinion, as well as in practice,
and humble in your judgment of yourselves. A strong and perfect trust in
the grace of God, is agreeable with best endeavours in our duty.
Holiness is the desire and duty of every Christian. It must be in all
affairs, in every condition, and towards all people. We must especially
watch and pray against the sins to which we are inclined. The written
word of God is the surest rule of a Christian's life, and by this rule
we are commanded to be holy every way. God makes those holy whom he
saves.

[1 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 1:17</span></span>

Holy confidence in God as a Father, and awful fear of him as a Judge,
agree together; and to regard God always as a Judge, makes him dear to
us as a Father. If believers do evil, God will visit them with
corrections. Then, let Christians not doubt God's faithfulness to his
promises, nor give way to enslaving dread of his wrath, but let them
reverence his holiness. The fearless professor is defenceless, and Satan
takes him captive at his will; the desponding professor has no heart to
avail himself of his advantages, and is easily brought to surrender. The
price paid for man's redemption was the precious blood of Christ. Not
only openly wicked, but unprofitable conversation is highly dangerous,
though it may plead custom. It is folly to resolve, I will live and die
in such a way, because my forefathers did so. God had purposes of
special favour toward his people, long before he made manifest such
grace unto them. But the clearness of light, the supports of faith, the
power of ordinances, are all much greater since Christ came upon earth,
than they were before. The comfort is, that being by faith made one with
Christ, his present glory is an assurance that where he is we shall be
also, [Joh 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003). The soul must be
purified, before it can give up its own desires and indulgences. And the
word of God planted in the heart by the Holy Ghost, is a means of
spiritual life, stirring up to our duty, working a total change in the
dispositions and affections of the soul, till it brings to eternal life.
In contrast with the excellence of the renewed spiritual man, as born
again, observe the vanity of the natural man. In his life, and in his
fall, he is like grass, the flower of grass, which soon withers and dies
away. We should hear, and thus receive and love, the holy, living word,
and rather hazard all than lose it; and we must banish all other things
from the place due to it. We should lodge it in our hearts as our only
treasures here, and the certain pledge of the treasure of glory laid up
for believers in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 2](pe1002)

</div>
