<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe2000)  [Next](pe2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

([Pe2 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001).md) Exhortations to add the
exercise of various other graces to fait.

([Pe2 1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012).md) The apostle looks
forward to his approaching decease.

([Pe2 1:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016).md) And confirms the truth
of the gospel, relating to Christ's appearing to judgment.

[2 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 1:1</span></span>

Faith unites the weak believer to Christ, as really as it does the
strong one, and purifies the heart of one as truly as of another; and
every sincere believer is by his faith justified in the sight of God.
Faith worketh godliness, and produces effects which no other grace in
the soul can do. In Christ all fulness dwells, and pardon, peace, grace,
and knowledge, and new principles, are thus given through the Holy
Spirit. The promises to those who are partakers of a Divine nature, will
cause us to inquire whether we are really renewed in the spirit of our
minds; let us turn all these promises into prayers for the transforming
and purifying grace of the Holy Spirit. The believer must add knowledge
to his virtue, increasing acquaintance with the whole truth and will of
God. We must add temperance to knowledge; moderation about worldly
things; and add to temperance, patience, or cheerful submission to the
will of God. Tribulation worketh patience, whereby we bear all
calamities and crosses with silence and submission. To patience we must
add godliness: this includes the holy affections and dispositions found
in the true worshipper of God; with tender affection to all fellow
Christians, who are children of the same Father, servants of the same
Master, members of the same family, travellers to the same country,
heirs of the same inheritance. Wherefore let Christians labour to attain
assurance of their calling, and of their election, by believing and
well-doing; and thus carefully to endeavour, is a firm argument of the
grace and mercy of God, upholding them so that they shall not utterly
fall. Those who are diligent in the work of religion, shall have a
triumphant entrance into that everlasting kingdom where Christ reigns,
and they shall reign with him for ever and ever; and it is in the
practice of every good work that we are to expect entrance to heaven.

[2 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 1:12</span></span>

We must be established in the belief of the truth, that we may not be
shaken by every wind of doctrine; and especially in the truth necessary
for us to know in our day, what belongs to our peace, and what is
opposed in our time. The body is but a tabernacle, or tent, of the soul.
It is a mean and movable dwelling. The nearness of death makes the
apostle diligent in the business of life. Nothing can so give composure
in the prospect, or in the hour, of death, as to know that we have
faithfully and simply followed the Lord Jesus, and sought his glory.
Those who fear the Lord, talk of his loving-kindness. This is the way to
spread the knowledge of the Lord; and by the written word, they are
enabled to do this.

[2 Peter 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 1:16</span></span>

The gospel is no weak thing, but comes in power, [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016.md). The law sets before us our
wretched state by sin, but there it leaves us. It discovers our disease,
but does not make known the cure. It is the sight of Jesus crucified, in
the gospel, that heals the soul. Try to dissuade the covetous worldling
from his greediness, one ounce of gold weighs down all reasons. Offer to
stay a furious man from anger by arguments, he has not patience to hear
them. Try to detain the licentious, one smile is stronger with him than
all reason. But come with the gospel, and urge them with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, shed to save their souls from hell, and to
satisfy for their sins, and this is that powerful pleading which makes
good men confess that their hearts burn within them, and bad men, even
an Agrippa, to say they are almost persuaded to be Christians, [Act
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#028.md). God is well pleased with
Christ, and with us in him. This is the Messiah who was promised,
through whom all who believe in him shall be accepted and saved. The
truth and reality of the gospel also are foretold by the prophets and
penmen of the Old Testament, who spake and wrote under influence, and
according to the direction of the Spirit of God. How firm and sure
should our faith be, who have such a firm and sure word to rest upon!
When the light of the Scripture is darted into the blind mind and dark
understanding, by the Holy Spirit of God, it is like the day-break that
advances, and diffuses itself through the whole soul, till it makes
perfect day. As the Scripture is the revelation of the mind and will of
God, every man ought to search it, to understand the sense and meaning.
The Christian knows that book to be the word of God, in which he tastes
a sweetness, and feels a power, and sees a glory, truly divine. And the
prophecies already fulfilled in the person and salvation of Christ, and
in the great concerns of the church and the world, form an unanswerable
proof of the truth of Christianity. The Holy Ghost inspired holy men to
speak and write. He so assisted and directed them in delivering what
they had received from him, that they clearly expressed what they made
known. So that the Scriptures are to be accounted the words of the Holy
Ghost, and all the plainness and simplicity, all the power and all the
propriety of the words and expressions, come from God. Mix faith with
what you find in the Scriptures, and esteem and reverence the Bible as a
book written by holy men, taught by the Holy Ghost.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 2](pe2002.md)

</div>
