<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi002)  [Next](phi004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 3:0</span></span>

([Phi 3:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)) The apostle cautions the
Philippians against judaizing false teachers, and renounces his own
former privileges.

([Phi 3:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)) Expresses earnest
desire to be found in Christ; also his pressing on toward perfection;
and recommends his own example to other believers.

[Philippians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 3:1</span></span>

Sincere Christians rejoice in Christ Jesus. The prophet calls the false
prophets dumb dogs, [Isa 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010); to
which the apostle seems to refer. Dogs, for their malice against
faithful professors of the gospel of Christ, barking at them and biting
them. They urged human works in opposition to the faith of Christ; but
Paul calls them evil-workers. He calls them the concision; as they rent
the church of Christ, and cut it to pieces. The work of religion is to
no purpose, unless the heart is in it, and we must worship God in the
strength and grace of the Divine Spirit. They rejoice in Christ Jesus,
not in mere outward enjoyments and performances. Nor can we too
earnestly guard against those who oppose or abuse the doctrine of free
salvation. If the apostle would have gloried and trusted in the flesh,
he had as much cause as any man. But the things which he counted gain
while a Pharisee, and had reckoned up, those he counted loss for Christ.
The apostle did not persuade them to do any thing but what he himself
did; or to venture on any thing but that on which he himself ventured
his never-dying soul. He deemed all these things to be but loss,
compared with the knowledge of Christ, by faith in his person and
salvation. He speaks of all worldly enjoyments and outward privileges
which sought a place with Christ in his heart, or could pretend to any
merit and desert, and counted them but loss; but it might be said, It is
easy to say so; but what would he do when he came to the trial? He had
suffered the loss of all for the privileges of a Christian. Nay, he not
only counted them loss, but the vilest refuse, offals thrown to dogs;
not only less valuable than Christ, but in the highest degree
contemptible, when set up as against him. True knowledge of Christ
alters and changes men, their judgments and manners, and makes them as
if made again anew. The believer prefers Christ, knowing that it is
better for us to be without all worldly riches, than without Christ and
his word. Let us see what the apostle resolved to cleave to, and that
was Christ and heaven. We are undone, without righteousness wherein to
appear before God, for we are guilty. There is a righteousness provided
for us in Jesus Christ, and it is a complete and perfect righteousness.
None can have benefit by it, who trust in themselves. Faith is the
appointed means of applying the saving benefit. It is by faith in
Christ's blood. We are made conformable to Christ's death, when we die
to sin, as he died for sin; and the world is crucified to us, and we to
the world, by the cross of Christ. The apostle was willing to do or to
suffer any thing, to attain the glorious resurrection of saints. This
hope and prospect carried him through all difficulties in his work. He
did not hope to attain it through his own merit and righteousness, but
through the merit and righteousness of Jesus Christ.

[Philippians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 3:12</span></span>

This simple dependence and earnestness of soul, were not mentioned as if
the apostle had gained the prize, or were already made perfect in the
Saviour's likeness. He forgot the things which were behind, so as not to
be content with past labours or present measures of grace. He reached
forth, stretched himself forward towards his point; expressions showing
great concern to become more and more like unto Christ. He who runs a
race, must never stop short of the end, but press forward as fast as he
can; so those who have heaven in their view, must still press forward to
it, in holy desires and hopes, and constant endeavours. Eternal life is
the gift of God, but it is in Christ Jesus; through his hand it must
come to us, as it is procured for us by him. There is no getting to
heaven as our home, but by Christ as our Way. True believers, in seeking
this assurance, as well as to glorify him, will seek more nearly to
resemble his sufferings and death, by dying to sin, and by crucifying
the flesh with its affections and lusts. In these things there is a
great difference among real Christians, but all know something of them.
Believers make Christ all in all, and set their hearts upon another
world. If they differ from one another, and are not of the same judgment
in lesser matters, yet they must not judge one another; while they all
meet now in Christ, and hope to meet shortly in heaven. Let them join in
all the great things in which they are agreed, and wait for further
light as to lesser things wherein they differ. The enemies of the cross
of Christ mind nothing but their sensual appetites. Sin is the sinner's
shame, especially when gloried in. The way of those who mind earthly
things, may seem pleasant, but death and hell are at the end of it. If
we choose their way, we shall share their end. The life of a Christian
is in heaven, where his Head and his home are, and where he hopes to be
shortly; he sets his affections upon things above; and where his heart
is, there will his conversation be. There is glory kept for the bodies
of the saints, in which they will appear at the resurrection. Then the
body will be made glorious; not only raised again to life, but raised to
great advantage. Observe the power by which this change will be wrought.
May we be always prepared for the coming of our Judge; looking to have
our vile bodies changed by his Almighty power, and applying to him daily
to new-create our souls unto holiness; to deliver us from our enemies,
and to employ our bodies and souls as instruments of righteousness in
his service.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 4](phi004)

</div>
