<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philippians Index](phi.md)  
  [Previous](phi001)  [Next](phi003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001.md)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 2:0</span></span>

([Phi 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001).md) Exhortations to a kind,
humble spirit and behaviour.

([Phi 2:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005).md) The example of Christ.

([Phi 2:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012).md) Diligence in the
affairs of salvation, and to be examples to the world.

([Phi 2:19-30](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019).md) The apostle's purpose
of visiting Philippi.

[Philippians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 2:1</span></span>

Here are further exhortations to Christian duties; to like-mindedness
and lowly-mindedness, according to the example of the Lord Jesus.
Kindness is the law of Christ's kingdom, the lesson of his school, the
livery of his family. Several motives to brotherly love are mentioned.
If you expect or experience the benefit of God's compassions to
yourselves, be compassionate one to another. It is the joy of ministers
to see people like-minded. Christ came to humble us, let there not be
among us a spirit of pride. We must be severe upon our own faults, and
quick in observing our own defects, but ready to make favourable
allowances for others. We must kindly care for others, but not be
busy-bodies in other men's matters. Neither inward nor outward peace can
be enjoyed, without lowliness of mind.

[Philippians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 2:5</span></span>

The example of our Lord Jesus Christ is set before us. We must resemble
him in his life, if we would have the benefit of his death. Notice the
two natures of Christ; his Divine nature, and human nature. Who being in
the form of God, partaking the Divine nature, as the eternal and
only-begotten Son of God, [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md),
had not thought it a robbery to be equal with God, and to receive Divine
worship from men. His human nature; herein he became like us in all
things except sin. Thus low, of his own will, he stooped from the glory
he had with the Father before the world was. Christ's two states, of
humiliation and exaltation, are noticed. Christ not only took upon him
the likeness and fashion, or form of a man, but of one in a low state;
not appearing in splendour. His whole life was a life of poverty and
suffering. But the lowest step was his dying the death of the cross, the
death of a malefactor and a slave; exposed to public hatred and scorn.
The exaltation was of Christ's human nature, in union with the Divine.
At the name of Jesus, not the mere sound of the word, but the authority
of Jesus, all should pay solemn homage. It is to the glory of God the
Father, to confess that Jesus Christ is Lord; for it is his will, that
all men should honour the Son as they honour the Father, [Joh
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023.md). Here we see such motives to
self-denying love as nothing else can supply. Do we thus love and obey
the Son of God?

[Philippians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 2:12</span></span>

We must be diligent in the use of all the means which lead to our
salvation, persevering therein to the end. With great care, lest, with
all our advantages, we should come short. Work out your salvation, for
it is God who worketh in you. This encourages us to do our utmost,
because our labour shall not be in vain: we must still depend on the
grace of God. The working of God's grace in us, is to quicken and engage
our endeavours. God's good-will to us, is the cause of his good work in
us. Do your duty without murmurings. Do it, and do not find fault with
it. Mind your work, and do not quarrel with it. By peaceableness; give
no just occasion of offence. The children of God should differ from the
sons of men. The more perverse others are, the more careful we should be
to keep ourselves blameless and harmless. The doctrine and example of
consistent believers will enlighten others, and direct their way to
Christ and holiness, even as the light-house warns mariners to avoid
rocks, and directs their course into the harbour. Let us try thus to
shine. The gospel is the word of life, it makes known to us eternal life
through Jesus Christ. Running, denotes earnestness and vigour, continual
pressing forward; labouring, denotes constancy, and close application.
It is the will of God that believers should be much in rejoicing; and
those who are so happy as to have good ministers, have great reason to
rejoice with them.

[Philippians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 2:19</span></span>

It is best with us, when our duty becomes natural to us. Naturally, that
is, sincerely, and not in pretence only; with a willing heart and
upright views. We are apt to prefer our own credit, ease, and safety,
before truth, holiness, and duty; but Timothy did not so. Paul desired
liberty, not that he might take pleasure, but that he might do good.
Epaphroditus was willing to go to the Philippians, that he might be
comforted with those who had sorrowed for him when he was sick. It
seems, his illness was caused by the work of God. The apostle urges them
to love him the more on that account. It is doubly pleasant to have our
mercies restored by God, after great danger of their removal; and this
should make them more valued. What is given in answer to prayer, should
be received with great thankfulness and joy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 3](phi003.md)

</div>
