<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro005)  [Next](pro007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 6:0</span></span>

([Pro 6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)) Cautions against rash
suretiship.

([Pro 6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)) A rebuke to
slothfulness.

([Pro 6:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012)) Seven things hateful to
God.

(v. 20-35) Exhortations to walk according to God's commandments.

[Proverbs 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 6:1</span></span>

If we live as directed by the word of God, we shall find it profitable
even in this present world. We are stewards of our worldly substance,
and have to answer to the Lord for our disposal of it; to waste it in
rash schemes, or such plans as may entangle us in difficulties and
temptations, is wrong. A man ought never to be surety for more than he
is able and willing to pay, and can afford to pay, without wronging his
family; he ought to look upon every sum he is engaged for, as his own
debt. If we must take all this care to get our debts to men forgiven,
much more to obtain forgiveness with God. Humble thyself to him, make
sure of Christ as thy Friend, to plead for thee; pray earnestly that thy
sins may be pardoned, and that thou mayest be kept from going down to
the pit.

[Proverbs 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 6:6</span></span>

Diligence in business is every man's wisdom and duty; not so much that
he may attain worldly wealth, as that he may not be a burden to others,
or a scandal to the church. The ants are more diligent than slothful
men. We may learn wisdom from the meanest insects, and be shamed by
them. Habits of indolence and indulgence grow upon people. Thus life
runs to waste; and poverty, though at first at a distance, gradually
draws near, like a traveller; and when it arrives, is like an armed man,
too strong to be resisted. All this may be applied to the concerns of
our souls. How many love their sleep of sin, and their dreams of worldly
happiness! Shall we not seek to awaken such? Shall we not give diligence
to secure our own salvation?

[Proverbs 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 6:12</span></span>

If the slothful are to be condemned, who do nothing, much more those
that do all the ill they can. Observe how such a man is described. He
says and does every thing artfully, and with design. His ruin shall come
without warning, and without relief. Here is a list of things hateful to
God. Those sins are in a special manner provoking to God, which are
hurtful to the comfort of human life. These things which God hates, we
must hate in ourselves; it is nothing to hate them in others. Let us
shun all such practices, and watch and pray against them; and avoid,
with marked disapproval, all who are guilty of them, whatever may be
their rank.

[Proverbs 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 6:20</span></span>

The word of God has something to say to us upon all occasions. Let not
faithful reproofs ever make us uneasy. When we consider how much this
sin abounds, how heinous adultery is in its own nature, of what evil
consequence it is, and how certainly it destroys the spiritual life in
the soul, we shall not wonder that the cautions against it are so often
repeated. Let us notice the subjects of this chapter. Let us remember
Him who willingly became our Surety, when we were strangers and enemies.
And shall Christians, who have such prospects, motives, and examples, be
slothful and careless? Shall we neglect what is pleasing to God, and
what he will graciously reward? May we closely watch every sense by
which poison can enter our minds or affections.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 7](pro007)

</div>
