<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro029)  [Next](pro031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)

[Proverbs 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 30:1</span></span>

Agur speaks of himself as wanting a righteousness, and having done very
foolishly. And it becomes us all to have low thoughts of ourselves. He
speaks of himself as wanting revelation to guide him in the ways of
truth and wisdom. The more enlightened people are, the more they lament
their ignorance; the more they pray for clearer, still clearer
discoveries of God, and his rich grace in Christ Jesus. In [Pro
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004), there is a prophetic notice of
Him who came down from heaven to be our Instructor and Saviour, and then
ascended into heaven to be our Advocate. The Messiah is here spoken of
as a Person distinct from the Father, but his name as yet secret. The
great Redeemer, in the glories of his providence and grace, cannot be
found out to perfection. Had it not been for Christ, the foundations of
the earth had sunk under the load of the curse upon the ground, for
man's sin. Who, and what is the mighty One that doeth all this? There is
not the least ground to suspect anything wanting in the word of God;
adding to his words opens the way to errors and corruptions.

[Proverbs 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 30:7</span></span>

Agur wisely prayed for a middle state, that he might be kept at a
distance from temptations; he asked daily bread suited to his station,
his family, and his real good. There is a remarkable similarity between
this prayer and several clauses of the Lord's prayer. If we are removed
from vanity and lies; if we are interested in the pardoning love of
Christ, and have him for our portion; if we walk with God, then we shall
have all we can ask or think, as to spiritual things. When we consider
how those who have abundance are prone to abuse the gift, and what it is
to suffer want, Agur's prayer will ever be found a wise one, though
seldom offered. Food convenient; what is so for one, may not be so for
another; but we may be sure that our heavenly Father will supply all our
need, and not suffer us to want anything good for us; and why should we
wish for more?

[Proverbs 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 30:10</span></span>

Slander not a servant to his master, accuse him not in small matters, to
make mischief.

[Proverbs 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 30:11</span></span>

In every age there are monsters of ingratitude who ill-treat their
parents. Many persuade themselves they are holy persons, whose hearts
are full of sin, and who practise secret wickedness. There are others
whose lofty pride is manifest. There have also been cruel monsters in
every age.

[Proverbs 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 30:15</span></span>

Cruelty and covetousness are two daughters of the horseleech, that still
cry, "Give, give," and they are continually uneasy to themselves. Four
things never are satisfied, to which these devourers are compared. Those
are never rich that are always coveting. And many who have come to a bad
end, have owned that their wicked courses began by despising their
parents' authority.

[Proverbs 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 30:18</span></span>

Four things cannot be fully known. The kingdom of nature is full of
marvels. The fourth is a mystery of iniquity; the cursed arts by which a
vile seducer gains the affections of a female; and the arts which a vile
woman uses to conceal her wickedness.

[Proverbs 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 30:21</span></span>

Four sorts of persons are very troublesome. Men of low origin and base
spirit, who, getting authority, become tyrants. Foolish and violent men
indulging in excesses. A woman of a contentious spirit and vicious
habits. A servant who has obtained undue influence. Let those whom
Providence has advanced from low beginnings, carefully watch against
that sin which most easily besets them.

[Proverbs 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 30:24</span></span>

Four things that are little, are yet to be admired. There are those who
are poor in the world, and of small account, yet wise for their souls
and another world.

[Proverbs 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 30:29</span></span>

We may learn from animals to go well; also to keep our temper under all
provocations. We must keep the evil thought in our minds from breaking
out into evil speeches. We must not stir up the passions of others. Let
nothing be said or done with violence, but every thing with softness and
calmness. Alas, how often have we done foolishly in rising up against
the Lord our King! Let us humble ourselves before him. And having found
peace with Him, let us follow peace with all men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 31](pro031)

</div>
