<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro003)  [Next](pro005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 4:0</span></span>

([Pro 4:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001).md) Exhortation to the study
of wisdom.

([Pro 4:14-27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014).md) Cautions against bad
company, Exhortation to faith and holiness.

[Proverbs 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 4:1</span></span>

We must look upon our teachers as our fathers: though instruction carry
in it reproof and correction, bid it welcome. Solomon's parents loved
him, therefore taught him. Wise and godly men, in every age of the
world, and rank in society, agree that true wisdom consists in
obedience, and is united to happiness. Get wisdom, take pains for it.
Get the rule over thy corruptions; take more pains to get this than the
wealth of this world. An interest in Christ's salvation is necessary.
This wisdom is the one thing needful. A soul without true wisdom and
grace is a dead soul. How poor, contemptible, and wretched are those,
who, with all their wealth and power, die without getting understanding,
without Christ, without hope, and without God! Let us give heed to the
sayings of Him who has the words of eternal life. Thus our path will be
plain before us: by taking, and keeping fast hold of instruction, we
shall avoid being straitened or stumbling.

[Proverbs 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 4:14</span></span>

The way of evil men may seem pleasant, and the nearest way to compass
some end; but it is an evil way, and will end ill; if thou love thy God
and thy soul, avoid it. It is not said, Keep at a due distance, but at a
great distance; never think you can get far enough from it. The way of
the righteous is light; Christ is their Way, and he is the Light. The
saints will not be perfect till they reach heaven, but there they shall
shine as the sun in his strength. The way of sin is as darkness. The way
of the wicked is dark, therefore dangerous; they fall into sin, but know
not how to avoid it. They fall into trouble, but never seek to know
wherefore God contends with them, nor what will be in the end of it.
This is the way we are bid to shun. Attentive hearing the word of God,
is a good sign of a work of grace begun in the heart, and a good means
of carrying it on. There is in the word of God a proper remedy for all
diseases of the soul. Keep thy heart with all diligence. We must set a
strict guard upon our souls; keep our hearts from doing hurt, and
getting hurt. A good reason is given; because out of it are the issues
of life. Above all, we should seek from the Lord Jesus that living
water, the sanctifying Spirit, issuing forth unto everlasting life. Thus
we shall be enabled to put away a froward mouth and perverse lips; our
eyes will be turned from beholding vanity, looking straight forward, and
walking by the rule of God's word, treading in the steps of our Lord and
Master. Lord, forgive the past, and enable us to follow thee more
closely for the time to come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 5](pro005.md)

</div>
