<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro001)  [Next](pro003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 2:0</span></span>

([Pro 2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001)) Promises to those who
seek wisdom.

([Pro 2:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#010)) The advantages of
wisdom.

[Proverbs 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 2:1</span></span>

Those who earnestly seek heavenly wisdom, will never complain that they
have lost their labour; and the freeness of the gift does not do away
the necessity of our diligence, [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027). Let them seek, and they shall
find it; let them ask, and it shall be given them. Observe who are thus
favoured. They are the righteous, on whom the image of God is renewed,
which consists in righteousness. If we depend upon God, and seek to him
for wisdom, he will enable us to keep the paths of judgment.

[Proverbs 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 2:10</span></span>

If we are truly wise, we shall be careful to avoid all evil company and
evil practices. When wisdom has dominion over us, then it not only fills
the head, but enters into the heart, and will preserve, both against
corruptions within and temptations without. The ways of sin are ways of
darkness, uncomfortable and unsafe: what fools are those who leave the
plain, pleasant, lightsome paths of uprightness, to walk in such ways!
They take pleasure in sin; both in committing it, and in seeing others
commit it. Every wise man will shun such company. True wisdom will also
preserve from those who lead to fleshly lusts, which defile the body,
that living temple, and war against the soul. These are evils which
excite the sorrow of every serious mind, and cause every reflecting
parent to look upon his children with anxiety, lest they should be
entangled in such fatal snares. Let the sufferings of others be our
warnings. Our Lord Jesus deters from sinful pleasures, by the
everlasting torments which follow them. It is very rare that any who are
caught in this snare of the devil, recover themselves; so much is the
heart hardened, and the mind blinded, by the deceitfulness of this sin.
Many think that this caution, besides the literal sense, is to be
understood as a caution against idolatry, and subjecting the soul to the
body, by seeking any forbidden object. The righteous must leave the
earth as well as the wicked; but the earth is a very different thing to
them. To the wicked it is all the heaven they ever shall have; to the
righteous it is the place of preparation for heaven. And is it all one
to us, whether we share with the wicked in the miseries of their latter
end, or share those everlasting joys that shall crown believers?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 3](pro003)

</div>
