<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro000)  [Next](pro002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

([Pro 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)) The use of the Proverbs.

([Pro 1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)) Exhortations to fear God
and obey parents.

([Pro 1:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010)) To avoid the enticings
of sinners.

([Pro 1:20-33](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020)) The address of Wisdom
to sinners.

[Proverbs 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 1:1</span></span>

The lessons here given are plain, and likely to benefit those who feel
their own ignorance, and their need to be taught. If young people take
heed to their ways, according to Solomon's Proverbs, they will gain
knowledge and discretion. Solomon speaks of the most important points of
truth, and a greater than Solomon is here. Christ speaks by his word and
by his Spirit. Christ is the Word and the Wisdom of God, and he is made
to us wisdom.

[Proverbs 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 1:7</span></span>

Fools are persons who have no true wisdom, who follow their own devices,
without regard to reason, or reverence for God. Children are reasonable
creatures, and when we tell them what they must do, we must tell them
why. But they are corrupt and wilful, therefore with the instruction
there is need of a law. Let Divine truths and commands be to us most
honourable; let us value them, and then they shall be so to us.

[Proverbs 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 1:10</span></span>

Wicked people are zealous in seducing others into the paths of the
destroyer: sinners love company in sin. But they have so much the more
to answer for. How cautious young people should be! "Consent thou not."
Do not say as they say, nor do as they do, or would have thee to do;
have no fellowship with them. Who could think that it should be a
pleasure to one man to destroy another! See their idea of worldly
wealth; but it is neither substance, nor precious. It is the ruinous
mistake of thousands, that they overvalue the wealth of this world. Men
promise themselves in vain that sin will turn to their advantage. The
way of sin is down-hill; men cannot stop themselves. Would young people
shun temporal and eternal ruin, let them refuse to take one step in
these destructive paths. Men's greediness of gain hurries them upon
practices which will not suffer them or others to live out half their
days. What is a man profited, though he gain the world, if he lose his
life? much less if he lose his soul?

[Proverbs 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 1:20</span></span>

Solomon, having showed how dangerous it is to hearken to the temptations
of Satan, here declares how dangerous it is not to hearken to the calls
of God. Christ himself is Wisdom, is Wisdoms. Three sorts of persons are
here called by Him: 1. Simple ones. Sinners are fond of their simple
notions of good and evil, their simple prejudices against the ways of
God, and flatter themselves in their wickedness. 2. Scorners. Proud,
jovial people, that make a jest of every thing. Scoffers at religion,
that run down every thing sacred and serious. 3. Fools. Those are the
worst of fools that hate to be taught, and have a rooted dislike to
serious godliness. The precept is plain; Turn you at my reproof. We do
not make a right use of reproofs, if we do not turn from evil to that
which is good. The promises are very encouraging. Men cannot turn by any
power of their own; but God answers, Behold, I will pour out my Spirit
unto you. Special grace is needful to sincere conversion. But that grace
shall never be denied to any who seek it. The love of Christ, and the
promises mingled with his reproofs, surely should have the attention of
every one. It may well be asked, how long men mean to proceed in such a
perilous path, when the uncertainty of life and the consequences of
dying without Christ are considered? Now sinners live at ease, and set
sorrow at defiance; but their calamity will come. Now God is ready to
hear their prayers; but then they shall cry in vain. Are we yet
despisers of wisdom? Let us hearken diligently, and obey the Lord Jesus,
that we may enjoy peace of conscience and confidence in God; be free
from evil, in life, in death, and for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 2](pro002)

</div>
