<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro007)  [Next](pro009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 8:0</span></span>

([Pro 8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001).md) Christ, as Wisdom, calls
to the sons of men.

([Pro 8:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012).md) The nature and riches
of Wisdom.

([Pro 8:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022).md) Christ one with the
Father, in the creation of the world, and rejoicing in his work for the
salvation of man.

([Pro 8:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#032).md) Exhortations to hear
Christ's word.

[Proverbs 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 8:1</span></span>

The will of God is made known by the works of creation, and by the
consciences of men, but more clearly by Moses and the prophets. The
chief difficulty is to get men to attend to instruction. Yet attention
to the words of Christ, will guide the most ignorant into saving
knowledge of the truth. Where there is an understanding heart, and
willingness to receive the truth in love, wisdom is valued above silver
and gold.

[Proverbs 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 8:12</span></span>

Wisdom, here is Christ, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge; it is Christ in the word, and Christ in the heart; not only
Christ revealed to us, but Christ revealed in us. All prudence and skill
are from the Lord. Through the redemption of Christ's precious blood,
the riches of his grace abound in all wisdom and prudence. Man found out
many inventions for ruin; God found one for our recovery. He hates pride
and arrogance, evil ways and froward conversation; these render men
unwilling to hear his humbling, awakening, holy instructions. True
religion gives men the best counsel in all difficult cases, and helps to
make their way plain. His wisdom makes all truly happy who receive it in
the love of Christ Jesus. Seek him early, seek him earnestly, seek him
before any thing else. Christ never said, Seek in vain. Those who love
Christ, are such as have seen his loveliness, and have had his love shed
abroad in their hearts; therefore they are happy. They shall be happy in
this world, or in that which is beyond compare better. Wealth gotten by
vanity will soon be diminished, but that which is well got, will wear
well; and that which is well spent upon works of piety and charity, will
be lasting. If they have not riches and honour in this world, they shall
have that which is infinitely better. They shall be happy in the grace
of God. Christ, by his Spirit, guides believers into all truth, and so
leads them in the way of righteousness; and they walk after the Spirit.
Also, they shall be happy in the glory of God hereafter. In Wisdom's
promises, believers have goods laid up, not for days and years, but for
eternity; her fruit therefore is better than gold.

[Proverbs 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 8:22</span></span>

The Son of God declares himself to have been engaged in the creation of
the world. How able, how fit is the Son of God to be the Saviour of the
world, who was the Creator of it! The Son of God was ordained, before
the world, to that great work. Does he delight in saving wretched
sinners, and shall not we delight in his salvation?

[Proverbs 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 8:32</span></span>

Surely we should hearken to Christ's voice with the readiness of
children. Let us all be wise, and not refuse such mercy. Blessed are
those who hear the Saviour's voice, and wait on him with daily reading,
meditation, and prayer. The children of the world find time for vain
amusements, without neglecting what they deem the one thing needful.
Does it not show contempt of Wisdom's instructions, when people
professing godliness, seek excuses for neglecting the means of grace?
Christ is Wisdom, and he is Life to all believers; nor can we obtain
God's favour, unless we find Christ, and are found in him. Those who
offend Christ deceive themselves; sin is a wrong to the soul. Sinners
die because they will die, which justifies God when he judges.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 9](pro009.md)

</div>
