<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro008)  [Next](pro010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 9:0</span></span>

([Pro 9:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001).md) The invitations of
Wisdom.

([Pro 9:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013).md) The invitations of
folly.

[Proverbs 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 9:1</span></span>

Christ has prepared ordinances to which his people are admitted, and by
which nourishment is given here to those that believe in him, as well as
mansions in heaven hereafter. The ministers of the gospel go forth to
invite the guests. The call is general, and shuts out none that do not
shut out themselves. Our Saviour came, not to call the righteous, but
sinners; not the wise in their own eyes, who say they see. We must keep
from the company and foolish pleasures of the ungodly, or we never can
enjoy the pleasures of a holy life. It is vain to seek the company of
wicked men in the hope of doing them good; we are far more likely to be
corrupted by them. It is not enough to forsake the foolish, we must join
those that walk in wisdom. There is no true wisdom but in the way of
religion, no true life but in the end of that way. Here is the happiness
of those that embrace it. A man cannot be profitable to God; it is for
our own good. Observe the shame and ruin of those who slight it. God is
not the Author of sin: and Satan can only tempt, he cannot force. Thou
shalt bear the loss of that which thou scornest: it will add to thy
condemnation.

[Proverbs 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 9:13</span></span>

How diligent the tempter is, to seduce unwary souls into sin! Carnal,
sensual pleasure, stupifies conscience, and puts out the sparks of
conviction. This tempter has no solid reason to offer; and where she
gets dominion in a soul, all knowledge of holy things is lost and
forgotten. She is very violent and pressing. We need to seek and pray
for true wisdom, for Satan has many ways to withdraw our souls from
Christ. Not only worldly lusts and abandoned seducers prove fatal to the
souls of men; but false teachers, with doctrines that flatter pride and
give liberty to lusts, destroy thousands. They especially draw off such
as have received only partial serious impressions. The depths of Satan
are depths of hell; and sin, without remorse, is ruin, ruin without
remedy. Solomon shows the hook; those that believe him, will not meddle
with the bait. Behold the wretched, empty, unsatisfying, deceitful, and
stolen pleasure sin proposes; and may our souls be so desirous of the
everlasting enjoyment of Christ, that on earth we may live to him,
daily, by faith, and ere long be with him in glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 10](pro010.md)

</div>
