<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa043)  [Next](psa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 44:0</span></span>

A petition for succour and relief.

[Psalms 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 44:1</span></span>

Former experiences of God's power and goodness are strong supports to
faith, and powerful pleas in prayer under present calamities. The many
victories Israel obtained, were not by their own strength or merit, but
by God's favour and free grace. The less praise this allows us, the more
comfort it affords, that we may see all as coming from the favour of
God. He fought for Israel, else they had fought in vain. This is
applicable to the planting of the Christian church in the world, which
was not by any human policy or power. Christ, by his Spirit, went forth
conquering and to conquer; and he that planted a church for himself in
the world, will support it by the same power and goodness. They trusted
and triumphed in and through him. Let him that glories, glory in the
Lord. But if they have the comfort of his name, let them give unto him
the glory due unto it.

[Psalms 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 44:9</span></span>

The believer must have times of temptation, affliction, and
discouragement; the church must have seasons of persecution. At such
times the people of God will be ready to fear that he has cast them off,
and that his name and truth will be dishonoured. But they should look
above the instruments of their trouble, to God, well knowing that their
worst enemies have no power against them, but what is permitted from
above.

[Psalms 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 44:17</span></span>

In afflictions, we must not seek relief by any sinful compliance; but
should continually meditate on the truth, purity, and knowledge of our
heart-searching God. Hearts sins and secret sins are known to God, and
must be reckoned for. He knows the secret of the heart, therefore judges
of the words and actions. While our troubles do not drive us from our
duty to God, we should not suffer them to drive us from our comfort in
God. Let us take care that prosperity and ease do not render us careless
and lukewarm. The church of God cannot be prevailed on by persecution to
forget God; the believer's heart does not turn back from God. The Spirit
of prophecy had reference to those who suffered unto death, for the
testimony of Christ. Observe the pleas used, [Psa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#025), [Psa
44:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#026). Not their own merit and
righteousness, but the poor sinner's pleas. None that belong to Christ
shall be cast off, but every one of them shall be saved, and that for
ever. The mercy of God, purchased, promised, and constantly flowing
forth, and offered to believers, does away every doubt arising from our
sins; while we pray in faith, Redeem us for thy mercies' sake.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 45](psa045)

</div>
