<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa034)  [Next](psa036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 35:0</span></span>

([Psa 35:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)) David prays for safety.

([Psa 35:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011)) He complains of his
enemies.

([Psa 35:17-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)) And calls upon God to
support him.

[Psalms 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 35:1</span></span>

It is no new thing for the most righteous men, and the most righteous
cause, to meet with enemies. This is a fruit of the old enmity in the
seed of the serpent against the Seed of the woman. David in his
afflictions, Christ in his sufferings, the church under persecution, and
the Christian in the hour temptation, all beseech the Almighty to appear
in their behalf, and to vindicate their cause. We are apt to justify
uneasiness at the injuries men do us, by our never having given them
cause to use us so ill; but this should make us easy, for then we may
the more expect that God will plead our cause. David prayed to God to
manifest himself in his trial. Let me have inward comfort under all
outward troubles, to support my soul. If God, by his Spirit, witness to
our spirits that he is our salvation, we need desire no more to make us
happy. If God is our Friend, no matter who is our enemy. By the Spirit
of prophecy, David foretells the just judgments of God that would come
upon his enemies for their great wickedness. These are predictions, they
look forward, and show the doom of the enemies of Christ and his
kingdom. We must not desire or pray for the ruin of any enemies, except
our lusts and the evil spirits that would compass our destruction. A
traveller benighted in a bad road, is an expressive emblem of a sinner
walking in the slippery and dangerous ways of temptation. But David
having committed his cause to God, did not doubt of his own deliverance.
The bones are the strongest parts of the body. The psalmist here
proposes to serve and glorify God with all his strength. If such
language may be applied to outward salvation, how much more will it
apply to heavenly things in Christ Jesus!

[Psalms 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 35:11</span></span>

Call a man ungrateful, and you can call him no worse: this was the
character of David's enemies. Herein he was a type of Christ. David
shows how tenderly he had behaved towards them in afflictions. We ought
to mourn for the sins of those who do not mourn for themselves. We shall
not lose by the good offices we do to any, how ungrateful soever they
may be. Let us learn to possess our souls in patience and meekness like
David, or rather after Christ's example.

[Psalms 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 35:17</span></span>

Though the people of God are, and study to be, quiet, yet it has been
common for their enemies to devise deceitful matters against them. David
prays, My soul is in danger, Lord, rescue it; it belongs to thee the
Father of spirits, therefore claim thine own; it is thine, save it!
Lord, be not far from me, as if I were a stranger. He who exalted the
once suffering Redeemer, will appear for all his people: the roaring
lion shall not destroy their souls, any more than he could that of
Christ, their Surety. They trust their souls in his hands, they are one
with him by faith, are precious in his sight, and shall be rescued from
destruction, that they may give thanks in heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 36](psa036)

</div>
