<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa024)  [Next](psa026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 25:0</span></span>

([Psa 25:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001).md) Confidence in prayer.

([Psa 25:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008).md) Prayer for remission of
sins.

([Psa 25:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015).md) For help in
affliction.

[Psalms 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 25:1</span></span>

In worshipping God, we must lift up our souls to him. It is certain that
none who, by a believing attendance, wait on God, and, by a believing
hope, wait for him, shall be ashamed of it. The most advanced believer
both needs and desires to be taught of God. If we sincerely desire to
know our duty, with resolution to do it, we may be sure that God will
direct us in it. The psalmist is earnest for the pardon of his sins.
When God pardons sin, he is said to remember it no more, which denotes
full remission. It is God's goodness, and not ours, his mercy, and not
our merit, that must be our plea for the pardon of sin, and all the good
we need. This plea we must rely upon, feeling our own unworthiness, and
satisfied of the riches of God's mercy and grace. How boundless is that
mercy which covers for ever the sins and follies of a youth spent
without God and without hope! Blessed be the Lord, the blood of the
great Sacrifice can wash away every stain.

[Psalms 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 25:8</span></span>

We are all sinners; and Christ came into the world to save sinners, to
teach sinners, to call sinners to repentance. We value a promise by the
character of him that makes it; we therefore depend upon God's promises.
All the paths of the Lord, that is, all his promises and all his
providences, are mercy and truth. In all God's dealings his people may
see his mercy displayed, and his word fulfilled, whatever afflictions
they are now exercised with. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth; and so it will appear when they come to their journey's end.
Those that are humble, that distrust themselves, and desire to be taught
and to follow Divine guidance, these he will guide in judgment, that is,
by the rule of the written word, to find rest for their souls in the
Saviour. Even when the body is sick, and in pain, the soul may be at
ease in God.

[Psalms 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 25:15</span></span>

The psalmist concludes, as he began, with expressing dependence upon
God, and desire toward him. It is good thus to hope, and quietly to wait
for the salvation of the Lord. And if God turns to us, no matter who
turns from us. He pleads his own integrity. Though guilty before God,
yet, as to his enemies, he had the testimony of conscience that he had
done them no wrong. God would, at length, give Israel rest from all
their enemies round about. In heaven, God's Israel will be perfectly
redeemed from all troubles. Blessed Saviour, thou hast graciously taught
us that without thee we can do nothing. Do thou teach us how to pray,
how to appear before thee in the way which thou shalt choose, and how to
lift up our whole hearts and desires after thee, for thou art the Lord
our righteousness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 26](psa026.md)

</div>
