<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa068)  [Next](psa070) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 69](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 69:0</span></span>

([Psa 69:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)) David complains of
great distress.

([Psa 69:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)) And begs for succour.

([Psa 69:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)) He declares the
judgments of God.

([Psa 69:30-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030)) He concludes with joy
and praise.

[Psalms 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 69:1</span></span>

We should frequently consider the person of the Sufferer here spoken of,
and ask why, as well as what he suffered, that, meditating thereon, we
may be more humbled for sin, and more convinced of our danger, so that
we may feel more gratitude and love, constraining us to live to His
glory who died for our salvation. Hence we learn, when in affliction, to
commit the keeping of our souls to God, that we may not be soured with
discontent, or sink into despair. David was hated wrongfully, but the
words far more fully apply to Christ. In a world where unrighteousness
reigns so much, we must not wonder if we meet with those that are our
enemies wrongfully. Let us take care that we never do wrong; then if we
receive wrong, we may the better bear it. By the satisfaction Christ
made to God for our sin by his blood, he restored that which he took not
away, he paid our debt, suffered for our offences. Even when we can
plead Not guilty, as to men's unjust accusations, yet before God we must
acknowledge ourselves to deserve all that is brought upon us. All our
sins take rise from our foolishness. They are all done in God's sight.
David complains of the unkindness of friends and relations. This was
fulfilled in Christ, whose brethren did not believe on him, and who was
forsaken by his disciples. Christ made satisfaction for us, not only by
putting off the honours due to God, but by submitting to the greatest
dishonours that could be done to any man. We need not be discouraged if
our zeal for the truths, precepts, and worship of God, should provoke
some, and cause others to mock our godly sorrow and deadness to the
world.

[Psalms 69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 69:13</span></span>

Whatever deep waters of affliction or temptation we sink into, whatever
floods of trouble or ungodly men seem ready to overwhelm us, let us
persevere in prayer to our Lord to save us. The tokens of God's favour
to us are enough to keep our spirits from sinking in the deepest outward
troubles. If we think well of God, and continue to do so under the
greatest hardships, we need not fear but he will do well for us. And if
at any time we are called on to suffer reproach and shame, for Christ's
sake, this may be our comfort, that he knows it. It bears hard on one
that knows the worth of a good name, to be oppressed with a bad one; but
when we consider what a favour it is to be accounted worthy to suffer
shame for the name of Jesus, we shall see that there is no reason why it
should be heart-breaking to us. The sufferings of Christ were here
particularly foretold, which proves the Scripture to be the word of God;
and how exactly these predictions were fulfilled in Jesus Christ, which
proves him to be the true Messiah. The vinegar and the gall given to
him, were a faint emblem of that bitter cup which he drank up, that we
might drink the cup of salvation. We cannot expect too little from men,
miserable comforters are they all; nor can we expect too much from the
God of all comfort and consolation.

[Psalms 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 69:22</span></span>

These are prophecies of the destruction of Christ's persecutors. [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022), [Psa
69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023), are applied to the judgments of
God upon the unbelieving Jews, in [Rom
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009), [Rom
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010). When the supports of life and
delights of sense, through the corruption of our nature, are made the
food and fuel of sin, then our table is a snare. Their sin was, that
they would not see, but shut their eyes against the light, loving
darkness rather; their punishment was, that they should not see, but
should be given up to their own hearts' lusts which hardened them. Those
who reject God's great salvation proffered to them, may justly fear that
his indignation will be poured out upon them. If men will sin, the Lord
will reckon for it. But those that have multiplied to sin, may yet find
mercy, through the righteousness of the Mediator. God shuts not out any
from that righteousness; the gospel excludes none who do not, by
unbelief, shut themselves out. But those who are proud and self-willed,
so that they will not come in to God's righteousness, shall have their
doom accordingly; they themselves decide it. Let those not expect any
benefit thereby, who are not glad to be beholden to it. It is better to
be poor and sorrowful, with the blessing of the Lord, than rich and
jovial, and under his curse. This may be applied to Christ. He was, when
on earth, a man of sorrows that had not where to lay his head; but God
exalted him. Let us call upon the Lord, and though poor and sorrowful,
guilty and defiled, his salvation will set us up on high.

[Psalms 69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 69:30</span></span>

The psalmist concludes the psalm with holy joy and praise, which he
began with complaints of his grief. It is a great comfort to us, that
humble and thankful praises are more pleasing to God than the most
costly, pompous sacrifices. The humble shall look to him, and be glad;
those that seek him through Christ shall live and be comforted. God will
do great things for the gospel church, in which let all who wish well to
it rejoice. A seed shall serve him on earth, and his servants shall
inherit his heavenly kingdom. Those that love his name shall dwell
before him for ever. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Arise, thou great Restorer of the ancient places to dwell in, and turn
away ungodliness from thy people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 70](psa070)

</div>
