<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa089)  [Next](psa091.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 90](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 90:0</span></span>

([Psa 90:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001).md) The eternity of God, the
frailty of man.

([Psa 90:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007).md) Submission to Divine
chastisements.

([Psa 90:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012).md) Prayer for mercy and
grace.

[Psalms 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 90:1</span></span>

It is supposed that this psalm refers to the sentence passed on Israel
in the wilderness, Numbers 14. The favour and protection of God are the
only sure rest and comfort of the soul in this evil world. Christ Jesus
is the refuge and dwelling-place to which we may repair. We are dying
creatures, all our comforts in the world are dying comforts, but God is
an ever-living God, and believers find him so. When God, by sickness, or
other afflictions, turns men to destruction, he thereby calls men to
return unto him to repent of their sins, and live a new life. A thousand
years are nothing to God's eternity: between a minute and a million of
years there is some proportion; between time and eternity there is none.
All the events of a thousand years, whether past or to come, are more
present to the Eternal Mind, than what was done in the last hour is to
us. And in the resurrection, the body and soul shall both return and be
united again. Time passes unobserved by us, as with men asleep; and when
it is past, it is as nothing. It is a short and quickly-passing life, as
the waters of a flood. Man does but flourish as the grass, which, when
the winter of old age comes, will wither; but he may be mown down by
disease or disaster.

[Psalms 90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 90:7</span></span>

The afflictions of the saints often come from God's love; but the
rebukes of sinners, and of believers for their sins, must be seen coming
from the displeasure of God. Secret sins are known to God, and shall be
reckoned for. See the folly of those who go about to cover their sins,
for they cannot do so. Our years, when gone, can no more be recalled
than the words that we have spoken. Our whole life is toilsome and
troublesome; and perhaps, in the midst of the years we count upon, it is
cut off. We are taught by all this to stand in awe. The angels that
sinned know the power of God's anger; sinners in hell know it; but which
of us can fully describe it? Few seriously consider it as they ought.
Those who make a mock at sin, and make light of Christ, surely do not
know the power of God's anger. Who among us can dwell with that
devouring fire?

[Psalms 90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 90:12</span></span>

Those who would learn true wisdom, must pray for Divine instruction,
must beg to be taught by the Holy Spirit; and for comfort and joy in the
returns of God's favour. They pray for the mercy of God, for they
pretend not to plead any merit of their own. His favour would be a full
fountain of future joys. It would be a sufficient balance to former
griefs. Let the grace of God in us produce the light of good works. And
let Divine consolations put gladness into our hearts, and a lustre upon
our countenances. The work of our hands, establish thou it; and, in
order to that, establish us in it. Instead of wasting our precious,
fleeting days in pursuing fancies, which leave the possessors for ever
poor, let us seek the forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance in heaven.
Let us pray that the work of the Holy Spirit may appear in converting
our hearts, and that the beauty of holiness may be seen in our conduct.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 91](psa091.md)

</div>
