<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa070)  [Next](psa072) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 71](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 71:0</span></span>

([Psa 71:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)) Prayers that God would
deliver and save.

([Psa 71:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014)) Believing praises.

[Psalms 71:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 71:1</span></span>

David prays that he might never be made ashamed of dependence upon God.
With this petition every true believer may come boldly to the throne of
grace. The gracious care of Divine providence in our birth and infancy,
should engage us to early piety. He that was our Help from our birth,
ought to be our Hope from our youth. Let none expect ease or comfort
from the world. Those who love the Lord, often are hated and persecuted;
men wondered at for their principles and conduct; but the Lord has been
their strong refuge. The faithful servants of God may be assured that he
will not cast them off in old age, nor forsake them when their strength
fails.

[Psalms 71:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 71:14</span></span>

The psalmist declares that the righteousness of Christ, and the great
salvation obtained thereby, shall be the chosen subject of his
discourse. Not on a sabbath only, but on every day of the week, of the
year, of his life. Not merely at stated returns of solemn devotion, but
on every occasion, all the day long. Why will he always dwell on this?
Because he knew not the numbers thereof. It is impossible to measure the
value or the fulness of these blessings. The righteousness is
unspeakable, the salvation everlasting. God will not cast off his
grey-headed servants when no longer capable of labouring as they have
done. The Lord often strengthens his people in their souls, when nature
is sinking into decay. And it is a debt which the old disciples of
Christ owe to succeeding generations, to leave behind them a solemn
testimony to the advantage of religion, and the truth of God's promises;
and especially to the everlasting righteousness of the Redeemer. Assured
of deliverance and victory, let us spend our days, while waiting the
approach of death, in praising the Holy One of Israel with all our
powers. And while speaking of his righteousness, and singing his
praises, we shall rise above fears and infirmities, and have earnests of
the joys of heaven. The work of redemption ought, above all God's works,
to be spoken of by us in our praises. The Lamb that was slain, and has
redeemed us to God, is worthy of all blessing and praise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 72](psa072)

</div>
