<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa012)  [Next](psa014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 13:0</span></span>

The psalmist complains that God had long withdrawn. He earnestly prays
for comfort. He assures himself of an answer of peace.

[Psalms 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 13:1</span></span>

God sometimes hides his face, and leaves his own children in the dark
concerning their interest in him: and this they lay to heart more than
any outward trouble whatever. But anxious cares are heavy burdens with
which believers often load themselves more than they need. The bread of
sorrows is sometimes the saint's daily bread; our Master himself was a
man of sorrows. It is a common temptation, when trouble lasts long, to
think that it will last always. Those who have long been without joy,
begin to be without hope. We should never allow ourselves to make any
complaints but what drive us to our knees. Nothing is more killing to a
soul than the want of God's favour; nothing more reviving than the
return of it. The sudden, delightful changes in the book of Psalms, are
often very remarkable. We pass from depth of despondency to the height
of religious confidence and joy. It is thus, [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005). All is gloomy dejection in [Psa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004); but here the mind of the
despondent worshipper rises above all its distressing fears, and throws
itself, without reserve, on the mercy and care of its Divine Redeemer.
See the power of faith, and how good it is to draw near to God. If we
bring our cares and griefs to the throne of grace, and leave them there,
we may go away like Hannah, and our countenances will be no more said,
[Sa1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#018). God's mercy is the support
of the psalmist's faith. Finding I have that to trust to, I am
comforted, though I have no merit of my own. His faith in God's mercy
filled his heart with joy in his salvation; for joy and peace come by
believing. He has dealt bountifully with me. By faith he was as
confident of salvation, as if it had been completed already. In this way
believers pour out their prayers, renouncing all hopes but in the mercy
of God through the Saviour's blood: and sometimes suddenly, at others
gradually, they will find their burdens removed, and their comforts
restored; they then allow that their fears and complaints were
unnecessary, and acknowledge that the Lord hath dealt bountifully with
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 14](psa014)

</div>
