<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa062)  [Next](psa064.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 63:0</span></span>

([Psa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md), [Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002).md) David's desire toward God.

([Psa 63:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003).md) His satisfaction in God.

([Psa 63:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007).md) His dependence upon
God, and assurance of safety.

[Psalms 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 63:1</span></span>

Early will I seek thee. The true Christian devotes to God the morning
hour. He opens the eyes of his understanding with those of his body, and
awakes each morning to righteousness. He arises with a thirst after
those comforts which the world cannot give, and has immediate recourse
by prayer to the Fountain of the water of life. The true believer is
convinced, that nothing in this sinful world can satisfy the wants and
desires of his immortal soul; he expects his happiness from God, as his
portion. When faith and hope are most in exercise, the world appears a
weary desert, and the believer longs for the joys of heaven, of which he
has some foretastes in the ordinances of God upon earth.

[Psalms 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 63:3</span></span>

Even in affliction we need not want matter for praise. When this is the
regular frame of a believer's mind, he values the loving-kindness of God
more than life. God's loving-kindness is our spiritual life, and that is
better than temporal life. We must praise God with joyful lips; we must
address ourselves to the duties of religion with cheerfulness, and speak
forth the praises of God from a principle of holy joy. Praising lips
must be joyful lips. David was in continual danger; care and fear held
his eyes waking, and gave him wearisome nights; but he comforted himself
with thoughts of God. The mercies of God, when called to mind in the
night watches, support the soul, making darkness cheerful. How happy
will be that last morning, when the believer, awaking up after the
Divine likeness, shall be satisfied with all the fulness of God, and
praise him with joyful lips, where there is no night, and where sorrow
and sighing flee away!

[Psalms 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 63:7</span></span>

True Christians can, in some measure, and at some times, make use of the
strong language of David, but too commonly our souls cleave to the dust.
Having committed ourselves to God, we must be easy and pleased, and
quiet from the fear of evil. Those that follow hard after God, would
soon fail, if God's right hand did not uphold them. It is he that
strengthens us and comforts us. The psalmist doubts not but that though
now sowing in tears, he should reap in joy. Messiah the Prince shall
rejoice in God; he is already entered into the joy set before him, and
his glory will be completed at his second coming. Blessed Lord, let our
desire towards thee increase every hour; let our love be always upon
thee; let all our enjoyment be in thee, and all our satisfaction from
thee. Be thou all in all to us while we remain in the present wilderness
state, and bring us home to the everlasting enjoyment of thee for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 64](psa064.md)

</div>
