<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa039)  [Next](psa041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 40:0</span></span>

([Psa 40:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)) Confidence for
deliverance.

([Psa 40:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)) Christ's work of
redemption.

([Psa 40:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)) Prayer for mercy and
grace.

[Psalms 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 40:1</span></span>

Doubts and fears about the eternal state, are a horrible pit and miry
clay, and have been so to many a dear child of God. There is power
enough in God to help the weakest, and grace enough to help the
unworthiest of all that trust in him. The psalmist waited patiently; he
continued believing, hoping, and praying. This is applicable to Christ.
His agony, in the garden and on the cross, was a horrible pit and miry
clay. But those that wait patiently for God do not wait in vain. Those
that have been under religious melancholy, and by the grace of God have
been relieved, may apply [Psa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002)
very feelingly to themselves; they are brought up out of a horrible pit.
Christ is the Rock on which a poor soul can alone stand fast. Where God
has given stedfast hope, he expects there should be a steady, regular
walk and conduct. God filled the psalmist with joy, as well as peace in
believing. Multitudes, by faith beholding the sufferings and glory of
Christ, have learned to fear the justice and trust in the mercy of God
through Him. Many are the benefits with which we are daily loaded, both
by the providence and by the grace of God.

[Psalms 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 40:6</span></span>

The psalmist foretells that work of wonder, redemption by our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Substance must come, which is Christ, who must bring that
glory to God, and that grace to man, which it was impossible the
sacrifices should ever do. Observe the setting apart of our Lord Jesus
to the work and office of Mediator. In the volume, or roll, of the book
it was written of him. In the close rolls of the Divine decrees and
counsel, the covenant of redemption was recorded. Also, in all the
volumes of the Old Testament something was written of him, [Joh
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028). Now the purchase of our
salvation is made, the proclamation is sent forth, calling us to come
and accept it. It was preached freely and openly. Whoever undertook to
preach the gospel of Christ, would be under great temptation to conceal
it; but Christ, and those he calls to that work, are carried on in it.
May we believe his testimony, trust his promise, and submit to his
authority.

[Psalms 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 40:11</span></span>

The best saints see themselves undone, unless continually preserved by
the grace of God. But see the frightful view the psalmist had of sin.
This made the discovery of a Redeemer so welcome. In all his reflections
upon each step of his life, he discovered something amiss. The sight and
sense of our sins in their own colours, must distract us, if we have not
at the same time some sight of a Saviour. If Christ has triumphed over
our spiritual enemies, then we, through him, shall be more than
conquerors. This may encourage all that seek God and love his salvation,
to rejoice in him, and to praise him. No griefs nor poverty can render
those miserable who fear the Lord. Their God, and all that he has or
does, is the ground of their joy. The prayer of faith can unlock his
fulness, which is adapted to all their wants. The promises are sure, the
moment of fulfilment hastens forward. He who once came in great
humility, shall come again in glorious majesty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 41](psa041)

</div>
