<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa059)  [Next](psa061) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 60:0</span></span>

([Psa 60:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)) David prays for the
deliverance of Israel from their enemies.

([Psa 60:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006)) He entreats God to
carry on and complete their victories.

[Psalms 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 60:1</span></span>

David owns God's displeasure to be the cause of all the hardships he had
undergone. And when God is turning his hand in our favour, it is good to
remember our former troubles. In God's displeasure their troubles began,
therefore in his favour their prosperity must begin. Those breaches and
divisions which the folly and corruption of man make, nothing but the
wisdom and grace of God can repair, by pouring out a spirit of love and
peace, by which only a kingdom is saved from ruin. The anger of God
against sin, is the only cause of all misery, private or public, that
has been, is, or shall be. In all these cases there is no remedy, but by
returning to the Lord with repentance, faith, and prayer; beseeching him
to return to us. Christ, the Son of David, is given for a banner to
those that fear God; in him they are gathered together in one, and take
courage. In his name and strength they wage war with the powers of
darkness.

[Psalms 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 60:6</span></span>

If Christ be ours, all things, one way or another, shall be for our
eternal good. The man who is a new creature in Christ, may rejoice in
all the precious promises God has spoken in his holiness. His present
privileges, and the sanctifying influences of the Spirit, are sure
earnests of heavenly glory. David rejoices in conquering the
neighbouring nations, which had been enemies to Israel. The Israel of
God are through Christ more than conquerors. Though sometimes they think
that the Lord has cast them off, yet he will bring them into the strong
city at last. Faith in the promise will assure us that it is our
Father's good pleasure to give us the kingdom: But we are not yet made
complete conquerors, and no true believer will abuse these truths to
indulge sloth, or vain confidence. Hope in God is the best principle of
true courage, for what need those fear who have God on their side? All
our victories are from him, and while those who willingly submit to our
anointed King shall share his glories, all his foes shall be put under
his feet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 61](psa061)

</div>
