<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa019)  [Next](psa021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 20:0</span></span>

This psalm is a prayer for the kings of Israel, but with relation to
Christ.

[Psalms 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 20:1</span></span>

Even the greatest of men may be much in trouble. Neither the crown on
the king's head, nor the grace in his heart, would make him free from
trouble. Even the greatest of men must be much in prayer. Let none
expect benefit by the prayers of the church, or their friends, who are
capable of praying for themselves, yet neglect it. Pray that God would
protect his person, and preserve his life. That God would enable him to
go on in his undertakings for the public good. We may know that God
accepts our spiritual sacrifices, if by his Spirit he kindles in our
souls a holy fire of piety and love to God. Also, that the Lord would
crown his enterprises with success. Our first step to victory in
spiritual warfare is to trust only in the mercy and grace of God; all
who trust in themselves will soon be cast down. Believers triumph in
God, and his revelation of himself to them, by which they distinguish
themselves from those that live without God in the world. Those who make
God and his name their praise, may make God and his name their trust.
This was the case when the pride and power of Jewish unbelief, and pagan
idolatry, fell before the sermons and lives of the humble believers in
Jesus. This is the case in every conflict with our spiritual enemies,
when we engage them in the name, the spirit, and the power of Christ;
and this will be the case at the last day, when the world, with the
prince of it, shall be brought down and fall; but believers, risen-from
the dead, through the resurrection of the Lord, shall stand, and sing
his praises in heaven. In Christ's salvation let us rejoice; and set up
our banners in the name of the Lord our God, assured that by the saving
strength of his right hand we shall be conquerors over every enemy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 21](psa021)

</div>
