<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa088)  [Next](psa090.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 89](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 89:0</span></span>

([Psa 89:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001).md) God's mercy and truth,
and his covenant.

([Psa 89:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005).md) The glory and
perfection of God.

([Psa 89:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015).md) The happiness of those
in communion with him.

(v. 19-37) God's covenant with David, as a type of Christ.

([Psa 89:38-52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038).md) A calamitous state
lamented, Prayer for redress.

[Psalms 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 89:1</span></span>

Though our expectations may be disappointed, yet God's promises are
established in the heavens, in his eternal counsels; they are out of the
reach of opposers in hell and earth. And faith in the boundless mercy
and everlasting truth of God, may bring comfort even in the deepest
trials.

[Psalms 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 89:5</span></span>

The more God's works are known, the more they are admired. And to praise
the Lord, is to acknowledge him to be such a one that there is none like
him. Surely then we should feel and express reverence when we worship
God. But how little of this appears in our congregations, and how much
cause have we to humble ourselves on this account! That almighty power
which smote Egypt, will scatter the enemies of the church, while all who
trust in God's mercy will rejoice in his name; for mercy and truth
direct all he does. His counsels from eternity, and their consequences
to eternity, are all justice and judgment.

[Psalms 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 89:15</span></span>

Happy are those who so know the joyful sound of the gospel as to obey
it; who experience its power upon their hearts, and bring forth the
fruit of it in their lives. Though believers are nothing in themselves,
yet having all in Christ Jesus, they may rejoice in his name. May the
Lord enable us to do so. The joy of the Lord is the strength of his
people; whereas unbelief dispirits ourselves and discourages others.
Though it steals upon us under a semblance of humility, yet it is the
very essence of pride. Christ is the Holy One of Israel; and in him was
that peculiar people more blessed than in any other blessing.

[Psalms 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 89:19</span></span>

The Lord anointed David with the holy oil, not only as an emblem of the
graces and gifts he received, but as a type of Christ, the King Priest,
and Prophet, anointed with the Holy Ghost without measure. David after
his anointing, was persecuted, but none could gain advantage against
him. Yet all this was a faint shadow of the Redeemer's sufferings,
deliverance, glory, and authority, in whom alone these predictions and
promises are fully brought to pass. He is the mighty God. This is the
Redeemer appointed for us, who alone is able to complete the work of our
salvation. Let us seek an interest in these blessings, by the witness of
the Holy Spirit in our hearts. As the Lord corrected the posterity of
David for their transgressions, so his people shall be corrected for
their sins. Yet it is but a rod, not a sword; it is to correct, not to
destroy. It is a rod in the hand of God, who is wise, and knows what he
does; gracious, and will do what is best. It is a rod which they shall
never feel, but when there is need. As the sun and moon remain in
heaven, whatever changes there seem to be in them, and again appear in
due season; so the covenant of grace made in Christ, whatever alteration
seems to come to it, should not be questioned.

[Psalms 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 89:38</span></span>

Sometimes it is not easy to reconcile God's providences with his
promises, yet we are sure that God's works fulfil his word. When the
great Anointed One, Christ himself, was upon the cross, God seemed to
have cast him off, yet did not make void his covenant, for that was
established for ever. The honour of the house of David was lost. Thrones
and crowns are often laid in the dust; but there is a crown of glory
reserved for Christ's spiritual seed, which fadeth not away. From all
this complaint learn what work sin makes with families, noble families,
with families in which religion has appeared. They plead with God for
mercy. God's unchangeableness and faithfulness assure us that He will
not cast off those whom he has chosen and covenanted with. They were
reproached for serving him. The scoffers of the latter days, in like
manner, reproach the footsteps of the Messiah when they ask, Where is
the promise of his coming? [Pe2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003.md),
[Pe2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004.md). The records of the Lord's
dealings with the family of David, show us his dealings with his church,
and with believers. Their afflictions and distresses may be grievous,
but he will not finally cast them off. Self-deceivers abuse this
doctrine, and others by a careless walk bring themselves into darkness
and distress; yet let the true believer rely on it for encouragement in
the path of duty, and in bearing the cross. The psalm ends with praise,
even after this sad complaint. Those who give God thanks for what he has
done, may give him thanks for what he will do. God will follow those
with his mercies, who follow him with praises.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 90](psa090.md)

</div>
