<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa013)  [Next](psa015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 14:0</span></span>

A description of the depravity of human nature, and the deplorable
corruption of a great part of mankind.

[Psalms 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 14:1</span></span>

The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. The sinner here
described is an atheist, one that saith there is no Judge or Governor of
the world, no Providence ruling over the affairs of men. He says this in
his heart. He cannot satisfy himself that there is none, but wishes
there were none, and pleases himself that it is possible there may be
none; he is willing to think there is none. This sinner is a fool; he is
simple and unwise, and this is evidence of it: he is wicked and profane,
and this is the cause. The word of God is a discerner of these thoughts.
No man will say, There is no God, till he is so hardened in sin, that it
is become his interest that there should be none to call him to an
account. The disease of sin has infected the whole race of mankind. They
are all gone aside, there is none that doeth good, no, not one. Whatever
good is in any of the children of men, or is done by them, it is not of
themselves, it is God's work in them. They are gone aside from the right
way of their duty, the way that leads to happiness, and are turned into
the paths of the destroyer. Let us lament the corruption of our nature,
and see what need we have of the grace of God: let us not marvel that we
are told we must be born again. And we must not rest in any thing short
of union with Christ, and a new creation to holiness by his Spirit. The
psalmist endeavours to convince sinners of the evil and danger of their
way, while they think themselves very wise, and good, and safe. Their
wickedness is described. Those that care not for God's people, for God's
poor, care not for God himself. People run into all manner of
wickedness, because they do not call upon God for his grace. What good
can be expected from those that live without prayer? But those that will
not fear God, may be made to fear at the shaking of a leaf. All our
knowledge of the depravity of human nature should endear to us salvation
out of Zion. But in heaven alone shall the whole company of the redeemed
rejoice fully, and for evermore. The world is bad; oh that the Messiah
would come and change its character! There is universal corruption; oh
for the times of reformation! The triumphs of Zion's King will be the
joys of Zion's children. The second coming of Christ, finally to do away
the dominion of sin and Satan, will be the completing of this salvation,
which is the hope, and will be the joy of every Israelite indeed. With
this assurance we should comfort ourselves and one another, under the
sins of sinners and sufferings of saints.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 15](psa015)

</div>
