<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa055)  [Next](psa057) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 56:0</span></span>

([Psa 56:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)) David seeks mercy from
God, amidst the malice of his enemies.

([Psa 56:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)) He rests his faith on
God's promises, and declares his obligation to praise him for mercies.

[Psalms 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 56:1</span></span>

Be merciful unto me, O God. This petition includes all the good for
which we come to throne of grace. If we obtain mercy there, we need no
more to make us happy. It implies likewise our best plea, not our merit,
but God's mercy, his free, rich mercy. We may flee to, and trust the
mercy of God, when surrounded on all sides by difficulties and dangers.
His enemies were too hard for him, if God did not help him. He resolves
to make God's promises the matter of his praises, and so we have reason
to make them. As we must not trust an arm of flesh when engaged for us,
so we must not be afraid of an arm of flesh when stretched out against
us. The sin of sinners will never be their security. Who knows the power
of God's anger; how high it can reach, how forcibly it can strike?

[Psalms 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 56:8</span></span>

The heavy and continued trials through which many of the Lord's people
have passed, should teach us to be silent and patient under lighter
crosses. Yet we are often tempted to repine and despond under small
sorrows. For this we should check ourselves. David comforts himself, in
his distress and fear, that God noticed all his grievances and all his
griefs. God has a bottle and a book for his people's tears, both the
tears for their sins, and those for their afflictions. He observes them
with tender concern. Every true believer may boldly say, The Lord is my
helper, and then I will not fear what man shall do unto me; for man has
no power but what is given him from above. Thy vows are upon me, O Lord;
not as a burden, but as that by which I am known to be thy servant; as a
bridle that restrains me from what would be hurtful, and directs me in
the way of my duty. And vows of thankfulness properly accompany prayers
for mercy. If God deliver us from sin, either from doing it, or by his
pardoning mercy, he has delivered our souls from death, which is the
wages of sin. Where the Lord has begun a good work he will carry it on
and perfect it. David hopes that God would keep him even from the
appearance of sin. We should aim in all our desires and expectations of
deliverance, both from sin and trouble, that we may do the better
service to the Lord; that we may serve him without fear. If his grace
has delivered our souls from the death of sin, he will bring us to
heaven, to walk before him for ever in light.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 57](psa057)

</div>
