<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa060)  [Next](psa062.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 61](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 61:0</span></span>

([Psa 61:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001).md) David seeks God upon
former experience.

([Psa 61:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005).md) He vows to serve God.

[Psalms 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 61:1</span></span>

David begins with prayers and tears, but ends with praise. Thus the
soul, being lifted up to God, returns to the enjoyment of itself.
Wherever we are, we have liberty to draw near to God, and may find a way
open to the throne of grace. And that which separates us from other
comforts, should drive us nearer to God, the fountain of all comfort.
Though the heart is overwhelmed, yet it may be lifted up to God in
prayer. Nay, I will cry unto thee, for by that means it will be
supported and relieved. Weeping must quicken praying, and not deaden it.
God's power and promise are a rock that is higher than we are. This rock
is Christ. On the Divine mercy, as on a rock, David desired to rest his
soul; but he was like a ship-wrecked sailor, exposed to the billows at
the bottom of a rock too high for him to climb without help. David found
that he could not be fixed on the Rock of salvation, unless the Lord
placed him upon it. As there is safety in Him, and none in ourselves,
let us pray to be led to and fixed upon Christ our Rock. The service of
God shall be his constant work and business: all must make it so who
expect to find God their shelter and strong tower. The grace of God
shall be his constant comfort.

[Psalms 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 61:5</span></span>

There is a people in the world that fear God's name. There is a heritage
peculiar to that people; present comforts in the soul, earnests of
future bliss. Those that fear God have enough in him, and must not
complain. We need desire no better heritage than that of those who fear
God. Those abide to good purpose in this world, who abide before God,
serve him, and walk in his fear; those who do so, shall abide before him
for ever. And these words are to be applied to Him of whom the angel
said, the Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and
of his kingdom there shall be no end, [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032.md). God's promises, and our faith in
them, are not to do away, but to encourage prayer. We need not desire to
be better secured than under the protection of God's mercy and truth.
And if we partake of that grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ, we
may praise him, whatever be our outward circumstances. But renewed
experience of God's mercy and truth towards his people in Christ, is the
main matter of our joy in him, and our praise unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 62](psa062.md)

</div>
