<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa030)  [Next](psa032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 31:0</span></span>

([Psa 31:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001).md) Confidence in God.

([Psa 31:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009).md) Prayer in trouble.

([Psa 31:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019).md) Praise for God's
goodness.

[Psalms 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 31:1</span></span>

Faith and prayer must go together, for the prayer of faith is the
prevailing prayer. David gave up his soul in a special manner to God.
And with the words, [Psa 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005.md), our
Lord Jesus yielded up his last breath on the cross, and made his soul a
free-will offering for sin, laying down his life as a ransom. But David
is here as a man in distress and trouble. And his great care is about
his soul, his spirit, his better part. Many think that while perplexed
about their worldly affairs, and their cares multiply, they may be
excused if they neglect their souls; but we are the more concerned to
look to our souls, that, though the outward man perish, the inward man
may suffer no damage. The redemption of the soul is so precious, that it
must have ceased for ever, if Christ had not undertaken it. Having
relied on God's mercy, he will be glad and rejoice in it. God looks upon
our souls, when we are in trouble, to see whether they are humbled for
sin, and made better by the affliction. Every believer will meet with
such dangers and deliverances, until he is delivered from death, his
last enemy.

[Psalms 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 31:9</span></span>

David's troubles made him a man of sorrows. Herein he was a type of
Christ, who was acquainted with grief. David acknowledged that his
afflictions were merited by his own sins, but Christ suffered for ours.
David's friends durst not give him any assistance. Let us not think it
strange if thus deserted, but make sure of a Friend in heaven who will
not fail. God will be sure to order and dispose all for the best, to all
those who commit their spirits also into his hand. The time of life is
in God's hands, to lengthen or shorten, make bitter or sweet, according
to the counsel of his will. The way of man is not in himself, nor in our
friend's hands, nor in our enemies' hands, but in God's. In this faith
and confidence he prays that the Lord would save him for his mercies's
sake, and not for any merit of his own. He prophesies the silencing of
those that reproach and speak evil of the people of God. There is a day
coming, when the Lord will execute judgment upon them. In the mean time,
we should engage ourselves by well-doing, if possible, to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

[Psalms 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 31:19</span></span>

Instead of yielding to impatience or despondency under our troubles, we
should turn our thoughts to the goodness of the Lord towards those who
fear and trust in Him. All comes to sinners through the wondrous gift of
the only-begotten Son of God, to be the atonement for their sins. Let
not any yield to unbelief, or think, under discouraging circumstances,
that they are cut off from before the eyes of the Lord, and left to the
pride of men. Lord, pardon our complaints and fears; increase our faith,
patience, love, and gratitude; teach us to rejoice in tribulation and in
hope. The deliverance of Christ, with the destruction of his enemies,
ought to strengthen and comfort the hearts of believers under all their
afflictions here below, that having suffered courageously with their
Master, they may triumphantly enter into his joy and glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 32](psa032.md)

</div>
