<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa036)  [Next](psa038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 37:0</span></span>

David persuades to patience and confidence in God, by the state of the
godly and of the wicked.

[Psalms 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 37:1</span></span>

When we look abroad we see the world full of evil-doers, that flourish
and live in ease. So it was seen of old, therefore let us not marvel at
the matter. We are tempted to fret at this, to think them the only happy
people, and so we are prone to do like them: but this we are warned
against. Outward prosperity is fading. When we look forward, with an eye
of faith, we shall see no reason to envy the wicked. Their weeping and
wailing will be everlasting. The life of religion is a believing trust
in the Lord, and diligent care to serve him according to his will. It is
not trusting God, but tempting him, if we do not make conscience of our
duty to him. A man's life consists not in abundance, but, Thou shalt
have food convenient for thee. This is more than we deserve, and it is
enough for one that is going to heaven. To delight in God is as much a
privilege as a duty. He has not promised to gratify the appetites of the
body, and the humours of the fancy, but the desires of the renewed,
sanctified soul. What is the desire of the heart of a good man? It is
this, to know, and love, and serve God. Commit thy way unto the Lord;
roll thy way upon the Lord, so the margin reads it. Cast thy burden upon
the Lord, the burden of thy care. We must roll it off ourselves, not
afflict and perplex ourselves with thoughts about future events, but
refer them to God. By prayer spread thy case and all thy cares before
the Lord, and trust in him. We must do our duty, and then leave the
event with God. The promise is very sweet: He shall bring that to pass,
whatever it is, which thou has committed to him.

[Psalms 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 37:7</span></span>

Let us be satisfied that God will make all to work for good to us. Let
us not discompose ourselves at what we see in this world. A fretful,
discontented spirit is open to many temptations. For, in all respects,
the little which is allotted to the righteous, is more comfortable and
more profitable than the ill-gotten and abused riches of ungodly men. It
comes from a hand of special love. God provides plentifully and well,
not only for his working servants, but for his waiting servants. They
have that which is better than wealth, peace of mind, peace with God,
and then peace in God; that peace which the world cannot give, and which
the world cannot have. God knows the believer's days. Not one day's work
shall go unrewarded. Their time on earth is reckoned by days, which will
soon be numbered; but heavenly happiness shall be for ever. This will be
a real support to believers in evil times. Those that rest on the Rock
of ages, have no reason to envy the wicked the support of their broken
reeds.

[Psalms 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 37:21</span></span>

The Lord our God requires that we do justly, and render to all their
due. It is a great sin for those that are able, to deny the payment of
just debts; it is a great misery not to be able to pay them. He that is
truly merciful, will be ever merciful. We must leave our sins; learn to
do well, and cleave to it. This is true religion. The blessing of God is
the spring, sweetness, and security of all earthly enjoyments. And if we
are sure of this, we are sure not to want any thing good for us in this
world. By his grace and Holy Spirit, he directs the thoughts,
affections, and designs of good men. By his providence he overrules
events, so as to make their way plain. He does not always show them his
way for a distance, but leads them step by step, as children are led.
God will keep them from being ruined by their falls, either into sin or
into trouble, though such as fall into sin will be sorely hurt. Few, if
any, have known the consistent believer, or his children, reduced to
abject, friendless want. God forsakes not his saints in affliction; and
in heaven only the righteous shall dwell for ever; that will be their
everlasting habitation. A good man may fall into the hands of a
messenger of Satan, and be sorely buffeted, but God will not leave him
in his enemy's hands.

[Psalms 37:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 37:34</span></span>

Duty is ours, and we must mind it; but events are God's, we must refer
the disposal of them to him. What a striking picture is in [Psa
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#035), [Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036), of many a prosperous enemy of
God! But God remarkably blights the projects of the prosperous wicked,
especially persecutors. None are perfect in themselves, but believers
are so in Christ Jesus. If all the saint's days continue dark and
cloudy, his dying day may prove comfortable, and his sun set bright; or,
if it should set under a cloud, yet his future state will be everlasting
peace. The salvation of the righteous will be the Lord's doing. He will
help them to do their duties, to bear their burdens; help them to bear
their troubles well, and get good by them, and, in due time, will
deliver them out of their troubles. Let sinners then depart from evil,
and do good; repent of and forsake sin, and trust in the mercy of God
through Jesus Christ. Let them take his yoke upon them, and learn of
him, that they may dwell for evermore in heaven. Let us mark the closing
scenes of different characters, and always depend on God's mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 38](psa038)

</div>
