<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa026)  [Next](psa028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 27:0</span></span>

([Psa 27:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)) The psalmist's faith.

([Psa 27:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#007)) His desire toward God,
and expectation from him.

[Psalms 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 27:1</span></span>

The Lord, who is the believer's light, is the strength of his life; not
only by whom, but in whom he lives and moves. In God let us strengthen
ourselves. The gracious presence of God, his power, his promise, his
readiness to hear prayer, the witness of his Spirit in the hearts of his
people; these are the secret of his tabernacle, and in these the saints
find cause for that holy security and peace of mind in which they dwell
at ease. The psalmist prays for constant communion with God in holy
ordinances. All God's children desire to dwell in their Father's house.
Not to sojourn there as a wayfaring man, to tarry but for a night; or to
dwell there for a time only, as the servant that abides not in the house
for ever; but to dwell there all the days of their life, as children
with a father. Do we hope that the praising of God will be the
blessedness of our eternity? Surely then we ought to make it the
business of our time. This he had at heart more than any thing. Whatever
the Christian is as to this life, he considers the favour and service of
God as the one thing needful. This he desires, prays for and seeks
after, and in it he rejoices.

[Psalms 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 27:7</span></span>

Wherever the believer is, he can find a way to the throne of grace by
prayer. God calls us by his Spirit, by his word, by his worship, and by
special providences, merciful and afflicting. When we are foolishly
making court to lying vanities, God is, in love to us, calling us to
seek our own mercies in him. The call is general, "Seek ye my face;" but
we must apply it to ourselves, "I will seek it." The word does us no
good, when we do not ourselves accept the exhortation: a gracious heart
readily answers to the call of a gracious God, being made willing in the
day of his power. The psalmist requests the favour of the Lord; the
continuance of his presence with him; the benefit of Divine guidance,
and the benefit of Divine protection. God's time to help those that
trust in him, is, when all other helpers fail. He is a surer and better
Friend than earthly parents are, or can be. What was the belief which
supported the psalmist? That he should see the goodness of the Lord.
There is nothing like the believing hope of eternal life, the foresights
of that glory, and foretastes of those pleasures, to keep us from
fainting under all calamities. In the mean time he should be
strengthened to bear up under his burdens. Let us look unto the
suffering Saviour, and pray in faith, not to be delivered into the hands
of our enemies. Let us encourage each other to wait on the Lord, with
patient expectation, and fervent prayer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 28](psa028)

</div>
