<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa054)  [Next](psa056) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 55](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 55:0</span></span>

([Psa 55:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#001)) Prayer to God to
manifest his favour.

([Psa 55:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#009)) The great wickedness
and treachery of his enemies.

([Psa 55:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#016)) He is sure that God
would in due time appear for him.

[Psalms 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 55:1</span></span>

In these verses we have, 1. David praying. Prayer is a salve for every
sore, and a relief to the spirit under every burden. 2. David weeping.
Griefs are thus, in some measure, lessened, while those increase that
have no vent given them. David in great alarm. We may well suppose him
to be so, upon the breaking out of Absalom's conspiracy, and the falling
away of the people. Horror overwhelmed him. Probably the remembrance of
his sin in the matter of Uriah added much to the terror. When under a
guilty conscience we must mourn in our complaint, and even strong
believers have for a time been filled with horror. But none ever was so
overwhelmed as the holy Jesus, when it pleased the Lord to put him to
grief, and to make his soul an offering for our sins. In his agony he
prayed more earnestly, and was heard and delivered; trusting in him, and
following him, we shall be supported under, and carried through all
trials. See how David was weary of the treachery and ingratitude of men,
and the cares and disappointments of his high station: he longed to hide
himself in some desert from the fury and fickleness of his people. He
aimed not at victory, but rest; a barren wilderness, so that he might be
quiet. The wisest and best of men most earnestly covet peace and
quietness, and the more when vexed and wearied with noise and clamour.
This makes death desirable to a child of God, that it is a final escape
from all the storms and tempests of this world, to perfect and
everlasting rest.

[Psalms 55:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 55:9</span></span>

No wickedness so distresses the believer, as that which he witnesses in
those who profess to be of the church of God. Let us not be surprised at
the corruptions and disorders of the church on earth, but long to see
the New Jerusalem. He complains of one that had been very industrious
against him. God often destroys the enemies of the church by dividing
them. And an interest divided against itself cannot long stand. The true
Christian must expect trials from professed friends, from those with
whom he has been united; this will be very painful; but by looking unto
Jesus we shall be enabled to bear it. Christ was betrayed by a
companion, a disciple, an apostle, who resembled Ahithophel in his
crimes and doom. Both were speedily overtaken by Divine vengeance. And
this prayer is a prophecy of the utter, the everlasting ruin, of all who
oppose and rebel against the Messiah.

[Psalms 55:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 55:16</span></span>

In every trial let us call upon the Lord, and he will save us. He shall
hear us, and not blame us for coming too often; the oftener the more
welcome. David had thought all were against him; but now he sees there
were many with him, more than he supposed; and the glory of this he
gives to God, for it is he that raises us up friends, and makes them
faithful to us. There are more true Christians, and believers have more
real friends, than in their gloomy hours they suppose. His enemies
should be reckoned with, and brought down; they could not ease
themselves of their fears, as David could, by faith in God. Mortal men,
though ever so high and strong, will easily be crushed by an eternal
God. Those who are not reclaimed by the rod of affliction, will
certainly be brought down to the pit of destruction. The burden of
afflictions is very heavy, especially when attended with the temptations
of Satan; there is also the burden of sin and corruption. The only
relief under it is, to look to Christ, who bore it. Whatever it is that
thou desirest God should give thee, leave it to him to give it in his
own way and time. Care is a burden, it makes the heart stoop. We must
commit our ways and works to the Lord; let him do as seemeth him good,
and let us be satisfied. To cast our burden upon God, is to rest upon
his providence and promise. And if we do so, he will carry us in the
arms of his power, as a nurse carries a child; and will strengthen our
spirits by his Spirit, so that they shall sustain the trial. He will
never suffer the righteous to be moved; to be so shaken by any troubles,
as to quit their duty to God, or their comfort in him. He will not
suffer them to be utterly cast down. He, who bore the burden of our
sorrows, desires us to leave to him to bear the burden of our cares,
that, as he knows what is best for us, he may provide it accordingly.
Why do not we trust Christ to govern the world which he redeemed?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 56](psa056)

</div>
