<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa072)  [Next](psa074) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 73:0</span></span>

([Psa 73:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)) The psalmist's
temptation.

([Psa 73:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015)) How he gained a
victory over it.

([Psa 73:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021)) How he profited by it.

[Psalms 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 73:1</span></span>

The psalmist was strongly tempted to envy the prosperity of the wicked;
a common temptation, which has tried the graces of many saints. But he
lays down the great principle by which he resolved to abide. It is the
goodness of God. This is a truth which cannot be shaken. Good thoughts
of God will fortify against Satan's temptations. The faith even of
strong believers may be sorely shaken, and ready to fail. There are
storms that will try the firmest anchors. Foolish and wicked people have
sometimes a great share of outward prosperity. They seem to have the
least share of the troubles of this life; and they seem to have the
greatest share of its comforts. They live without the fear of God, yet
they prosper, and get on in the world. Wicked men often spend their
lives without much sickness, and end them without great pain; while many
godly persons scarcely know what health is, and die with great
sufferings. Often the wicked are not frightened, either by the
remembrance of their sins, or the prospect of their misery, but they die
without terror. We cannot judge men's state beyond death, by what passes
at their death. He looked abroad, and saw many of God's people greatly
at a loss. Because the wicked are so very daring, therefore his people
return hither; they know not what to say to it, and the rather, because
they drink deep of the bitter cup of affliction. He spoke feelingly when
he spoke of his own troubles; there is no disputing against sense,
except by faith. From all this arose a strong temptation to cast off
religion. But let us learn that the true course of sanctification
consists in cleansing a man from all pollution both of soul and body.
The heart is cleansed by the blood of Christ laid hold upon by faith;
and by the begun works of the Lord's Spirit, manifested in the hearty
resolution, purpose, and study of holiness, and a blameless course of
life and actions, the hands are cleansed. It is not in vain to serve God
and keep his ordinances.

[Psalms 73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 73:15</span></span>

The psalmist having shown the progress of his temptation, shows how
faith and grace prevailed. He kept up respect for God's people, and with
that he restrained himself from speaking what he had thought amiss. It
is a sign that we repent of the evil thoughts of the heart, if we
suppress them. Nothing gives more offence to God's children, than to say
it is vain to serve God; for there is nothing more contrary to their
universal experience. He prayed to God to make this matter plain to him;
and he understood the wretched end of wicked people; even in the height
of their prosperity they were but ripening for ruin. The sanctuary must
be the resort of a tempted soul. The righteous man's afflictions end in
peace, therefore he is happy; the wicked man's enjoyments end in
destruction, therefore he is miserable. The prosperity of the wicked is
short and uncertain, slippery places. See what their prosperity is; it
is but a vain show, it is only a corrupt imagination, not substance, but
a mere shadow; it is as a dream, which may please us a little while we
are slumbering, yet even then it disturbs our repose.

[Psalms 73:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 73:21</span></span>

God would not suffer his people to be tempted, if his grace were not
sufficient, not only to save them from harm, but to make them gainers by
it. This temptation, the working of envy and discontent, is very
painful. In reflecting upon it, the psalmist owns it was his folly and
ignorance thus to vex himself. If good men, at any time, through the
surprise and strength of temptation, think, or speak, or act amiss, they
will reflect upon it with sorrow and shame. We must ascribe our safety
in temptation, and our victory, not to our own wisdom, but to the
gracious presence of God with us, and Christ's intercession for us. All
who commit themselves to God, shall be guided with the counsel both of
his word and of his Spirit, the best counsellors here, and shall be
received to his glory in another world; the believing hopes and
prospects of which will reconcile us to all dark providences. And the
psalmist was hereby quickened to cleave the closer to God. Heaven itself
could not make us happy without the presence and love of our God. The
world and all its glory vanishes. The body will fail by sickness, age,
and death; when the flesh fails, the conduct, courage, and comfort fail.
But Christ Jesus, our Lord, offers to be all in all to every poor
sinner, who renounces all other portions and confidences. By sin we are
all far from God. And a profession Christ, if we go on in sin, will
increase our condemnation. May we draw near, and keep near, to our God,
by faith and prayer, and find it good to do so. Those that with an
upright heart put their trust in God, shall never want matter for
thanksgiving to him. Blessed Lord, who hast so graciously promised to
become our portion in the next world, prevent us from choosing any other
in this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 74](psa074)

</div>
