<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa038)  [Next](psa040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 39:0</span></span>

([Psa 39:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)) David meditates on man's
frailty.

([Psa 39:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)) He applies for pardon
and deliverance.

[Psalms 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 39:1</span></span>

If an evil thought should arise in the mind, suppress it. Watchfulness
in the habit, is the bridle upon the head; watchfulness in acts, is the
hand upon the bridle. When not able to separate from wicked men, we
should remember they will watch our words, and turn them, if they can,
to our disadvantage. Sometimes it may be necessary to keep silence, even
from good words; but in general we are wrong when backward to engage in
edifying discourse. Impatience is a sin that has its cause within
ourselves, and that is, musing; and its ill effects upon ourselves, and
that is no less than burning. In our greatest health and prosperity,
every man is altogether vanity, he cannot live long; he may die soon.
This is an undoubted truth, but we are very unwilling to believe it.
Therefore let us pray that God would enlighten our minds by his Holy
Spirit, and fill our hearts with his grace, that we may be ready for
death every day and hour.

[Psalms 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 39:7</span></span>

There is no solid satisfaction to be had in the creature; but it is to
be found in the Lord, and in communion with him; to him we should be
driven by our disappointments. If the world be nothing but vanity, may
God deliver us from having or seeking our portion in it. When
creature-confidences fail, it is our comfort that we have a God to go
to, a God to trust in. We may see a good God doing all, and ordering all
events concerning us; and a good man, for that reason, says nothing
against it. He desires the pardoning of his sin, and the preventing of
his shame. We must both watch and pray against sin. When under the
correcting hand of the Lord, we must look to God himself for relief, not
to any other. Our ways and our doings bring us into trouble, and we are
beaten with a rod of our own making. What a poor thing is beauty! and
what fools are those that are proud of it, when it will certainly, and
may quickly, be consumed! The body of man is as a garment to the soul.
In this garment sin has lodged a moth, which wears away, first the
beauty, then the strength, and finally the substance of its parts.
Whoever has watched the progress of a lingering distemper, or the work
of time alone, in the human frame, will feel at once the force of this
comparison, and that, surely every man is vanity. Afflictions are sent
to stir up prayer. If they have that effect, we may hope that God will
hear our prayer. The believer expects weariness and ill treatment on his
way to heaven; but he shall not stay here long: walking with God by
faith, he goes forward on his journey, not diverted from his course, nor
cast down by the difficulties he meets. How blessed it is to sit loose
from things here below, that while going home to our Father's house, we
may use the world as not abusing it! May we always look for that city,
whose Builder and Maker is God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 40](psa040)

</div>
