<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa076)  [Next](psa078) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 77](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 77:0</span></span>

([Psa 77:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)) The psalmist's troubles
and temptation.

([Psa 77:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)) He encourages himself
by the remembrance of God's help of his people.

[Psalms 77:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 77:1</span></span>

Days of trouble must be days of prayer; when God seems to have withdrawn
from us, we must seek him till we find him. In the day of his trouble
the psalmist did not seek for the diversion of business or amusement,
but he sought God, and his favor and grace. Those that are under trouble
of mind, must pray it away. He pored upon the trouble; the methods that
should have relieved him did but increase his grief. When he remembered
God, it was only the Divine justice and wrath. His spirit was
overwhelmed, and sank under the load. But let not the remembrance of the
comforts we have lost, make us unthankful for those that are left.
Particularly he called to remembrance the comforts with which he
supported himself in former sorrows. Here is the language of a
sorrowful, deserted soul, walking in darkness; a common case even among
those that fear the Lord, [Isa 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010).
Nothing wounds and pierces like the thought of God's being angry. God's
own people, in a cloudy and dark day, may be tempted to make wrong
conclusions about their spiritual state, and that of God's kingdom in
the world. But we must not give way to such fears. Let faith answer them
from the Scripture. The troubled fountain will work itself clear again;
and the recollection of former times of joyful experience often raises a
hope, tending to relief. Doubts and fears proceed from the want and
weakness of faith. Despondency and distrust under affliction, are too
often the infirmities of believers, and, as such, are to be thought upon
by us with sorrow and shame. When, unbelief is working in us, we must
thus suppress its risings.

[Psalms 77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 77:11</span></span>

The remembrance of the works of God, will be a powerful remedy against
distrust of his promise and goodness; for he is God, and changes not.
God's way is in the sanctuary. We are sure that God is holy in all his
works. God's ways are like the deep waters, which cannot be fathomed;
like the way of a ship, which cannot be tracked. God brought Israel out
of Egypt. This was typical of the great redemption to be wrought out in
the fulness of time, both by price and power. If we have harboured
doubtful thoughts, we should, without delay, turn our minds to meditate
on that God, who spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, that with him, he might freely give us all things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 78](psa078)

</div>
