<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa064)  [Next](psa066.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 65:0</span></span>

([Psa 65:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001).md) God is to be praised in
the kingdom of grace.

([Psa 65:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006).md) In the kingdom of
providence.

[Psalms 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 65:1</span></span>

All the praise the Lord receives from this earth is from Zion, being the
fruit of the Spirit of Christ, and acceptable through him. Praise is
silent unto thee, as wanting words to express the great goodness of God.
He reveals himself upon a mercy-seat, ready to hear and answer the
prayers of all who come unto him by faith in Jesus Christ. Our sins
prevail against us; we cannot pretend to balance them with any
righteousness of our own: yet, as for our transgressions, of thine own
free mercy, and for the sake of a righteousness of thine own providing,
we shall not come into condemnation for them. Observe what it is to come
into communion with God in order to blessedness. It is to converse with
him as one we love and value; it is to apply ourselves closely to
religion as to the business of our dwelling-place. Observe how we come
into communion with God; only by God's free choice. There is abundance
of goodness in God's house, and what is satisfying to the soul; there is
enough for all, enough for each: it is always ready; and all without
money and without price. By faith and prayer we may keep up communion
with God, and bring in comfort from him, wherever we are. But it is only
through that blessed One, who approaches the Father as our Advocate and
Surety, that sinners may expect or can find this happiness.

[Psalms 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 65:6</span></span>

That Almighty strength which sets fast the mountains, upholds the
believer. That word which stills the stormy ocean, and speaks it into a
calm, can silence our enemies. How contrary soever light and darkness
are to each other, it is hard to say which is most welcome. Does the
watchman wait for the morning? so does the labourer earnestly desire the
shades of evening. Some understand it of the morning and evening
sacrifices. We are to look upon daily worship, both alone and with our
families, to be the most needful of our daily occupations, the most
delightful of our daily comforts. How much the fruitfulness of this
lower part of the creation depends upon the influence of the upper, is
easy to observe; every good and perfect gift is from above. He who
enriches the earth, which is filled with man's sins, by his abundant and
varied bounty, can neither want power nor will to feed the souls of his
people. Temporal mercies to us unworthy creatures, shadow forth more
important blessings. The rising of the Sun of righteousness, and the
pouring forth of the influences of the Holy Spirit, that river of God,
full of the waters of life and salvation, render the hard, barren,
worthless hearts of sinners fruitful in every good work, and change the
face of nations more than the sun and rain change the face of nature.
Wherever the Lord passes, by his preached gospel, attended by his Holy
Spirit, his paths drop fatness, and numbers are taught to rejoice in and
praise him. They will descend upon the pastures of the wilderness, all
the earth shall hear and embrace the gospel, and bring forth abundantly
the fruits of righteousness which are, through Jesus Christ, to the
glory of the Father. Manifold and marvellous, O Lord, are thy works,
whether of nature or of grace; surely in loving-kindness hast thou made
them all.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 66](psa066.md)

</div>
