<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa015)  [Next](psa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 16:0</span></span>

This psalm begins with expressions of devotion, which may be applied to
Christ; but ends with such confidence of a resurrection, as must be
applied to Christ, and to him only.

[Psalms 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 16:1</span></span>

David flees to God's protection, with cheerful, believing confidence.
Those who have avowed that the Lord is their Lord, should often put
themselves in mind of what they have done, take the comfort of it, and
live up to it. He devotes himself to the honour of God, in the service
of the saints. Saints on earth we must be, or we shall never be saints
in heaven. Those renewed by the grace of God, and devoted to the glory
of God, are saints on earth. The saints in the earth are excellent ones,
yet some of them so poor, that they needed to have David's goodness
extended to them. David declares his resolution to have no fellowship
with the works of darkness; he repeats the solemn choice he had made of
God for his portion and happiness, takes to himself the comfort of the
choice, and gives God the glory of it. This is the language of a devout
and pious soul. Most take the world for their chief good, and place
their happiness in the enjoyments of it; but how poor soever my
condition is in this world, let me have the love and favour of God, and
be accepted of him; let me have a title by promise to life and happiness
in the future state; and I have enough. Heaven is an inheritance; we
must take that for our home, our rest, our everlasting good, and look
upon this world to be no more ours, than the country through which is
our road to our Father's house. Those that have God for their portion,
have a goodly heritage. Return unto thy rest, O my soul, and look no
further. Gracious persons, though they still covet more of God, never
covet more than God; but, being satisfied of his loving-kindness, are
abundantly satisfied with it: they envy not any their carnal mirth and
delights. But so ignorant and foolish are we, that if left to ourselves,
we shall forsake our own mercies for lying vanities. God having given
David counsel by his word and Spirit, his own thoughts taught him in the
night season, and engaged him by faith to live to God. [Psa
16:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008), are quoted by St. Peter in
his first sermon, after the pouring out of the Spirit on the day of
Pentecost, [Act 2:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025); he declared
that David in them speaks concerning Christ, and particularly of his
resurrection. And Christ being the Head of the body, the church, these
verses may be applied to all Christians, guided and animated by the
Spirit of Christ; and we may hence learn, that it is our wisdom and duty
to set the Lord always before us. And if our eyes are ever toward God,
our hearts and tongues may ever rejoice in him. Death destroys the hope
of man, but not the hope of a real Christian. Christ's resurrection is
an earnest of the believer's resurrection. In this world sorrow is our
lot, but in heaven there is joy, a fulness of joy; our pleasures here
are for a moment, but those at God's right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Through this thy beloved Son, and our dear Saviour, thou wilt
show us, O Lord, the path of life; thou wilt justify our souls now, and
raise our bodies by thy power at the last day; when earthly sorrow shall
end in heavenly joy, pain in everlasting happiness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 17](psa017)

</div>
