<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa041)  [Next](psa043.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 42:0</span></span>

The conflict in the soul of a believer.

[Psalms 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 42:1</span></span>

The psalmist looked to the Lord as his chief good, and set his heart
upon him accordingly; casting anchor thus at first, he rides out the
storm. A gracious soul can take little satisfaction in God's courts, if
it do not meet with God himself there. Living souls never can take up
their rest any where short of a living God. To appear before the Lord is
the desire of the upright, as it is the dread of the hypocrite. Nothing
is more grievous to a gracious soul, than what is intended to shake its
confidence in the Lord. It was not the remembrance of the pleasures of
his court that afflicted David; but the remembrance of the free access
he formerly had to God's house, and his pleasure in attending there.
Those that commune much with their own hearts, will often have to chide
them. See the cure of sorrow. When the soul rests on itself, it sinks;
if it catches hold on the power and promise of God, the head is kept
above the billows. And what is our support under present woes but this,
that we shall have comfort in Him. We have great cause to mourn for sin;
but being cast down springs from unbelief and a rebellious will; we
should therefore strive and pray against it.

[Psalms 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 42:6</span></span>

The way to forget our miseries, is to remember the God of our mercies.
David saw troubles coming from God's wrath, and that discouraged him.
But if one trouble follow hard after another, if all seem to combine for
our ruin, let us remember they are all appointed and overruled by the
Lord. David regards the Divine favour as the fountain of all the good he
looked for. In the Saviour's name let us hope and pray. One word from
him will calm every storm, and turn midnight darkness into the light of
noon, the bitterest complaints into joyful praises. Our believing
expectation of mercy must quicken our prayers for it. At length, is
faith came off conqueror, by encouraging him to trust in the name of the
Lord, and to stay himself upon his God. He adds, And my God; this
thought enabled him to triumph over all his griefs and fears. Let us
never think that the God of our life, and the Rock of our salvation, has
forgotten us, if we have made his mercy, truth, and power, our refuge.
Thus the psalmist strove against his despondency: at last his faith and
hope obtained the victory. Let us learn to check all unbelieving doubts
and fears. Apply the promise first to ourselves, and then plead it to
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 43](psa043.md)

</div>
