<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa010)  [Next](psa012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 11:0</span></span>

David's struggle with, and triumph over a strong temptation to distrust
God, and betake himself to indirect means for his own safety, in a time
of danger.

[Psalms 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 11:1</span></span>

Those that truly fear God and serve him, are welcome to put their trust
in him. The psalmist, before he gives an account of his temptation to
distrust God, records his resolution to trust in Him, as that by which
he was resolved to live and die. The believer, though not terrified by
his enemies, may be tempted, by the fears of his friends, to desert his
post, or neglect his work. They perceive his danger, but not his
security; they give him counsel that savours of worldly policy, rather
than of heavenly wisdom. The principles of religion are the foundations
on which the faith and hope of the righteous are built. We are concerned
to hold these fast against all temptations to unbelief; for believers
would be undone, if they had not God to go to, God to trust in, and
future bliss to hope for. The prosperity of wicked people in their
wicked, evil ways, and the straits and distresses which the best men are
sometimes brought into, tried David's faith. We need not say, Who shall
go up to heaven, to fetch us thence a God to trust in? The word is nigh
us, and God in the word; his Spirit is in his saints, those living
temples, and the Lord is that Spirit. This God governs the world. We may
know what men seem to be, but God knows what they are, as the refiner
knows the value of gold when he has tried it. God is said to try with
his eyes, because he cannot err, or be imposed upon. If he afflicts good
people, it is for their trial, therefore for their good. However
persecutors and oppressors may prosper awhile, they will for ever
perish. God is a holy God, and therefore hates them. He is a righteous
Judge, and will therefore punish them. In what a horrible tempest are
the wicked hurried away at death! Every man has the portion of his cup
assigned him. Impenitent sinner, mark your doom! The last call to
repentance is about to be addressed to you, judgement is at hand;
through the gloomy shade of death you pass into the region of eternal
wrath. Hasten then, O sinner, to the cross of Christ. How stands the
case between God and our souls? Is Christ our hope, our consolation, our
security? Then, not otherwise, will the soul be carried through all its
difficulties and conflicts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 12](psa012.md)

</div>
