<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa014)  [Next](psa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 15:0</span></span>

The way to heaven, if we would be happy, we must be holy. We are
encouraged to walk in that way.

[Psalms 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 15:1</span></span>

Here is a very serious question concerning the character of a citizen of
Zion. It is the happiness of glorified saints, that they dwell in the
holy hill; they are at home there, they shall be for ever there. It
concerns us to make it sure to ourselves that we have a place among
them. A very plain and particular answer is here given. Those who desire
to know their duty, will find the Scripture a very faithful director,
and conscience a faithful monitor. A citizen of Zion is sincere in his
religion. He is really what he professes to be, and endeavours to stand
complete in all the will of God. He is just both to God and man; and, in
speaking to both, speaks the truth in his heart. He scorns and abhors
wrong and fraud; he cannot reckon that a good bargain, nor a saving one,
which is made with a lie; and knows that he who wrongs his neighbour
will prove, in the end, to have most injured himself. He is very careful
to do hurt to no man. He speaks evil of no man, makes not others' faults
the matter of his common talk; he makes the best of every body, and the
worst of nobody. If an ill-natured story be told him, he will disprove
it if he can; if not, it goes no further. He values men by their virtue
and piety. Wicked people are vile people, worthless, and good for
nothing; so the word signifies. He thinks the worse of no man's piety
for his poverty and mean condition. He reckons that serious piety puts
honour upon a man, more than wealth, or a great name. He honours such,
desires their conversation and an interest in their prayers, is glad to
show them respect, or do them a kindness. By this we may judge of
ourselves in some measure. Even wise and good men may swear to their own
hurt: but see how strong the obligation is, a man must rather suffer
loss to himself and his family, than wrong his neighbour. He will not
increase his estate by extortion, or by bribery. He will not, for any
gain, or hope of it to himself, do any thing to hurt a righteous cause.
Every true living member of the church, like the church itself, is built
upon a Rock. He that doeth these things shall not be moved for ever. The
grace of God shall always be sufficient for him. The union of these
tempers and this conduct, can only spring from repentance for sin, faith
in the Saviour, and love to him. In these respects let us examine and
prove our own selves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 16](psa016)

</div>
