<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa071)  [Next](psa073) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 72](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 72:0</span></span>

([Psa 72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)) David begins with a prayer
for Solomon.

(v. 2-17) He passes into a prophecy of the glories of his reign, and of
Christ's kingdom.

([Psa 72:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)) Praise to God.

[Psalms 72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 72:1</span></span>

This psalm belongs to Solomon in part, but to Christ more fully and
clearly. Solomon was both the king and the king's son, and his pious
father desired that the wisdom of God might be in him, that his reign
might be a remembrance of the kingdom of the Messiah. It is the prayer
of a father for his child; a dying blessing. The best we can ask of God
for our children is, that God would give them wisdom and grace to know
and to do their duty.

[Psalms 72:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 72:2</span></span>

This is a prophecy of the kingdom of Christ; many passages in it cannot
be applied to the reign of Solomon. There were righteousness and peace
at first in the administration of his government; but, before the end of
his reign, there were troubles and unrighteousness. The kingdom here
spoken of is to last as long as the sun, but Solomon's was soon at an
end. Even the Jewish expositors understood it of the kingdom of the
Messiah. Observe many great and precious promises here made, which were
to have full accomplishment only in the kingdom of Christ. As far as his
kingdom is set up, discord and contentions cease, in families, churches,
and nations. The law of Christ, written in the heart, disposes men to be
honest and just, and to render to all their due; it likewise disposes
men to live in love, and so produces abundance of peace. Holiness and
love shall be lasting in Christ's kingdom. Through all the changes of
the world, and all the changes of life, Christ's kingdom will support
itself. And he shall, by the graces and comforts of his Spirit, come
down like rain upon the mown grass; not on that cut down, but that which
is left growing, that it may spring again. His gospel has been, or shall
be, preached to all nations. Though he needs not the services of any,
yet he must be served with the best. Those that have the wealth of this
world, must serve Christ with it, do good with it. Prayer shall be made
through him, or for his sake; whatever we ask of the Father, should be
in his name. Praises shall be offered to him: we are under the highest
obligations to him. Christ only shall be feared throughout all
generations. To the end of time, and to eternity, his name shall be
praised. All nations shall call HIM blessed.

[Psalms 72:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 72:18</span></span>

We are taught to bless God in Christ, for all he has done for us by him.
David is earnest in prayer for the fulfilment of this prophecy and
promise. It is sad to think how empty the earth is of the glory of God,
how little service and honour he has from a world to which he is so
bountiful. May we, like David, submit to Christ's authority, and partake
of his righteousness and peace. May we bless him for the wonders of
redeeming love. May we spend our days, and end our lives, praying for
the spread of his gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 73](psa073)

</div>
