<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa028)  [Next](psa030.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 29:0</span></span>

Exhortation to give glory to God.

[Psalms 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 29:1</span></span>

The mighty and honourable of the earth are especially bound to honour
and worship him; but, alas, few attempt to worship him in the beauty of
holiness. When we come before him as the Redeemer of sinners, in
repentance faith, and love, he will accept our defective services,
pardon the sin that cleaves to them, and approve of that measure of
holiness which the Holy Spirit enables us to exercise. We have here the
nature of religious worship; it is giving to the Lord the glory due to
his name. We must be holy in all our religious services, devoted to God,
and to his will and glory. There is a beauty in holiness, and that puts
beauty upon all acts of worship. The psalmist here sets forth God's
dominion in the kingdom of nature. In the thunder, and lightning, and
storm, we may see and hear his glory. Let our hearts be thereby filled
with great, and high, and honourable thoughts of God, in the holy
adoring of whom, the power of godliness so much consists. O Lord our
God, thou art very great! The power of the lightning equals the terror
of the thunder. The fear caused by these effects of the Divine power,
should remind us of the mighty power of God, of man's weakness, and of
the defenceless and desperate condition of the wicked in the day of
judgment. But the effects of the Divine word upon the souls of men,
under the power of the Holy Spirit, are far greater than those of
thunder storms in the nature world. Thereby the stoutest are made to
tremble, the proudest are cast down, the secrets of the heart are
brought to light, sinners are converted, the savage, sensual, and
unclean, become harmless, gentle, and pure. If we have heard God's
voice, and have fled for refuge to the hope set before us, let us
remember that children need not fear their Father's voice, when he
speaks in anger to his enemies. While those tremble who are without
shelter, let those who abide in his appointed refuge bless him for their
security, looking forward to the day of judgment without dismay, safe as
Noah in the ark.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 30](psa030.md)

</div>
