<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa001)  [Next](psa003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 2:0</span></span>

([Psa 2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001).md) Threatenings against the
enemies of Christ's kingdom.

([Psa 2:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007).md) Promise to Christ as the
Head of this kingdom.

([Psa 2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010).md) Counsel to all, to
espouse its interests.

[Psalms 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 2:1</span></span>

We are here told who would appear as adversaries to Christ. As this
world is the kingdom of Satan, unconverted men, of every rank, party,
and character, are stirred up by him to oppose the cause of God. But the
rulers of the earth generally have been most active. The truths and
precepts of Christianity are against ambitious projects and worldly
lusts. We are told what they aim at in this opposition. They would break
asunder the bands of conscience, and the cords of God's commandments;
they will not receive, but cast them away as far as they can. These
enemies can show no good cause for opposing so just and holy a
government, which, if received by all, would bring a heaven upon earth.
They can hope for no success in so opposing so powerful a kingdom. The
Lord Jesus has all power both in heaven and in earth, and is Head over
all things to the church, notwithstanding the restless endeavours of his
enemies. Christ's throne is set up in his church, that is, in the hearts
of all believers.

[Psalms 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 2:7</span></span>

The kingdom of the Messiah is founded upon an eternal decree of God the
Father. This our Lord Jesus often referred to, as what he governed
himself by. God hath said unto him, Thou art my Son, and it becomes each
of us to say to him, Thou art my Lord, my Sovereign. The Son, in asking
the heathen for his inheritance, desires their happiness in him; so that
he pleads for them, ever lives to do so, and is able to save to the
uttermost, and he shall have multitudes of willing, loyal subjects,
among them. Christians are the possession of the Lord Jesus; they are to
him for a name and a praise. God the Father gives them to him, when, by
his Spirit and grace, he works upon them to submit to the Lord Jesus.

[Psalms 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 2:10</span></span>

Whatever we rejoice in, in this world, it must always be with trembling,
because of the uncertainty of all things in it. To welcome Jesus Christ,
and to submit to him, is our wisdom and interest. Let him be very dear
and precious; love him above all, love him in sincerity, love him much,
as she did, to whom much was forgiven, and, in token of it, kissed his
feet, [Luk 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038.md). And with a kiss of
loyalty take this yoke upon you, and give up yourselves to be governed
by his laws, disposed of by his providence, and entirely devoted to his
cause. Unbelief is a sin against the remedy. It will be utter
destruction to yourselves; lest ye perish in the way of your sins, and
from the way of your vain hopes; lest your way perish, lest you prove to
have missed the way of happiness. Christ is the way; take heed lest ye
be cut off from Him as your way to God. They thought themselves in the
way; but neglecting Christ, they perish from it. Blessed will those be
in the day of wrath, who, by trusting in Christ, have made him their
Refuge.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 3](psa003.md)

</div>
