<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa077)  [Next](psa079.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 78:0</span></span>

([Psa 78:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001).md) Attention called for.

(v. 9-39) The history of Israel.

(v. 40-55) Their settlement in Canaan.

(v. 56-72) The mercies of God to Israel contrasted with their
ingratitude.

[Psalms 78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 78:1</span></span>

These are called dark and deep sayings, because they are carefully to be
looked into. The law of God was given with a particular charge to teach
it diligently to their children, that the church may abide for ever.
Also, that the providences of God, both in mercy and in judgment, might
encourage them to conform to the will of God. The works of God much
strengthen our resolution to keep his commandments. Hypocrisy is the
high road to apostacy; those that do not set their hearts right, will
not be stedfast with God. Many parents, by negligence and wickedness,
become murderers of their children. But young persons, though they are
bound to submit in all things lawful, must not obey sinful orders, or
copy sinful examples.

[Psalms 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 78:9</span></span>

Sin dispirits men, and takes away the heart. Forgetfulness of God's
works is the cause of disobedience to his laws. This narrative relates a
struggle between God's goodness and man's badness. The Lord hears all
our murmurings and distrusts, and is much displeased. Those that will
not believe the power of God's mercy, shall feel the fire of his
indignation. Those cannot be said to trust in God's salvation as their
happiness at last, who can not trust his providence in the way to it. To
all that by faith and prayer, ask, seek, and knock, these doors of
heaven shall at any time be opened; and our distrust of God is a great
aggravation of our sins. He expressed his resentment of their
provocation; not in denying what they sinfully lusted after, but in
granting it to them. Lust is contented with nothing. Those that indulge
their lust, will never be estranged from it. Those hearts are hard
indeed, that will neither be melted by the mercies of the Lord, nor
broken by his judgments. Those that sin still, must expect to be in
trouble still. And the reason why we live with so little comfort, and to
so little purpose, is, because we do not live by faith. Under these
rebukes they professed repentance, but they were not sincere, for they
were not constant. In Israel's history we have a picture of our own
hearts and lives. God's patience, and warnings, and mercies, imbolden
them to harden their hearts against his word. And the history of
kingdoms is much the same. Judgments and mercies have been little
attended to, until the measure of their sins has been full. And higher
advantages have not kept churches from declining from the commandments
of God. Even true believers recollect, that for many a year they abused
the kindness of Providence. When they come to heaven, how will they
admire the Lord's patience and mercy in bringing them to his kingdom!

[Psalms 78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 78:40</span></span>

Let not those that receive mercy from God, be thereby made bold to sin,
for the mercies they receive will hasten its punishment; yet let not
those who are under Divine rebukes for sin, be discouraged from
repentance. The Holy One of Israel will do what is most for his own
glory, and what is most for their good. Their forgetting former favours,
led them to limit God for the future. God made his own people to go
forth like sheep; and guided them in the wilderness, as a shepherd his
flock, with all care and tenderness. Thus the true Joshua, even Jesus,
brings his church out of the wilderness; but no earthly Canaan, no
worldly advantages, should make us forget that the church is in the
wilderness while in this world, and that there remaineth a far more
glorious rest for the people of God.

[Psalms 78:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">psa 78:56</span></span>

After the Israelites were settled in Canaan, the children were like
their fathers. God gave them his testimonies, but they turned back.
Presumptuous sins render even Israelites hateful to God's holiness, and
exposed to his justice. Those whom the Lord forsakes become an easy prey
to the destroyer. And sooner or later, God will disgrace his enemies. He
set a good government over his people; a monarch after his own heart.
With good reason does the psalmist make this finishing, crowning
instance of God's favour to Israel; for David was a type of Christ, the
great and good Shepherd, who was humbled first, and then exalted; and of
whom it was foretold, that he should be filled with the Spirit of wisdom
and understanding. On the uprightness of his heart, and the skilfulness
of his hands, all his subjects may rely; and of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end. Every trial of human nature
hitherto, confirms the testimony of Scripture, that the heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, and nothing but
being created anew by the Holy Ghost can cure the ungodliness of any.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 79](psa079.md)

</div>
