<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa032)  [Next](psa034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 33:0</span></span>

([Psa 33:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)) God to be praised.

([Psa 33:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)) His people encouraged
by his power.

[Psalms 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 33:1</span></span>

Holy joy is the heart and soul of praise, and that is here pressed upon
the righteous. Thankful praise is the breath and language of holy joy.
Religious songs are proper expressions of thankful praise. Every
endowment we possess, should be employed with all our skill and
earnestness in God's service. His promises are all wise and good. His
word is right, and therefore we are only in the right when we agree with
it. His works are all done in truth. He is the righteous Lord, therefore
loveth righteousness. What a pity it is that this earth, which is so
full of the proofs and instances of God's goodness, should be so empty
of his praises; and that of the multitudes who live upon his bounty,
there are so few who live to his glory! What the Lord does, he does to
purpose; it stands fast. He overrules all the counsels of men, and makes
them serve his counsels; even that is fulfilled, which to us is most
surprising, the eternal counsel of God, nor can any thing prevent its
coming to pass.

[Psalms 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 33:12</span></span>

All the motions and operations of the souls of men, which no mortals
know but themselves, God knows better than they do. Their hearts, as
well as their times, are all in his hand; he formed the spirit of each
man within him. All the powers of the creature depend upon him, and are
of no account, of no avail at all, without him. If we make God's favour
sure towards us, then we need not fear whatever is against us. We are to
give to him the glory of his special grace. All human devices for the
salvation of our souls are vain; but the Lord's watchful eye is over
those whose conscientious fear of his name proceeds from a believing
hope in his mercy. In difficulties they shall be helped; in dangers they
shall not receive any real damage. Those that fear God and his wrath,
must hope in God and his mercy; for there is no flying from him, but by
flying to him. Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us; let us always have the
comfort and benefit, not according to our merits, but according to the
promise which thou hast in thy word given to us, and according to the
faith thou hast by thy Spirit and grace wrought in us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 34](psa034)

</div>
