<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa144)  [Next](psa146) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 145](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 145:0</span></span>

([Psa 145:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)) David extols the power,
goodness, and mercy of the Lord.

([Psa 145:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010)) The glory of God's
kingdom, and his care of those that love him.

[Psalms 145:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 145:1</span></span>

Those who, under troubles and temptations, abound in fervent prayer,
shall in due season abound in grateful praise, which is the true
language of holy joy. Especially we should speak of God's wondrous work
of redemption, while we declare his greatness. For no deliverance of the
Israelites, nor the punishment of sinners, so clearly proclaims the
justice of God, as the cross of Christ exhibits it to the enlightened
mind. It may be truly said of our Lord Jesus Christ, that his words are
words of goodness and grace; his works are works of goodness and grace.
He is full of compassion; hence he came into the world to save sinners.
When on earth, he showed his compassion both to the bodies and souls of
men, by healing the one, and making wise the other. He is of great
mercy, a merciful High Priest, through whom God is merciful to sinners.

[Psalms 145:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 145:10</span></span>

All God's works show forth his praises. He satisfies the desire of every
living thing, except the unreasonable children of men, who are satisfied
with nothing. He does good to all the children of men; his own people in
a special manner. Many children of God, who have been ready to fall into
sin, to fall into despair, have tasted his goodness in preventing their
falls, or recovering them speedily by his graces and comforts. And with
respect to all that are heavy laden under the burden of sin, if they
come to Christ by faith, he will ease them, he will raise them. He is
very ready to hear and answer the prayers of his people. He is present
every where; but in a special way he is nigh to them, as he is not to
others. He is in their hearts, and dwells there by faith, and they dwell
in him. He is nigh to those that call upon him, to help them in all
times of need. He will be nigh to them, that they may have what they
ask, and find what they seek, if they call upon him in truth and
sincerity. And having taught men to love his name and holy ways, he will
save them from the destruction of the wicked. May we then love his name,
and walk in his ways, while we desire that all flesh should bless his
holy name for ever and ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 146](psa146)

</div>
