<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa126)  [Next](psa128.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 127](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 127:0</span></span>

The value of the Divine blessing.

[Psalms 127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 127:1</span></span>

Let us always look to God's providence. In all the affairs and business
of a family we must depend upon his blessing. 1. For raising a family.
If God be not acknowledged, we have no reason to expect his blessing;
and the best-laid plans fail, unless he crowns them with success. 2. For
the safety of a family or a city. Except the Lord keep the city, the
watchmen, though they neither slumber nor sleep, wake but in vain;
mischief may break out, which even early discoveries may not be able to
prevent. 3. For enriching a family. Some are so eager upon the world,
that they are continually full of care, which makes their comforts
bitter, and their lives a burden. All this is to get money; but all in
vain, except God prosper them: while those who love the Lord, using due
diligence in their lawful callings, and casting all their care upon him,
have needful success, without uneasiness or vexation. Our care must be
to keep ourselves in the love of God; then we may be easy, whether we
have little or much of this world. But we must use the proper means very
diligently. Children are God's gifts, a heritage, and a reward; and are
to be accounted blessings, and not burdens: he who sends mouths, will
send meat, if we trust in him. They are a great support and defence to a
family. Children who are young, may be directed aright to the mark,
God's glory, and the service of their generation; but when they are gone
into the world, they are arrows out of the hand, it is too late to
direct them then. But these arrows in the hand too often prove arrows in
the heart, a grief to godly parents. Yet, if trained according to God's
word, they generally prove the best defence in declining years,
remembering their obligations to their parents, and taking care of them
in old age. All earthly comforts are uncertain, but the Lord will
assuredly comfort and bless those who serve him; and those who seek the
conversion of sinners, will find that their spiritual children are their
joy and crown in the day of Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 128](psa128.md)

</div>
