<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa109)  [Next](psa111.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 110:0</span></span>

Christ's kingdom.

[Psalms 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 110:1</span></span>

Glorious things are here spoken of Christ. Not only he should be
superior to all the kings of the earth, but he then existed in glory as
the eternal Son of God. Sitting is a resting posture: after services and
sufferings, to give law, to give judgment. It is a remaining posture: he
sits like a king for ever. All his enemies are now in a chain, but not
yet made his footstool. And his kingdom, being set up, shall be kept up
in the world, in despite of all the powers of darkness. Christ's people
are a willing people. The power of the Spirit, going with the power of
the world, to the people of Christs, is effectual to make them willing.
They shall attend him in the beautiful attire of holiness; which becomes
his house for ever. And he shall have many devoted to him. The dew of
our youth, even in the morning of our days, ought to be consecrated to
our Lord Jesus. Christ shall not only be a King, but a Priest. He is
God's Minister to us, and our Advocate with the Father, and so is the
Mediator between God and man. He is a Priest of the order of
Melchizedek, which was before that of Aaron, and on many accounts
superior to it, and a more lively representation of Christ's priesthood.
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, speaks as much terror to his
enemies as happiness to his people. The effect of this victory shall be
the utter ruin of his enemies. We have here the Redeemer saving his
friends, and comforting them. He shall be humbled; he shall drink of the
brook in the way. The wrath of God, running in the curse of the law, may
be considered as the brook in the way of his undertaking. Christ drank
of the waters of affliction in his way to the throne of glory. But he
shall be exalted. What then are we? Has the gospel of Christ been to us
the power of God unto salvation? Has his kingdom been set up in our
hearts? Are we his willing subjects? Once we knew not our need of his
salvation, and we were not willing that he should reign over us. Are we
willing to give up every sin, to turn from a wicked, insnaring world,
and rely only on his merits and mercy, to have him for our Prophet,
Priest, and King? and do we desire to be holy? To those who are thus
changed, the Saviour's sacrifice, intercession, and blessing belong.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 111](psa111.md)

</div>
