<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa138)  [Next](psa140) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 139](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 139:0</span></span>

([Psa 139:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001)) God knows all things.

([Psa 139:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#007)) He is every where
present.

([Psa 139:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017)) The psalmist's hatred
to sin, and desire to be led aright.

[Psalms 139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 139:1</span></span>

God has perfect knowledge of us, and all our thoughts and actions are
open before him. It is more profitable to meditate on Divine truths,
applying them to our own cases, and with hearts lifted to God in prayer,
than with a curious or disputing frame of mind. That God knows all
things, is omniscient; that he is every where, is omnipresent; are
truths acknowledged by all, yet they are seldom rightly believed in by
mankind. God takes strict notice of every step we take, every right step
and every by step. He knows what rule we walk by, what end we walk
toward, what company we walk with. When I am withdrawn from all company,
thou knowest what I have in my heart. There is not a vain word, not a
good word, but thou knowest from what thought it came, and with what
design it was uttered. Wherever we are, we are under the eye and hand of
God. We cannot by searching find how God searches us out; nor do we know
how we are known. Such thoughts should restrain us from sin.

[Psalms 139:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 139:7</span></span>

We cannot see God, but he can see us. The psalmist did not desire to go
from the Lord. Whither can I go? In the most distant corners of the
world, in heaven, or in hell, I cannot go out of thy reach. No veil can
hide us from God; not the thickest darkness. No disguise can save any
person or action from being seen in the true light by him. Secret haunts
of sin are as open before God as the most open villanies. On the other
hand, the believer cannot be removed from the supporting, comforting
presence of his Almighty Friend. Should the persecutor take his life,
his soul will the sooner ascend to heaven. The grave cannot separate his
body from the love of his Saviour, who will raise it a glorious body. No
outward circumstances can separate him from his Lord. While in the path
of duty, he may be happy in any situation, by the exercise of faith,
hope, and prayer.

[Psalms 139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 139:17</span></span>

God's counsels concerning us and our welfare are deep, such as cannot be
known. We cannot think how many mercies we have received from him. It
would help to keep us in the fear of the Lord all the day long, if, when
we wake in the morning, our first thoughts were of him: and how shall we
admire and bless our God for his precious salvation, when we awake in
the world of glory! Surely we ought not to use our members and senses,
which are so curiously fashioned, as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin. But our immortal and rational souls are a still more noble work and
gift of God. Yet if it were not for his precious thoughts of love to us,
our reason and our living for ever would, through our sins, prove the
occasion of our eternal misery. How should we then delight to meditate
on God's love to sinners in Jesus Christ, the sum of which exceeds all
reckoning! Sin is hated, and sinners lamented, by all who fear the Lord.
Yet while we shun them we should pray for them; with God their
conversion and salvation are possible. As the Lord knows us thoroughly,
and we are strangers to ourselves, we should earnestly desire and pray
to be searched and proved by his word and Spirit. if there be any wicked
way in me, let me see it; and do thou root it out of me. The way of
godliness is pleasing to God, and profitable to us; and will end in
everlasting life. It is the good old way. All the saints desire to be
kept and led in this way, that they may not miss it, turn out of it, or
tire in it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 140](psa140)

</div>
