<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa129)  [Next](psa131.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 130](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 130:0</span></span>

([Psa 130:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001).md) The psalmist's hope in
prayer.

([Psa 130:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005).md) His patience in hope.

[Psalms 130:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 130:1</span></span>

The only way of relief for a sin-entangled soul, is by applying to God
alone. Many things present themselves as diversions, many things offer
themselves as remedies, but the soul finds that the Lord alone can heal.
And until men are sensible of the guilt of sin, and quit all to come at
once to God, it is in vain for them to expect any relief. The Holy Ghost
gives to such poor souls a fresh sense of their deep necessity, to stir
them up in earnest applications, by the prayer of faith, by crying to
God. And as they love their souls, as they are concerned for the glory
of the Lord, they are not to be wanting in this duty. Why is it that
these matters are so long uncertain with them? Is it not from sloth and
despondency that they content themselves with common and customary
applications to God? Then let us up and be doing; it must be done, and
it is attended with safety. We are to humble ourselves before God, as
guilty in his sight. Let us acknowledge our sinfulness; we cannot
justify ourselves, or plead not guilty. It is our unspeakable comfort
that there is forgiveness with him, for that is what we need. Jesus
Christ is the great Ransom; he is ever an Advocate for us, and through
him we hope to obtain forgiveness. There is forgiveness with thee, not
that thou mayest be presumed upon, but that thou mayest be feared. The
fear of God often is put for the whole worship of God. The only motive
and encouragement for sinners is this, that there is forgiveness with
the Lord.

[Psalms 130:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 130:5</span></span>

It is for the Lord that my soul waits, for the gifts of his grace, and
the working of his power. We must hope for that only which he has
promised in his word. Like those who wish to see the dawn, being very
desirous that light would come long before day; but still more earnestly
does a good man long for the tokens of God's favour, and the visits of
his grace. Let all that devote themselves to the Lord, cheerfully stay
themselves on him. This redemption is redemption from all sin. Jesus
Christ saves his people from their sins, both from the condemning and
from the commanding power of sin. It is plenteous redemption; there is
an all-sufficient fulness in the Redeemer, enough for all, enough for
each; therefore enough for me, says the believer. Redemption from sin
includes redemption from all other evils, therefore it is a plenteous
redemption, through the atoning blood of Jesus, who shall redeem his
people from all their sins. All that wait on God for mercy and grace,
are sure to have peace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 131](psa131.md)

</div>
