<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa111)  [Next](psa113.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 112](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 112:0</span></span>

The blessedness of the righteous.

[Psalms 112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 112:1</span></span>

We have to praise the Lord that there are a people in the world, who
fear him and serve him, and that they are a happy people; which is owing
entirely to his grace. Their fear is not that which love casts out, but
that which love brings in. It follows and flows from love. It is a fear
to offend. This is both fear and trust. The heart touched by the Spirit
of God, as the needle touched with the loadstone, turns direct and
speedily to God, yet still with trembling, being filled with this holy
fear. Blessings are laid up for the faithful and their children's
children; and true riches are bestowed on them, with as much of this
world's possessions as is profitable for them. In the darkest hours of
affliction and trial, the light of hope and peace will spring up within
them, and seasonable relief shall turn mourning into joy. From their
Lord's example they learn to be kind and full of compassion, as well as
just in all their dealings; they use discretion, that they may be
liberal in that manner which appears most likely to do good. Envy and
slander may for a time hide their true characters here, but they shall
be had in everlasting remembrance. They need not fear evil tidings. A
good man shall have a settled spirit. And it is the endeavour of true
believers to keep their minds stayed upon God, and so to keep them calm
and undisturbed; and God has promised them both cause to do so, and
grace to do so. Trusting in the Lord is the best and surest way of
establishing the heart. The heart of man cannot fix any where with
satisfaction, but in the truth of God, and there it finds firm footing.
And those whose hearts are established by faith, will patiently wait
till they gain their point. Compare all this with the vexation of
sinners. The happiness of the saints is the envy of the wicked. The
desire of the wicked shall perish; their desire was wholly to the world
and the flesh, therefore when these perish, their joy is gone. But the
blessings of the gospel are spiritual and eternal, and are conferred
upon the members of the Christian church, through Christ their Head, who
is the Pattern of all righteousness, and the Giver of all grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 113](psa113.md)

</div>
