<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa105)  [Next](psa107) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 106](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 106:0</span></span>

([Psa 106:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001)) The happiness of God's
people.

([Psa 106:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#006)) Israel's sins.

(v. 13-33) Their provocations.

([Psa 106:34-46](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#034)) Their rebellions in
Canaan.

([Psa 106:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#047), [Psa
106:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048)) Prayer for more complete
deliverance.

[Psalms 106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 106:1</span></span>

None of our sins or sufferings should prevent our ascribing glory and
praise to the Lord. The more unworthy we are, the more is his kindness
to be admired. And those who depend on the Redeemer's righteousness will
endeavour to copy his example, and by word and deed to show forth his
praise. God's people have reason to be cheerful people; and need not
envy the children of men their pleasure or pride.

[Psalms 106:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 106:6</span></span>

Here begins a confession of sin; for we must acknowledge that the Lord
has done right, and we have done wickedly. We are encouraged to hope
that though justly corrected, yet we shall not be utterly forsaken.
God's afflicted people own themselves guilty before him. God is
distrusted because his favours are not remembered. If he did not save us
for his own name's sake, and to the praise of his power and grace, we
should all perish.

[Psalms 106:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 106:13</span></span>

Those that will not wait for God's counsel, shall justly be given up to
their own hearts' lusts, to walk in their own counsels. An undue desire,
even for lawful things, becomes sinful. God showed his displeasure for
this. He filled them with uneasiness of mind, terror of conscience, and
self-reproach. Many that fare deliciously every day, and whose bodies
are healthful, have leanness in their souls: no love to God, no
thankfulness, no appetite for the Bread of life, and then the soul must
be lean. Those wretchedly forget themselves, that feast their bodies and
starve their souls. Even the true believer will see abundant cause to
say, It is of the Lord's mercies that I am not consumed. Often have we
set up idols in our hearts, cleaved to some forbidden object; so that if
a greater than Moses had not stood to turn away the anger of the Lord,
we should have been destroyed. If God dealt severely with Moses for
unadvised words, what do those deserve who speak many proud and wicked
words? It is just in God to remove those relations that are blessings to
us, when we are peevish and provoking to them, and grieve their spirits.

[Psalms 106:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 106:34</span></span>

The conduct of the Israelites in Canaan, and God's dealings with them,
show that the way of sin is down-hill; omissions make way for
commissions: when they neglected to destroy the heathen, they learned
their works. One sin led to many more, and brought the judgments of God
on them. Their sin was, in part, their own punishment. Sinners often see
themselves ruined by those who led them into evil. Satan, who is a
tempter, will be a tormentor. At length, God showed pity to his people
for his covenant's sake. The unchangeableness of God's merciful nature
and love to his people, makes him change the course of justice into
mercy; and no other change is meant by God's repentance. Our case is
awful when the outward church is considered. When nations professing
Christianity, are so guilty as we are, no wonder if the Lord brings them
low for their sins. Unless there is general and deep repentance, there
can be no prospect but of increasing calamities. The psalm concludes
with prayer for completing the deliverance of God's people, and praise
for the beginning and progress of it. May all the people of the earth,
ere long, add their Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 107](psa107)

</div>
