<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev000)  [Next](rev002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

([Rev 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).md) The Divine origin, the
design, and the importance of this book.

([Rev 1:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004).md) The apostle John salutes
the seven churches of Asia.

([Rev 1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009).md) Declares when, where,
and how, the revelation was made to him.

([Rev 1:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012).md) His vision, in which he
saw Christ appear.

[Revelation 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 1:1</span></span>

This book is the Revelation of Jesus Christ; the whole Bible is so; for
all revelation comes through Christ, and all relates to him. Its
principal subject is to discover the purposes of God concerning the
affairs of the church, and of the nations as connected therewith, to the
end of the world. These events would surely come to pass; and they would
begin to come to pass very shortly. Though Christ is himself God, and
has light and life in himself, yet, as Mediator between God and man, he
receives instructions from the Father. To him we owe the knowledge of
what we are to expect from God, and what he expects from us. The subject
of this revelation was, the things that must shortly come to pass. On
all who read or hear the words of the prophecy, a blessing is
pronounced. Those are well employed who search the Bible. It is not
enough that we read and hear, but we must keep the things that are
written, in our memories, in our minds, in our affections, and in
practice, and we shall be blessed in the deed. Even the mysteries and
difficulties of this book are united with discoveries of God, suited to
impress the mind with awe, and to purify the soul of the reader, though
he may not discern the prophetic meaning. No part of Scripture more
fully states the gospel, and warns against the evil of sin.

[Revelation 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 1:4</span></span>

There can be no true peace, where there is not true grace; and where
grace goeth before, peace will follow. This blessing is in the name of
God, of the Holy Trinity, it is an act of adoration. The Father is first
named; he is described as the Jehovah who is, and who was, and who is to
come, eternal, unchangeable. The Holy Spirit is called the seven
spirits, the perfect Spirit of God, in whom there is a diversity of
gifts and operations. The Lord Jesus Christ was from eternity, a Witness
to all the counsels of God. He is the First-born from the dead, who will
by his own power raise up his people. He is the Prince of the kings of
the earth; by him their counsels are overruled, and to him they are
accountable. Sin leaves a stain of guilt and pollution upon the soul.
Nothing can fetch out this stain but the blood of Christ; and Christ
shed his own blood to satisfy Divine justice, and purchase pardon and
purity for his people. Christ has made believers kings and priests to
God and his Father. As such they overcome the world, mortify sin, govern
their own spirits, resist Satan, prevail with God in prayer, and shall
judge the world. He has made them priests, given them access to God,
enabled them to offer spiritual and acceptable sacrifices, and for these
favours they are bound to ascribe to him dominion and glory for ever. He
will judge the world. Attention is called to that great day when all
will see the wisdom and happiness of the friends of Christ, and the
madness and misery of his enemies. Let us think frequently upon the
second coming of Christ. He shall come, to the terror of those who wound
and crucify him by apostacy: he shall come, to the astonishment of the
whole world of the ungodly. He is the Beginning and the End; all things
are from him and for him; he is the Almighty; the same eternal and
unchanged One. And if we would be numbered with his saints in glory
everlasting, we must now willing submit to him receive him, and honour
him as a saviour, who we believe will come to be our Judge. Alas, that
there should be many, who would wish never to die, and that there should
not be a day of judgment!

[Revelation 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 1:9</span></span>

It was the apostle's comfort that he did not suffer as an evil-doer, but
for the testimony of Jesus, for bearing witness to Christ as the
Immanuel, the Saviour; and the Spirit of glory and of God rested upon
this persecuted apostle. The day and time when he had this vision was
the Lord's day, the Christian sabbath, the first day of the week,
observed in remembrance of the resurrection of Christ. Let us who call
him "Our Lord," honour him on his own day. The name shows how this
sacred day should be observed; the Lord's day should be wholly devoted
to the Lord, and none of its hours employed in a sensual, worldly
manner, or in amusements. He was in a serious, heavenly, spiritual
frame, under the gracious influences of the Spirit of God. Those who
would enjoy communion with God on the Lord's day, must seek to draw
their thoughts and affections from earthly things. And if believers are
kept on the Lord's holy day, from public ordinances and the communion of
saints, by necessity and not by choice, they may look for comfort in
meditation and secret duties, from the influences of the Spirit; and by
hearing the voice and contemplating the glory of their beloved Saviour,
from whose gracious words and power no confinement or outward
circumstances can separate them. An alarm was given as with the sound of
the trumpet, and then the apostle heard the voice of Christ.

[Revelation 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 1:12</span></span>

The churches receive their light from Christ and the gospel, and hold it
forth to others. They are golden candlesticks; they should be precious
and pure; not only the ministers, but the members of the churches; their
light should so shine before men, as to engage others to give glory to
God. And the apostle saw as though of the Lord Jesus Christ appeared in
the midst of the golden candlesticks. He is with his churches always, to
the end of the world, filling them with light, and life, and love. He
was clothed with a robe down to the feet, perhaps representing his
righteousness and priesthood, as Mediator. This vest was girt with a
golden girdle, which may denote how precious are his love and affection
for his people. His head and hairs white like wool and as snow, may
signify his majesty, purity, and eternity. His eyes as a flame of fire,
may represent his knowledge of the secrets of all hearts, and of the
most distant events. His feet like fine brass burning in a furnace, may
denote the firmness of his appointments, and the excellence of his
proceedings. His voice as the sound of many waters, may represent the
power of his word, to remove or to destroy. The seven stars were emblems
of the ministers of the seven churches to which the apostle was ordered
to write, and whom Christ upheld and directed. The sword represented his
justice, and his word, piercing to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md). His countenance was
like the sun, when it shines clearly and powerfully; its strength too
bright and dazzling for mortal eyes to behold. The apostle was
overpowered with the greatness of the lustre and glory in which Christ
appeared. We may well be contented to walk by faith, while here upon
earth. The Lord Jesus spake words of comfort; Fear not. Words of
instruction; telling who thus appeared. And his Divine nature; the First
and the Last. His former sufferings; I was dead: the very same whom his
disciples saw upon the cross. His resurrection and life; I have
conquered death, and am partaker of endless life. His office and
authority; sovereign dominion in and over the invisible world, as the
Judge of all, from whose sentence there is no appeal. Let us listen to
the voice of Christ, and receive the tokens of his love, for what can he
withhold from those for whose sins he has died? May we then obey his
word, and give up ourselves wholly to him who directs all things aright.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 2](rev002.md)

</div>
