<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev010)  [Next](rev012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 11:0</span></span>

([Rev 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001.md), [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002).md) The state of the church is
represented under the figure of a temple measured.

([Rev 11:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003).md) Two witnesses prophesy
is sackcloth.

([Rev 11:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007).md) They are slain, after
which they arise and ascend to heaven.

([Rev 11:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014).md) Under the seventh
trumpet, all antichristian powers are to be destroyed and there will be
a glorious state of Christ's kingdom upon earth.

[Revelation 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 11:1</span></span>

This prophetical passage about measuring the temple seems to refer to
Ezekiel's vision. The design of this measuring seems to be the
preservation of the church in times of public danger; or for its trial,
or for its reformation. The worshippers must be measured; whether they
make God's glory their end, and his word their rule, in all their acts
of worship. Those in the outer court, worship in a false manner, or with
dissembling hearts, and will be found among his enemies. God will have a
temple and an altar in the world, till the end of time. He looks
strictly to his temple. The holy city, the visible church, is trodden
under foot; is filled with idolaters, infidels, and hypocrites. But the
desolations of the church are limited, and she shall be delivered out of
all her troubles.

[Revelation 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 11:3</span></span>

In the time of treading down, God kept his faithful witnesses to attest
the truth of his word and worship, and the excellence of his ways, The
number of these witnesses is small, yet enough. They prophesy in
sackcloth. It shows their afflicted, persecuted state, and deep sorrow
for the abominations against which they protested. They are supported
during their great and hard work, till it is done. When they had
prophesied in sackcloth the greatest part of 1260 years, antichrist, the
great instrument of the devil, would war against them, with force and
violence for a time. Determined rebels against the light rejoice, as on
some happy event, when they can silence, drive to a distance, or destroy
the faithful servants of Christ, whose doctrine and conduct torment
them. It does not appear that the term is yet expired, and the witnesses
are not a present exposed to endure such terrible outward sufferings as
in former times; but such things may again happen, and there is abundant
cause to prophesy in sackcloth, on account of the state of religion. The
depressed state of real Christianity may relate only to the western
church. The Spirit of life from God, quickens dead souls, and shall
quicken the dead bodies of his people, and his dying interest in the
world. The revival of God's work and witnesses, will strike terror into
the souls of his enemies. Where there is guilt, there is fear; and a
persecuting spirit, though cruel, is a cowardly spirit. It will be no
small part of the punishment of persecutors, both in this world, and at
the great day, that they see the faithful servants of God honoured and
advanced. The Lord's witnesses must not be weary of suffering and
service, nor hastily grasp at the reward; but must stay till their
Master calls them. The consequence of their being thus exalted was a
mighty shock and convulsion in the antichristian empire. Events alone
can show the meaning of this. But whenever God's work and witnesses
revive, the devil's work and witnesses fall before him. And that the
slaying of the witnesses is future, appears to be probable.

[Revelation 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 11:14</span></span>

Before the sounding of the seventh and last trumpet, there is the usual
demand of attention. The saints and angels in heaven know the right of
our God and Saviour to rule over all the world. But the nations met
God's wrath with their own anger. It was a time in which he was
beginning to reward his people's faithful services, and sufferings; and
their enemies fretted against God, and so increased their guilt, and
hastened their destruction. By the opening the temple of God in heaven,
may be meant, that there was a more free communication between heaven
and earth; prayer and praises more freely and frequently going up,
graces and blessings plentifully coming down. But it rather seems to
refer to the church of God on earth. In the reign of antichrist, God's
law was laid aside, and made void by traditions and decrees; the
Scriptures were locked up from the people, but now they are brought to
the view of all. This, like the ark, is a token of the presence of God
returned to his people, and his favour toward them in Jesus Christ, as
the Propitiation for their sins. The great blessing of the Reformation
was attended with very awful providences; as by terrible things in
righteousness God answered the prayers presented in his holy temple now
opened.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 12](rev012.md)

</div>
