<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev012)  [Next](rev014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 13:0</span></span>

([Rev 13:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)) A wild beast rises out
of the sea, to whom the dragon gives his power.

([Rev 13:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)) Another beast, which
has two horns like a lamb, but speaks as a dragon.

([Rev 13:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016)) It obliges all to
worship its image, and receive its mark, as persons devoted to it.

[Revelation 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 13:1</span></span>

The apostle, standing on the shore, saw a savage beast rise out of the
sea; a tyrannical, idolatrous, persecuting power, springing up out of
the troubles which took place. It was a frightful monster! It appears to
mean that worldly, oppressing dominion, which for many ages, even from
the times of the Babylonish captivity, had been hostile to the church.
The first beast then began to oppress and persecute the righteous for
righteousness' sake, but they suffered most under the fourth beast of
Daniel, (the Roman empire,) which has afflicted the saints with many
cruel persecutions. The source of its power was the dragon. It was set
up by the devil, and supported by him. The wounding the head may be the
abolishing pagan idolatry; and the healing of the wound, introducing
popish idolatry, the same in substance, only in a new dress, but which
as effectually answers the devil's design. The world admired its power,
policy and success. They paid honour and subjection to the devil and his
instruments. It exercised infernal power and policy, requiring men to
render that honour to creatures which belongs to God alone. Yet the
devil's power and success are limited. Christ has a chosen remnant,
redeemed by his blood, recorded in his book, sealed by his Spirit; and
though the devil and antichrist may overcome the body, and take away the
natural life, they cannot conquer the soul, nor prevail with true
believers to forsake their Saviour, and join his enemies. Perseverance
in the faith of the gospel and true worship of God, in this great hour
of trial and temptation, which would deceive all but the elect, is the
character of those registered in the book of life. This powerful motive
and encouragement to constancy, is the great design of the whole
Revelation.

[Revelation 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 13:11</span></span>

Those who understand the first beast to denote a worldly power, take the
second to be also a persecuting and assumed power, which acts under the
disguise of religion, and of charity to the souls of men. It is a
spiritual dominion, professing to be derived from Christ, and exercised
at first in a gentle manner, but soon spake like the dragon. Its speech
betrayed it; for it gives forth those false doctrines and cruel decrees,
which show it to belong to the dragon, and not to the Lamb. It exercised
all the power of the former beast. It pursues the same design, to draw
men from worshipping the true God, and to subject the souls of men to
the will and control of men. The second beast has carried on its
designs, by methods whereby men should be deceived to worship the former
beast, in the new shape, or likeness made for it. By lying wonders,
pretended miracles. And by severe censures. Also by allowing none to
enjoy natural or civil rights, who will not worship that beast which is
the image of the pagan beast. It is made a qualification for buying and
selling, as well as for places of profit and trust, that they oblige
themselves to use all their interest, power, and endeavour, to forward
the dominion of the beast, which is meant by receiving his mark. To make
an image to the beast, whose deadly wound was healed, would be to give
form and power to his worship, or to require obedience to his commands.
To worship the image of the beast, implies being subject to those things
which stamp the character of the picture, and render it the image of the
beast. The number of the beast is given, so as to show the infinite
wisdom of God, and to exercise the wisdom of men. The number is the
number of a man, computed after the usual manner among men, and it is
666. What or who is intended by this, remains a mystery. To almost every
religious dispute this number has yet been applied, and it may
reasonably be doubted whether the meaning has yet been discovered. But
he who has wisdom and understanding, will see that all the enemies of
God are numbered and marked out for destruction; that the term of their
power will soon expire, and that all nations shall submit to our King of
righteousness and peace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 14](rev014)

</div>
