<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev013)  [Next](rev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 14:0</span></span>

([Rev 14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)) Those faithful to Christ
celebrate the praises of God.

([Rev 14:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006)) Three angels; one
proclaiming the everlasting gospel; another, the downfall of Babylon;
and a third, the dreadful wrath of God on the worshippers of the beast.
The blessedness of those who die in the Lord.

([Rev 14:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014)) A vision of Christ
with a sickle, and of a harvest ripe for cutting down.

([Rev 14:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017)) The emblem of a
vintage fully ripe, trodden in the wine-press of God's wrath.

[Revelation 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 14:1</span></span>

Mount Sion is the gospel church. Christ is with his church, and in the
midst of her in all her troubles, therefore she is not consumed. His
presence secures perseverance. His people appear honourably. They have
the name of God written in their foreheads; they make a bold and open
profession of their faith in God and Christ, and this is followed by
suitable actings. There were persons in the darkest times, who ventured
and laid down their lives for the worship and truth of the gospel of
Christ. They kept themselves clean from the wicked abominations of the
followers of antichrist. Their hearts were right with God; and they were
freely pardoned in Christ; he is glorified in them, and they in him. May
it be our prayer, our endeavour, our ambition, to be found in this
honourable company. Those who are really sanctified and justified are
meant here, for no hypocrite, however plausible, can be accounted to be
without fault before God.

[Revelation 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 14:6</span></span>

The progress of the Reformation appears to be here set forth. The four
proclamations are plain in their meaning; that all Christians may be
encouraged, in the time of trial, to be faithful to their Lord. The
gospel is the great means whereby men are brought to fear God, and to
give glory to him. The preaching of the everlasting gospel shakes the
foundations of antichrist in the world, and hastens its downfall. If any
persist in being subject to the beast, and in promoting his cause, they
must expect to be for ever miserable in soul and body. The believer is
to venture or suffer any thing in obeying the commandments of God, and
professing the faith of Jesus. May God bestow this patience upon us.
Observe the description of those that are and shall be blessed: such as
die in the Lord; die in the cause of Christ, in a state of union with
Christ; such as are found in Christ when death comes. They rest from all
sin, temptation, sorrow, and persecution; for there the wicked cease
from troubling, there the weary are at rest. Their works follow them: do
not go before as their title, or purchase, but follow them as proofs of
their having lived and died in the Lord: the remembrance of them will be
pleasant, and the reward far above all their services and sufferings.
This is made sure by the testimony of the Spirit, witnessing with their
spirits, and the written word.

[Revelation 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 14:14</span></span>

Warnings and judgments not having produced reformation, the sins of the
nations are filled up, and they become ripe for judgments, represented
by a harvest, an emblem which is used to signify the gathering of the
righteous, when ripe for heaven, by the mercy of God. The harvest time
is when the corn is ripe; when the believers are ripe for heaven, then
the wheat of the earth shall be gathered into Christ's garner. And by a
vintage. The enemies of Christ and his church are not destroyed, till by
their sin they are ripe for ruin, and then he will spare them no longer.
The wine-press is the wrath of God, some terrible calamity, probably the
sword, shedding the blood of the wicked. The patience of God towards
sinners, is the greatest miracle in the world; but, though lasting, it
will not be everlasting; and ripeness in sin is a sure proof of judgment
at hand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 15](rev015)

</div>
