<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev017)  [Next](rev019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 18:0</span></span>

([Rev 18:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)) Another angel from
heaven proclaims the fall of mystical Babylon.

([Rev 18:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004)) A voice from heaven
admonishes the people of God, lest they partake of her plagues.

([Rev 18:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)) The lamentations over
her.

([Rev 18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020)) The church called upon
to rejoice in her utter ruin.

[Revelation 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 18:1</span></span>

The downfall and destruction of the mystical Babylon are determined in
the counsels of God. Another angel comes from heaven. This seems to be
Christ himself, coming to destroy his enemies, and to shed abroad the
light of his gospel through all nations. The wickedness of this Babylon
was very great; she had forsaken the true God, and set up idols, and had
drawn all sorts of men into spiritual adultery, and by her wealth and
luxury kept them in her interest. The spiritual merchandise, by which
multitudes have wickedly lived in wealth, by the sins and follies of
mankind, seems principally intended. Fair warning is given to all that
expect mercy from God, that they should not only come out of this
Babylon, but assist in her destruction. God may have a people even in
Babylon. But God's people shall be called out of Babylon, and called
effectually, while those that partake with wicked men in their sins,
must receive of their plagues.

[Revelation 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 18:9</span></span>

The mourners had shared Babylon's sensual pleasures, and gained by her
wealth and trade. The kings of the earth, whom she flattered into
idolatry, allowing them to be tyrannical over their subjects, while
obedient to her; and the merchants, those who trafficked for her
indulgences, pardons, and honours; these mourn. Babylon's friends
partook her sinful pleasures and profits, but are not willing to share
her plagues. The spirit of antichrist is a worldly spirit, and that
sorrow is a mere worldly sorrow; they do not lament for the anger of
God, but for the loss of outward comforts. The magnificence and riches
of the ungodly will avail them nothing, but will render the vengeance
harder to be borne. The spiritual merchandise is here alluded to, when
not only slaves, but the souls of men, are mentioned as articles of
commerce, to the destroying the souls of millions. Nor has this been
peculiar to the Roman antichrist, and only her guilt. But let prosperous
traders learn, with all their gains, to get the unsearchable riches of
Christ; otherwise; even in this life, they may have to mourn that riches
make to themselves wings and fly away, and that all the fruits their
souls lusted after, are departed from them. Death, at any rate, will
soon end their commerce, and all the riches of the ungodly will be
exchanged, not only for the coffin and the worm, but for the fire that
cannot be quenched.

[Revelation 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 18:20</span></span>

That which is matter of rejoicing to the servants of God on earth, is
matter of rejoicing to the angels in heaven. The apostles, who are
honoured and daily worshipped at Rome in an idolatrous manner, will
rejoice in her fall. The fall of Babylon was an act of God's justice.
And because it was a final ruin, this enemy should never molest them any
more; of this they were assured by a sign. Let us take warning from the
things which brought others to destruction, and let us set our
affections on things above, when we consider the changeable nature of
earthly things.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 19](rev019)

</div>
