<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev004)  [Next](rev006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 5:0</span></span>

([Rev 5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)) A book sealed with seven
seals, which could be opened by none but Christ, who took the book to
open it.

([Rev 5:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008)) Upon which all honour is
ascribed to him, as worthy to open it.

[Revelation 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 5:1</span></span>

The apostle saw in the hand of Him that sat upon the throne, a roll of
parchments in the form usual in those times, and sealed with seven
seals. This represented the secret purposes of God about to be revealed.
The designs and methods of Divine Providence, toward the church and the
world, are stated, fixed, and made a matter of record. The counsels of
God are altogether hidden from the eye and understanding of the
creature. The several parts are not unsealed and opened at once, but
after each other, till the whole mystery of God's counsel and conduct is
finished in the world. The creatures cannot open it, nor read it; the
Lord only can do so. Those who see most of God, are most desirous to see
more; and those who have seen his glory, desire to know his will. But
even good men may be too eager and hasty to look into the mysteries of
the Divine conduct. Such desires, if not soon answered, turn to grief
and sorrow. If John wept much because he could not look into the book of
God's decrees, what reason have many to shed floods of tears for their
ignorance of the gospel of Christ! of that on which everlasting
salvation depends! We need not weep that we cannot foresee future events
respecting ourselves in this world; the eager expectation of future
prospects, or the foresight of future calamities, would alike unfit us
for present duties and conflicts, or render our prosperous days
distressing. Yet we may desire to learn, from the promises and
prophecies of Scripture, what will be the final event to believers and
to the church; and the Incarnate Son has prevailed, that we should learn
all that we need to know. Christ stands as Mediator between God and both
ministers and people. He is called a Lion, but he appears as a Lamb
slain. He appears with the marks of his sufferings, to show that he
pleads for us in heaven, in virtue of his satisfaction. He appears as a
Lamb, having seven horns and seven eyes; perfect power to execute all
the will of God, and perfect wisdom to understand it, and to do it in
the most effectual manner. The Father put the book of his eternal
counsels into the hand of Christ, and Christ readily and gladly took it
into his hand; for he delights to make known the will of his Father; and
the Holy Spirit is given by him to reveal the truth and will of God.

[Revelation 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 5:8</span></span>

It is matter of joy to all the world, to see that God deals with men in
grace and mercy through the Redeemer. He governs the world, not merely
as a Creator, but as our Saviour. The harps were instruments of praise;
the vials were full of odours, or incense, which signify the prayers of
the saints: prayer and praise should always go together. Christ has
redeemed his people from the bondage of sin, guilt, and Satan. He has
not only purchased liberty for them, but the highest honour and
preferment; he made them kings and priests; kings, to rule over their
own spirits, and to overcome the world, and the evil one; and he makes
them priests; giving them access to himself, and liberty to offer up
spiritual sacrifices. What words can more fully declare that Christ is,
and ought to be worshipped, equally with the Father, by all creatures,
to all eternity! Happy those who shall adore and praise in heaven, and
who shall for ever bless the Lamb, who delivered and set them apart for
himself by his blood. How worthy art thou, O God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, of our highest praises! All creatures should proclaim thy
greatness, and adore thy majesty.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 6](rev006)

</div>
