<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev006)  [Next](rev008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 7:0</span></span>

([Rev 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001).md) A pause between two great
periods.

([Rev 7:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004).md) The peace, happiness, and
safety of the saints, as signified by an angel's sealing 144, 000.

([Rev 7:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009).md) A song of praise.

([Rev 7:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013).md) The blessedness and
glory of those that suffered martyrdom for Christ.

[Revelation 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 7:1</span></span>

In the figurative language of Scripture, the blowing of the four winds
together, means a dreadful and general destruction. But the destruction
is delayed. Seals were used to mark for each person his own possessions.
This mark is the witness of the Holy Ghost, printed in the hearts of
believers. And the Lord would not suffer his people to be afflicted
before they were marked, that they might be prepared against all
conflicts. And, observe, of those who are thus sealed by the Spirit, the
seal must be on the forehead, plainly to be seen alike by friends and
foes, but not by the believer himself, except as he looks stedfastly in
the glass of God's word. The number of those who were sealed, may be
understood to stand for the remnant of people which God reserved. Though
the church of God is but a little flock, in comparison with the wicked
world, yet it is a society really large, and to be still more enlarged.
Here the universal church is figured under the type of Israel.

[Revelation 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 7:9</span></span>

The first fruits of Christ having led the way, the Gentiles converted
later follow, and ascribe their salvation to God and the Redeemer, with
triumph. In acts of religious worship we come nigh to God, and must come
by Christ; the throne of God could not be approached by sinners, were it
not for a Mediator. They were clothed with the robes of justification,
holiness, and victory; and they had palms in their hands, as conquerors
used to appear in their triumphs. Such a glorious appearance will the
faithful servants of God make at last, when they have fought the good
fight of faith, and finished their course. With a loud voice they gave
to God and the Lamb the praise of the great salvation. Those who enjoy
eternal happiness must and will bless both the Father and the Son; they
will do it publicly, and with fervour. We see what is the work of
heaven, and we ought to begin it now, to have our hearts much in it, and
to long for that world where our praises, as well as our happiness, will
be made perfect.

[Revelation 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 7:13</span></span>

Faithful Christians deserve our notice and respect; we should mark the
upright. Those who would gain knowledge, must not be ashamed to seek
instruction from any who can give it. The way to heaven is through many
tribulations; but tribulation, how great soever, shall not separate us
from the love of God. Tribulation makes heaven more welcome and more
glorious. It is not the blood of the martyrs, but the blood of the Lamb,
that can wash away sin, and make the soul pure and clean in the sight of
God; other blood stains, this is the only blood that makes the robes of
the saints white and clean. They are happy in their employment; heaven
is a state of service, though not of suffering; it is a state of rest,
but not of sloth; it isa praising, delightful rest. They have had
sorrows, and shed many tears on account of sin and affliction; but God
himself, with his own gracious hand, will wipe those tears away. He
deals with them as a tender father. This should support the Christian
under all his troubles. As all the redeemed owe their happiness wholly
to sovereign mercy; so the work and worship of God their Saviour is
their element; his presence and favour complete their happiness, nor can
they conceive of any other joy. To Him may all his people come; from him
they receive every needed grace; and to him let them offer all praise
and glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 8](rev008.md)

</div>
