<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev001)  [Next](rev003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 2:0</span></span>

([Rev 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)) Epistles to the churches
in Asia, with warnings and encouragements, To the church at Ephesus.

([Rev 2:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008)) At Smyrna.

([Rev 2:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012)) At Pergamos.

([Rev 2:18-29](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018)) And at Thyatira.

[Revelation 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 2:1</span></span>

These churches were in such different states as to purity of doctrine
and the power of godliness, that the words of Christ to them will always
suit the cases of other churches, and professors. Christ knows and
observes their state; though in heaven, yet he walks in the midst of his
churches on earth, observing what is wrong in them, and what they want.
The church of Ephesus is commended for diligence in duty. Christ keeps
an account of every hour's work his servants do for him, and their
labour shall not be in vain in the Lord. But it is not enough that we
are diligent; there must be bearing patience, and there must be waiting
patience. And though we must show all meekness to all men, yet we must
show just zeal against their sins. The sin Christ charged this church
with, is, not the having left and forsaken the object of love, but
having lost the fervent degree of it that at first appeared. Christ is
displeased with his people, when he sees them grow remiss and cold
toward him. Surely this mention in Scripture, of Christians forsaking
their first love, reproves those who speak of it with carelessness, and
thus try to excuse indifference and sloth in themselves and others; our
Saviour considers this indifference as sinful. They must repent: they
must be grieved and ashamed for their sinful declining, and humbly
confess it in the sight of God. They must endeavour to recover their
first zeal, tenderness, and seriousness, and must pray as earnestly, and
watch as diligently, as when they first set out in the ways of God. If
the presence of Christ's grace and Spirit is slighted, we may expect the
presence of his displeasure. Encouraging mention is made of what was
good among them. Indifference as to truth and error, good and evil, may
be called charity and meekness, but it is not so; and it is displeasing
to Christ. The Christian life is a warfare against sin, Satan, the
world, and the flesh. We must never yield to our spiritual enemies, and
then we shall have a glorious triumph and reward. All who persevere,
shall derive from Christ, as the Tree of life, perfection and
confirmation in holiness and happiness, not in the earthly paradise, but
in the heavenly. This is a figurative expression, taken from the account
of the garden of Eden, denoting the pure, satisfactory, and eternal joys
of heaven; and the looking forward to them in this world, by faith,
communion with Christ, and the consolations of the Holy Spirit.
Believers, take your wrestling life here, and expect and look for a
quiet life hereafter; but not till then: the word of God never promises
quietness and complete freedom from conflict here.

[Revelation 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 2:8</span></span>

Our Lord Jesus is the First, for by him were all things made; he was
before all things, with God, and is God himself. He is the Last, for he
will be the Judge of all. As this First and Last, who was dead and is
alive, is the believer's Brother and Friend, he must be rich in the
deepest poverty, honourable amidst the lowest abasement, and happy under
the heaviest tribulation, like the church of Smyrna. Many who are rich
as to this world, are poor as to the next; and some who are poor
outwardly, are inwardly rich; rich in faith, in good works, rich in
privileges, rich in gifts, rich in hope. Where there is spiritual
plenty, outward poverty may be well borne; and when God's people are
made poor as to this life, for the sake of Christ and a good conscience,
he makes all up to them in spiritual riches. Christ arms against coming
troubles. Fear none of these things; not only forbid slavish fear, but
subdue it, furnishing the soul with strength and courage. It should be
to try them, not to destroy them. Observe, the sureness of the reward;
"I will give thee:" they shall have the reward from Christ's own hand.
Also, how suitable it is; "a crown of life:" the life worn out in his
service, or laid down in his cause, shall be rewarded with a much better
life, which shall be eternal. The second death is unspeakably worse than
the first death, both in the agonies of it, and as it is eternal death:
it is indeed awful to die, and to be always dying. If a man is kept from
the second death and wrath to come, he may patiently endure whatever he
meets with in this world.

[Revelation 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 2:12</span></span>

The word of God is a sword, able to slay both sin and sinners. It turns
and cuts every way; but the believer need not fear this sword; yet this
confidence cannot be supported without steady obedience. As our Lord
notices all the advantages and opportunities we have for duty in the
places where we dwell, so he notices our temptations and discouragements
from the same causes. In a situation of trials, the church of Pergamos
had not denied the faith, either by open apostacy, or by giving way so
as to avoid the cross. Christ commends their stedfastness, but reproves
their sinful failures. A wrong view of gospel doctrine and Christian
liberty, was a root of bitterness from which evil practices grew.
Repentance is the duty of churches and bodies of men, as well as of
particular persons; those who sin together, should repent together. Here
is the promise of favour to those that overcome. The influences and
comforts of the Spirit of Christ, come down from heaven into the soul,
for its support. This is hidden from the rest of the world. The new name
is the name of adoption; when the Holy Spirit shows his own work in the
believer's soul, this new name and its real import are understood by
him.

[Revelation 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 2:18</span></span>

Even when the Lord knows the works of his people to be wrought in love,
faith, zeal, and patience; yet if his eyes, which are as a flame of
fire, observe them committing or allowing what is evil, he will rebuke,
correct, or punish them. Here is praise of the ministry and people of
Thyatira, by One who knew the principles from which they acted. They
grew wiser and better. All Christians should earnestly desire that their
last works may be their best works. Yet this church connived at some
wicked seducers. God is known by the judgments he executes; and by this
upon seducers, he shows his certain knowledge of the hearts of men, of
their principles, designs, frame, and temper. Encouragement is given to
those who kept themselves pure and undefiled. It is dangerous to despise
the mystery of God, and as dangerous to receive the mysteries of Satan.
Let us beware of the depths of Satan, of which those who know the least
are the most happy. How tender Christ is of his faithful servants! He
lays nothing upon his servants but what is for their good. There is
promise of an ample reward to the persevering, victorious believer; also
knowledge and wisdom, suitable to their power and dominion. Christ
brings day with him into the soul, the light of grace and of glory, in
the presence and enjoyment of him their Lord and Saviour. After every
victory let us follow up our advantage against the enemy, that we may
overcome and keep the works of Christ to the end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 3](rev003)

</div>
