<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev003)  [Next](rev005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 4:0</span></span>

([Rev 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)) A vision of God, as on
his glorious throne, around which were twenty-four elders and four
living creatures.

([Rev 4:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009)) Whose songs, and those
of the holy angels, the apostle heard.

[Revelation 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 4:1</span></span>

After the Lord Jesus had instructed the apostle to write to the churches
"the things that are," there was another vision. The apostle saw a
throne set in heaven, an emblem of the universal dominion of Jehovah. He
saw a glorious One upon the throne, not described by human features, so
as to be represented by a likeness or image, but only by his surpassing
brightness. These seem emblems of the excellence of the Divine nature,
and of God's awful justice. The rainbow is a fit emblem of that covenant
of promise which God has made with Christ, as the Head of the church,
and with all his people in him. The prevailing colour was a pleasant
green, showing the reviving and refreshing nature of the new covenant.
Four-and-twenty seats around the throne, were filled with
four-and-twenty elders, representing, probably, the whole church of God.
Their sitting denotes honour, rest, and satisfaction; their sitting
about the throne signifies nearness to God, the sight and enjoyment they
have of him. They were clothed in white raiment; the imputed
righteousness of the saints and their holiness: they had on their heads
crowns of gold, signifying the glory they have with him. Lightnings and
voices came from the throne; the awful declarations God makes to his
church, of his sovereign will and pleasure. Seven lamps of fire were
burning before the throne; the gifts, graces, and operations of the
Spirit of God in the churches of Christ, dispensed according to the will
and pleasure of Him who sits upon the throne. In the gospel church, the
laver for purification is the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, which
cleanses from all sin. In this all must be washed, to be admitted into
the gracious presence of God on earth, and his glorious presence in
heaven. The apostle saw four living creatures, between the throne and
the circle of the elders, standing between God and the people. These
seem to signify the true ministers of the gospel, because of their place
between God and the people. This also is shown by the description given,
denoting wisdom, courage, diligence, and discretion, and the affections
by which they mount up toward heaven.

[Revelation 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 4:9</span></span>

All true believers wholly ascribe their redemption and conversion, their
present privileges and future hopes, to the eternal and most holy God.
Thus rise the for-ever harmonious, thankful songs of the redeemed in
heaven. Would we on earth do like them, let our praises be constant, not
interrupted; united, not divided; thankful, not cold and formal; humble,
not self-confident.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 5](rev005)

</div>
