<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev018)  [Next](rev020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 19:0</span></span>

([Rev 19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).md) The church in heaven
and that on earth triumph, and praise the Lord for his righteous
judgments.

([Rev 19:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011).md) A vision of Christ
going forth to destroy the beast and his armies.

[Revelation 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 19:1</span></span>

Praising God for what we have, is praying for what is yet further to be
done for us. There is harmony between the angels and the saints in this
triumphant song. Christ is the Bridegroom of his ransomed church. This
second union will be completed in heaven; but the beginning of the
glorious millennium (by which is meant a reign of Christ, or a state of
happiness, for a thousand years on earth) may be considered as the
celebration of his espousals on earth. Then the church of Christ, being
purified from errors, divisions, and corruptions, in doctrine,
discipline, worship, and practice, will be made ready to be publicly
owned by him as his delight and his beloved. The church appeared; not in
the gay, gaudy dress of the mother of harlots, but in fine linen, clean
and white. In the robes of Christ's righteousness, imputed for
justification, and imparted for sanctification. The promises of the
gospel, the true sayings of God, opened, applied, and sealed by the
Spirit of God, in holy ordinances, are the marriage-feast. This seems to
refer to the abundant grace and consolation Christians will receive in
the happy days which are to come. The apostle offered honour to the
angel. The angel refused it. He directed the apostle to the true and
only object of religious worship; to worship God, and him alone. This
plainly condemns the practice of those who worship the elements of bread
and wine, and saints, and angels; and of those who do not believe that
Christ is truly and by nature God, yet pay him a sort of worship. They
stand convicted of idolatry by a messenger from heaven. These are the
true sayings of God; of Him who is to be worshipped, as one with the
Father and the Holy Spirit.

[Revelation 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 19:11</span></span>

Christ, the glorious Head of the church, is described as on a white
horse, the emblem of justice and holiness. He has many crowns, for he is
King of kings, and Lord of lords. He is arrayed in a vesture dipped in
his own blood, by which he purchased his power as Mediator; and in the
blood of his enemies, over whom he always prevails. His name is "The
Word of God;" a name none fully knows but himself; only this we know,
that this Word was God manifest in the flesh; but his perfections cannot
be fully understood by any creature. Angels and saints follow, and are
like Christ in their armour of purity and righteousness. The
threatenings of the written word he is going to execute on his enemies.
The ensigns of his authority are his name; asserting his authority and
power, warning the most powerful princes to submit, or they must fall
before him. The powers of earth and hell make their utmost effort. These
verses declare important events, foretold by the prophets. These persons
were not excused because they did what their leaders bade them. How vain
will be the plea of many sinners at the great day! We followed our
guides; we did as we saw others do! God has given a rule to walk by, in
his word; neither the example of the most, nor of the chief, must
influence us contrary thereto: if we do as the most do, we must go where
the most go, even into the burning lake.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 20](rev020.md)

</div>
