<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev005)  [Next](rev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 6:0</span></span>

([Rev 6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)) The opening of the seals,
The first, second, third, and fourth.

([Rev 6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)) The fifth.

([Rev 6:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)) The sixth.

[Revelation 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 6:1</span></span>

Christ, the Lamb, opens the first seal: observe what appeared. A rider
on a white horse. By the going forth of this white horse, a time of
peace, or the early progress of the Christian religion, seems to be
intended; its going forth in purity, at the time when its heavenly
Founder sent his apostles to teach all nations, adding, Lo! I am with
you alway, even to the end of the world. The Divine religion goes out
crowned, having the Divine favour resting upon it, armed spiritually
against its foes, and destined to be victorious in the end. On opening
the second seal, a red horse appeared; this signifies desolating
judgments. The sword of war and persecution is a dreadful judgment; it
takes away peace from the earth, one of the greatest blessings; and men
who should love one another, and help one another, are set upon killing
one another. Such scenes also followed the pure age of early
Christianity, when, neglectful of charity and the bond of peace, the
Christian leaders, divided among themselves, appealed to the sword, and
entangled themselves in guilt. On opening the third seal, a black horse
appeared; a colour denoting mourning and woe, darkness and ignorance. He
that sat on it had a yoke in his hand. Attempts were made to put a yoke
of superstitious observances on the disciples. As the stream of
Christianity flowed further from its pure fountain, it became more and
more corrupt. During the progress of this black horse, the necessaries
of life should be at excessive prices, and the more costly things should
not be hurt. According to prophetic language, these articles signified
that food of religious knowledge, by which the souls of men are
sustained unto everlasting life; such we are invited to buy, [Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001). But when the dark clouds of
ignorance and superstition, denoted by the black horse, spread over the
Christian world, the knowledge and practice of true religion became
scarce. When a people loathe their spiritual food, God may justly
deprive them of their daily bread. The famine of bread is a terrible
judgment; but the famine of the word is more so. Upon opening the fourth
seal, another horse appeared, of a pale colour. The rider was Death, the
king of terrors. The attendants, or followers of this king of terrors,
hell, a state of eternal misery to all who die in their sins; and in
times of general destruction, multitudes go down unprepared into the
pit. The period of the fourth seal is one of great slaughter and
devastation, destroying whatever may tend to make life happy, making
ravages on the spiritual lives of men. Thus the mystery of iniquity was
completed, and its power extended both over the lives and consciences of
men. The exact times of these four seals cannot be ascertained, for the
changes were gradual. God gave them power, that is, those instruments of
his anger, or those judgments: all public calamities are at his command;
they only go forth when God sends them, and no further than he permits.

[Revelation 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 6:9</span></span>

The sight the apostle beheld at the opening the fifth seal was very
affecting. He saw the souls of the martyrs under the altar; at the foot
of the altar in heaven, at the feet of Christ. Persecutors can only kill
the body; after that there is no more they can do; the soul lives. God
has provided a good place in the better world, for those who are
faithful unto death. It is not their own death, but the sacrifice of
Christ, that gives them entrance into heaven. The cause in which they
suffered, was for the word of God; the best any man can lay down his
life for; faith in God's word, and the unshaken confession of that
faith. They commit their cause to Him to whom vengeance belongs. The
Lord is the comforter of his afflicted servants, and precious is their
blood in his sight. As the measure of the sin of persecutors is filling
up, so is the number of the persecuted, martyred servants of Christ.
When this is fulfilled, God will send tribulation to those who trouble
them, and unbroken happiness and rest to those that are troubled.

[Revelation 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 6:12</span></span>

When the sixth seal was opened, there was a great earthquake. The
foundations of churches and states would be terribly shaken. Such bold
figurative descriptions of great changes abound in the prophecies of
Scripture; for these events are emblems, and declare the end of the
world and the day of judgment. Dread and terror would seize on all sorts
of men. Neither grandeur, riches, valour, nor strength, can support men
at that time. They would be glad to be no more seen; yea, to have no
longer any being. Though Christ be a Lamb, he can be angry, and the
wrath of the Lamb is exceedingly dreadful; for if the Redeemer himself,
who appeases the wrath of God, be our enemy, where shall we find a
friend to plead for us? As men have their day of opportunity, and their
seasons of grace, so God has his day of righteous wrath. It seems that
the overthrow of the paganism of the Roman empire is here meant. The
idolaters are described as hiding themselves in their dens and secret
caves, and vainly seeking to escape ruin. In such a day, when the signs
of the times show those who believe in God's word, that the King of
kings is approaching, Christians are called to a decided course, and to
a bold confession of Christ and his truth before their fellowmen.
Whatever they may have to endure, the short contempt of man is to be
borne, rather than that shame which is everlasting.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 7](rev007)

</div>
