<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 9:0</span></span>

([Rom 9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)) The apostle's concern
that his countrymen were strangers to the gospel.

([Rom 9:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)) The promises are made
good to the spiritual seed of Abraham.

([Rom 9:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)) Answers to objections
against God's sovereign conduct, in exercising mercy and justice.

([Rom 9:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)) This sovereignty is in
God's dealing both with Jews and Gentiles.

([Rom 9:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)) The falling short of
the Jews is owing to their seeking justification, not by faith, but by
the works of the law.

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

Being about to discuss the rejection of the Jews and the calling of the
Gentiles, and to show that the whole agrees with the sovereign electing
love of God, the apostle expresses strongly his affection for his
people. He solemnly appeals to Christ; and his conscience, enlightened
and directed by the Holy Spirit, bore witness to his sincerity. He would
submit to be treated as "accursed," to be disgraced, crucified; and even
for a time be in the deepest horror and distress; if he could rescue his
nation from the destruction about to come upon them for their obstinate
unbelief. To be insensible to the eternal condition of our
fellow-creatures, is contrary both to the love required by the law, and
the mercy of the gospel. They had long been professed worshippers of
Jehovah. The law, and the national covenant which was grounded thereon,
belonged to them. The temple worship was typical of salvation by the
Messiah, and the means of communion with God. All the promises
concerning Christ and his salvation were given to them. He is not only
over all, as Mediator, but he is God blessed for ever.

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

The rejection of the Jews by the gospel dispensation, did not break
God's promise to the patriarchs. The promises and threatenings shall be
fulfilled. Grace does not run in the blood; nor are saving benefits
always found with outward church privileges. Not only some of Abraham's
seed were chosen, and others not, but God therein wrought according to
the counsel of his own will. God foresaw both Esau and Jacob as born in
sin, by nature children of wrath even as others. If left to themselves
they would have continued in sin through life; but for wise and holy
reasons, not made known to us, he purposed to change Jacob's heart, and
to leave Esau to his perverseness. This instance of Esau and Jacob
throws light upon the Divine conduct to the fallen race of man. The
whole Scripture shows the difference between the professed Christian and
the real believer. Outward privileges are bestowed on many who are not
the children of God. There is, however, full encouragement to diligent
use of the means of grace which God has appointed.

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

Whatever God does, must be just. Wherein the holy, happy people of God
differ from others, God's grace alone makes them differ. In this
preventing, effectual, distinguishing grace, he acts as a benefactor,
whose grace is his own. None have deserved it; so that those who are
saved, must thank God only; and those who perish, must blame themselves
only, [Hos 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009). God is bound no
further than he has been pleased to bind himself by his own covenant and
promise, which is his revealed will. And this is, that he will receive,
and not cast out, those that come to Christ; but the drawing of souls in
order to that coming, is an anticipating, distinguishing favour to whom
he will. Why does he yet find fault? This is not an objection to be made
by the creature against his Creator, by man against God. The truth, as
it is in Jesus, abases man as nothing, as less than nothing, and
advances God as sovereign Lord of all. Who art thou that art so foolish,
so feeble, so unable to judge the Divine counsels? It becomes us to
submit to him, not to reply against him. Would not men allow the
infinite God the same sovereign right to manage the affairs of the
creation, as the potter exercises in disposing of his clay, when of the
same lump he makes one vessel to a more honourable, and one to a meaner
use? God could do no wrong, however it might appear to men. God will
make it appear that he hates sin. Also, he formed vessels filled with
mercy. Sanctification is the preparation of the soul for glory. This is
God's work. Sinners fit themselves for hell, but it is God who prepares
saints for heaven; and all whom God designs for heaven hereafter, he
fits for heaven now. Would we know who these vessels of mercy are? Those
whom God has called; and these not of the Jews only, but of the
Gentiles. Surely there can be no unrighteousness in any of these Divine
dispensations. Nor in God's exercising long-suffering, patience, and
forbearance towards sinners under increasing guilt, before he brings
utter destruction upon them. The fault is in the hardened sinner
himself. As to all who love and fear God, however such truths appear
beyond their reason to fathom, yet they should keep silence before him.
It is the Lord alone who made us to differ; we should adore his
pardoning mercy and new-creating grace, and give diligence to make our
calling and election sure.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

The rejecting of the Jews, and the taking in the Gentiles, were foretold
in the Old Testament. It tends very much to the clearing of a truth, to
observe how the Scripture is fulfilled in it. It is a wonder of Divine
power and mercy that there are any saved: for even those left to be a
seed, if God had dealt with them according to their sins, had perished
with the rest. This great truth this Scripture teaches us. Even among
the vast number of professing Christians it is to be feared that only a
remnant will be saved.

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

The Gentiles knew not their guilt and misery, therefore were not careful
to procure a remedy. Yet they attained to righteousness by faith. Not by
becoming proselytes to the Jewish religion, and submitting to the
ceremonial law; but by embracing Christ, and believing in him, and
submitting to the gospel. The Jews talked much of justification and
holiness, and seemed very ambitious to be the favourites of God. They
sought, but not in the right way, not in the humbling way, not in the
appointed way. Not by faith, not by embracing Christ, depending upon
Christ, and submitting to the gospel. They expected justification by
observing the precepts and ceremonies of the law of Moses. The
unbelieving Jews had a fair offer of righteousness, life, and salvation,
made them upon gospel terms, which they did not like, and would not
accept. Have we sought to know how we may be justified before God,
seeking that blessing in the way here pointed out, by faith in Christ,
as the Lord our Righteousness? Then we shall not be ashamed in that
awful day, when all refuges of lies shall be swept away, and the Divine
wrath shall overflow every hiding-place but that which God hath prepared
in his own Son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
