<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom009)  [Next](rom011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 10:0</span></span>

([Rom 10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)) The apostle's earnest
desire for the salvation of the Jews.

([Rom 10:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)) The difference between
the righteousness of the law, and the righteousness of faith.

([Rom 10:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)) The Gentiles stand on
a level with the Jews, in justification and salvation.

([Rom 10:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)) The Jews might know
this from Old Testament prophecies.

[Romans 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 10:1</span></span>

The Jews built on a false foundation, and refused to come to Christ for
free salvation by faith, and numbers in every age do the same in various
ways. The strictness of the law showed men their need of salvation by
grace, through faith. And the ceremonies shadowed forth Christ as
fulfilling the righteousness, and bearing the curse of the law. So that
even under the law, all who were justified before God, obtained that
blessing by faith, whereby they were made partakers of the perfect
righteousness of the promised Redeemer. The law is not destroyed, nor
the intention of the Lawgiver disappointed; but full satisfaction being
made by the death of Christ for our breach of the law, the end is
gained. That is, Christ has fulfilled the whole law, therefore whoever
believeth in him, is counted just before God, as much as though he had
fulfilled the whole law himself. Sinners never could go on in vain
fancies of their own righteousness, if they knew the justice of God as a
Governor, or his righteousness as a Saviour.

[Romans 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 10:5</span></span>

The self-condemned sinner need not perplex himself how this
righteousness may be found. When we speak of looking upon Christ, and
receiving, and feeding upon him, it is not Christ in heaven, nor Christ
in the deep, that we mean; but Christ in the promise, Christ offered in
the word. Justification by faith in Christ is a plain doctrine. It is
brought before the mind and heart of every one, thus leaving him without
excuse for unbelief. If a man confessed faith in Jesus, as the Lord and
Saviour of lost sinners, and really believed in his heart that God had
raised him from the dead, thus showing that he had accepted the
atonement, he should be saved by the righteousness of Christ, imputed to
him through faith. But no faith is justifying which is not powerful in
sanctifying the heart, and regulating all its affections by the love of
Christ. We must devote and give up to God our souls and our bodies: our
souls in believing with the heart, and our bodies in confessing with the
mouth. The believer shall never have cause to repent his confident trust
in the Lord Jesus. Of such faith no sinner shall be ashamed before God;
and he ought to glory in it before men.

[Romans 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 10:12</span></span>

There is not one God to the Jews, more kind, and another to the
Gentiles, who is less kind; the Lord is a Father to all men. The promise
is the same to all, who call on the name of the Lord Jesus as the Son of
God, as God manifest in the flesh. All believers thus call upon the Lord
Jesus, and none else will do so humbly or sincerely. But how should any
call on the Lord Jesus, the Divine Saviour, who had not heard of him?
And what is the life of a Christian but a life of prayer? It shows that
we feel our dependence on him, and are ready to give up ourselves to
him, and have a believing expectation of our all from him. It was
necessary that the gospel should be preached to the Gentiles. Somebody
must show them what they are to believe. How welcome the gospel ought to
be to those to whom it was preached! The gospel is given, not only to be
known and believed, but to be obeyed. It is not a system of notions, but
a rule of practice. The beginning, progress, and strength of faith is by
hearing. But it is only hearing the word, as the word of God that will
strengthen faith.

[Romans 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 10:18</span></span>

Did not the Jews know that the Gentiles were to be called in? They might
have known it from Moses and Isaiah. Isaiah speaks plainly of the grace
and favour of God, as going before in the receiving of the Gentiles. Was
not this our own case? Did not God begin in love, and make himself known
to us when we did not ask after him? The patience of God towards
provoking sinners is wonderful. The time of God's patience is called a
day, light as day, and fit for work and business; but limited as a day,
and there is a night at the end of it. God's patience makes man's
disobedience worse, and renders that the more sinful. We may wonder at
the mercy of God, that his goodness is not overcome by man's badness; we
may wonder at the wickedness of man, that his badness is not overcome by
God's goodness. And it is a matter of joy to think that God has sent the
message of grace to so many millions, by the wide spread of his gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 11](rom011)

</div>
