<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom010)  [Next](rom012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 11:0</span></span>

([Rom 11:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)) The rejection of the
Jews is not universal.

([Rom 11:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)) God overruled their
unbelief for making the Gentiles partakers of gospel privileges.

([Rom 11:22-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022)) The Gentiles cautioned
against pride and unbelief, The Jews shall be called as a nation, and
brought into God's visible covenant again.

([Rom 11:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)) A solemn adoring of
the wisdom, goodness, and justice of God.

[Romans 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 11:1</span></span>

There was a chosen remnant of believing Jews, who had righteousness and
life by faith in Jesus Christ. These were kept according to the election
of grace. If then this election was of grace, it could not be of works,
either performed or foreseen. Every truly good disposition in a fallen
creature must be the effect, therefore it cannot be the cause, of the
grace of God bestowed on him. Salvation from the first to the last must
be either of grace or of debt. These things are so directly contrary to
each other that they cannot be blended together. God glorifies his grace
by changing the hearts and tempers of the rebellious. How then should
they wonder and praise him! The Jewish nation were as in a deep sleep,
without knowledge of their danger, or concern about it; having no sense
of their need of the Saviour, or of their being upon the borders of
eternal ruin. David, having by the Spirit foretold the sufferings of
Christ from his own people, the Jews, foretells the dreadful judgments
of God upon them for it, Psalms 69. This teaches us how to understand
other prayers of David against his enemies; they are prophecies of the
judgments of God, not expressions of his own anger. Divine curses will
work long; and we have our eyes darkened, if we are bowed down in
worldly-mindedness.

[Romans 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 11:11</span></span>

The gospel is the greatest riches of every place where it is. As
therefore the righteous rejection of the unbelieving Jews, was the
occasion of so large a multitude of the Gentiles being reconciled to
God, and at peace with him; the future receiving of the Jews into the
church would be such a change, as would resemble a general resurrection
of the dead in sin to a life of righteousness. Abraham was as the root
of the church. The Jews continued branches of this tree till, as a
nation, they rejected the Messiah; after that, their relation to Abraham
and to God was, as it were, cut off. The Gentiles were grafted into this
tree in their room; being admitted into the church of God. Multitudes
were made heirs of Abraham's faith, holiness and blessedness. It is the
natural state of every one of us, to be wild by nature. Conversion is as
the grafting in of wild branches into the good olive. The wild olive was
often ingrafted into the fruitful one when it began to decay, and this
not only brought forth fruit, but caused the decaying olive to revive
and flourish. The Gentiles, of free grace, had been grafted in to share
advantages. They ought therefore to beware of self-confidence, and every
kind of pride or ambition; lest, having only a dead faith, and an empty
profession, they should turn from God, and forfeit their privileges. If
we stand at all, it is by faith; we are guilty and helpless in
ourselves, and are to be humble, watchful, afraid of self-deception, or
of being overcome by temptation. Not only are we at first justified by
faith, but kept to the end in that justified state by faith only; yet,
by a faith which is not alone, but which worketh by love to God and man.

[Romans 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 11:22</span></span>

Of all judgments, spiritual judgments are the sorest; of these the
apostle is here speaking. The restoration of the Jews is, in the course
of things, far less improbable than the call of the Gentiles to be the
children of Abraham; and though others now possess these privileges, it
will not hinder their being admitted again. By rejecting the gospel, and
by their indignation at its being preached to the Gentiles, the Jews
were become enemies to God; yet they are still to be favoured for the
sake of their pious fathers. Though at present they are enemies to the
gospel, for their hatred to the Gentiles; yet, when God's time is come,
that will no longer exist, and God's love to their fathers will be
remembered. True grace seeks not to confine God's favour. Those who find
mercy themselves, should endeavour that through their mercy others also
may obtain mercy. Not that the Jews will be restored to have their
priesthood, and temple, and ceremonies again; an end is put to all
these; but they are to be brought to believe in Christ, the true Messaih
whom they crucified, and become one sheep-fold with the Gentiles, under
Christ the Great Shepherd. The captivities of Israel, their dispersion,
and their being shut out from the church, are emblems of the believer's
corrections for doing wrong; and the continued care of the Lord towards
that people, and the final mercy and blessed restoration intended for
them, show the patience and love of God.

[Romans 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 11:33</span></span>

The apostle Paul knew the mysteries of the kingdom of God as well as
ever any man; yet he confesses himself at a loss; and despairing to find
the bottom, he humbly sits down at the brink, and adores the depth.
Those who know most in this imperfect state, feel their own weakness
most. There is not only depth in the Divine counsels, but riches;
abundance of that which is precious and valuable. The Divine counsels
are complete; they have not only depth and height, but breadth and
length, [Eph 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018), and that passing
knowledge. There is that vast distance and disproportion between God and
man, between the Creator and the creature, which for ever shuts us from
knowledge of his ways. What man shall teach God how to govern the world?
The apostle adores the sovereignty of the Divine counsels. All things in
heaven and earth, especially those which relate to our salvation, that
belong to our peace, are all of him by way of creation, through him by
way of providence, that they may be to him in their end. Of God, as the
Spring and Fountain of all; through Christ, to God, as the end. These
include all God's relations to his creatures; if all are of Him, and
through Him, all should be to Him, and for Him. Whatever begins, let
God's glory be the end: especially let us adore him when we talk of the
Divine counsels and actings. The saints in heaven never dispute, but
always praise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 12](rom012)

</div>
