<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom007)  [Next](rom009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 8:0</span></span>

([Rom 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).md) The freedom of believers
from condemnation.

([Rom 8:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010).md) Their privileges as
being the children of God.

([Rom 8:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018).md) Their hopeful prospects
under tribulations.

([Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md), [Rom
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#027).md) Their assistance from the Spirit
in prayer.

([Rom 8:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028).md) Their interest in the
love of God.

([Rom 8:32-39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032).md) Their final triumph,
through Christ.

[Romans 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 8:1</span></span>

Believers may be chastened of the Lord, but will not be condemned with
the world. By their union with Christ through faith, they are thus
secured. What is the principle of their walk; the flesh or the Spirit,
the old or the new nature, corruption or grace? For which of these do we
make provision, by which are we governed? The unrenewed will is unable
to keep any commandment fully. And the law, besides outward duties,
requires inward obedience. God showed abhorrence of sin by the
sufferings of his Son in the flesh, that the believer's person might be
pardoned and justified. Thus satisfaction was made to Divine justice,
and the way of salvation opened for the sinner. By the Spirit the law of
love is written upon the heart, and though the righteousness of the law
is not fulfilled by us, yet, blessed be God, it is fulfilled in us;
there is that in all true believers, which answers the intention of the
law. The favour of God, the welfare of the soul, the concerns of
eternity, are the things of the Spirit, which those that are after the
Spirit do mind. Which way do our thoughts move with most pleasure? Which
way go our plans and contrivances? Are we most wise for the world, or
for our souls? Those that live in pleasure are dead, [Ti1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006.md). A sanctified soul is a living
soul; and that life is peace. The carnal mind is not only an enemy to
God, but enmity itself. The carnal man may, by the power of Divine
grace, be made subject to the law of God, but the carnal mind never can;
that must be broken and driven out. We may know our real state and
character by inquiring whether we have the Spirit of God and Christ, or
not, [Ti1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009.md). Ye are not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit. Having the Spirit of Christ, means having a
turn of mind in some degree like the mind that was in Christ Jesus, and
is to be shown by a life and conversation suitable to his precepts and
example.

[Romans 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 8:10</span></span>

If the Spirit be in us, Christ is in us. He dwells in the heart by
faith. Grace in the soul is its new nature; the soul is alive to God,
and has begun its holy happiness which shall endure for ever. The
righteousness of Christ imputed, secures the soul, the better part, from
death. From hence we see how much it is our duty to walk, not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. If any habitually live according to corrupt
lustings, they will certainly perish in their sins, whatever they
profess. And what can a worldly life present, worthy for a moment to be
put against this noble prize of our high calling? Let us then, by the
Spirit, endeavour more and more to mortify the flesh. Regeneration by
the Holy Spirit brings a new and Divine life to the soul, though in a
feeble state. And the sons of God have the Spirit to work in them the
disposition of children; they have not the spirit of bondage, which the
Old Testament church was under, through the darkness of that
dispensation. The Spirit of adoption was not then plentifully poured
out. Also it refers to that spirit of bondage, under which many saints
were at their conversion. Many speak peace to themselves, to whom God
does not speak peace. But those who are sanctified, have God's Spirit
witnessing with their spirits, in and by his speaking peace to the soul.
Though we may now seem to be losers for Christ, we shall not, we cannot,
be losers by him in the end.

[Romans 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 8:18</span></span>

The sufferings of the saints strike no deeper than the things of time,
last no longer than the present time, are light afflictions, and but for
a moment. How vastly different are the sentence of the word and the
sentiment of the world, concerning the sufferings of this present time!
Indeed the whole creation seems to wait with earnest expectation for the
period when the children of God shall be manifested in the glory
prepared for them. There is an impurity, deformity, and infirmity, which
has come upon the creature by the fall of man. There is an enmity of one
creature to another. And they are used, or abused rather, by men as
instruments of sin. Yet this deplorable state of the creation is in
hope. God will deliver it from thus being held in bondage to man's
depravity. The miseries of the human race, through their own and each
other's wickedness, declare that the world is not always to continue as
it is. Our having received the first-fruits of the Spirit, quickens our
desires, encourages our hopes, and raises our expectations. Sin has
been, and is, the guilty cause of all the suffering that exists in the
creation of God. It has brought on the woes of earth; it has kindled the
flames of hell. As to man, not a tear has been shed, not a groan has
been uttered, not a pang has been felt, in body or mind, that has not
come from sin. This is not all; sin is to be looked at as it affects the
glory of God. Of this how fearfully regardless are the bulk of mankind!
Believers have been brought into a state of safety; but their comfort
consists rather in hope than in enjoyment. From this hope they cannot be
turned by the vain expectation of finding satisfaction in the things of
time and sense. We need patience, our way is rough and long; but He that
shall come, will come, though he seems to tarry.

[Romans 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 8:26</span></span>

Though the infirmities of Christians are many and great, so that they
would be overpowered if left to themselves, yet the Holy Spirit supports
them. The Spirit, as an enlightening Spirit, teaches us what to pray
for; as a sanctifying Spirit, works and stirs up praying graces; as a
comforting Spirit, silences our fears, and helps us over all
discouragements. The Holy Spirit is the spring of all desires toward
God, which are often more than words can utter. The Spirit who searches
the hearts, can perceive the mind and will of the spirit, the renewed
mind, and advocates his cause. The Spirit makes intercession to God, and
the enemy prevails not.

[Romans 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 8:28</span></span>

That is good for the saints which does their souls good. Every
providence tends to the spiritual good of those that love God; in
breaking them off from sin, bringing them nearer to God, weaning them
from the world, and fitting them for heaven. When the saints act out of
character, corrections will be employed to bring them back again. And
here is the order of the causes of our salvation, a golden chain, one
which cannot be broken. 1. Whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son. All that God
designed for glory and happiness as the end, he decreed to grace and
holiness as the way. The whole human race deserved destruction; but for
reasons not perfectly known to us, God determined to recover some by
regeneration and the power of his grace. He predestinated, or before
decreed, that they should be conformed to the image of his Son. In this
life they are in part renewed, and walk in his steps. 2. Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called. It is an effectual call, from self
and earth to God, and Christ, and heaven, as our end; from sin and
vanity to grace and holiness, as our way. This is the gospel call. The
love of God, ruling in the hearts of those who once were enemies to him,
proves that they have been called according to his purpose. 3. Whom he
called, them he also justified. None are thus justified but those that
are effectually called. Those who stand out against the gospel call,
abide under guilt and wrath. 4. Whom he justified, them he also
glorified. The power of corruption being broken in effectual calling,
and the guilt of sin removed in justification, nothing can come between
that soul and glory. This encourages our faith and hope; for, as for
God, his way, his work, is perfect. The apostle speaks as one amazed,
and swallowed up in admiration, wondering at the height and depth, and
length and breadth, of the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge. The
more we know of other things, the less we wonder; but the further we are
led into gospel mysteries, the more we are affected by them. While God
is for us, and we keep in his love, we may with holy boldness defy all
the powers of darkness.

[Romans 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 8:32</span></span>

All things whatever, in heaven and earth, are not so great a display of
God's free love, as the gift of his coequal Son to be the atonement on
the cross for the sin of man; and all the rest follows upon union with
him, and interest in him. All things, all which can be the causes or
means of any real good to the faithful Christian. He that has prepared a
crown and a kingdom for us, will give us what we need in the way to it.
Men may justify themselves, though the accusations are in full force
against them; but if God justifies, that answers all. By Christ we are
thus secured. By the merit of his death he paid our debt. Yea, rather
that is risen again. This is convincing evidence that Divine justice was
satisfied. We have such a Friend at the right hand of God; all power is
given to him. He is there, making intercession. Believer! does your soul
say within you, Oh that he were mine! and oh that I were his; that I
could please him and live to him! Then do not toss your spirit and
perplex your thoughts in fruitless, endless doubtings, but as you are
convinced of ungodliness, believe on Him who justifies the ungodly. You
are condemned, yet Christ is dead and risen. Flee to Him as such. God
having manifested his love in giving his own Son for us, can we think
that any thing should turn aside or do away that love? Troubles neither
cause nor show any abatement of his love. Whatever believers may be
separated from, enough remains. None can take Christ from the believer:
none can take the believer from Him; and that is enough. All other
hazards signify nothing. Alas, poor sinners! though you abound with the
possessions of this world, what vain things are they! Can you say of any
of them, Who shall separate us? You may be removed from pleasant
dwellings, and friends, and estates. You may even live to see and seek
your parting. At last you must part, for you must die. Then farewell,
all this world accounts most valuable. And what hast thou left, poor
soul, who hast not Christ, but that which thou wouldest gladly part
with, and canst not; the condemning guilt of all thy sins! But the soul
that is in Christ, when other things are pulled away, cleaves to Christ,
and these separations pain him not. Yea, when death comes, that breaks
all other unions, even that of the soul and body, it carries the
believer's soul into the nearest union with its beloved Lord Jesus, and
the full enjoyment of him for ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 9](rom009.md)

</div>
