<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom011)  [Next](rom013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 12:0</span></span>

([Rom 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001), [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)) Believers are to dedicate
themselves to God.

([Rom 12:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)) To be humble, and
faithfully to use their spiritual gifts, in their respective stations.

([Rom 12:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)) Exhortations to various
duties.

([Rom 12:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)) And to peaceable
conduct towards all men, with forbearance and benevolence.

[Romans 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 12:1</span></span>

The apostle having closed the part of his epistle wherein he argues and
proves various doctrines which are practically applied, here urges
important duties from gospel principles. He entreated the Romans, as his
brethren in Christ, by the mercies of God, to present their bodies as a
living sacrifice to Him. This is a powerful appeal. We receive from the
Lord every day the fruits of his mercy. Let us render ourselves; all we
are, all we have, all we can do: and after all, what return is it for
such very rich receivings? It is acceptable to God: a reasonable
service, which we are able and ready to give a reason for, and which we
understand. Conversion and sanctification are the renewing of the mind;
a change, not of the substance, but of the qualities of the soul. The
progress of sanctification, dying to sin more and more, and living to
righteousness more and more, is the carrying on this renewing work, till
it is perfected in glory. The great enemy to this renewal is, conformity
to this world. Take heed of forming plans for happiness, as though it
lay in the things of this world, which soon pass away. Do not fall in
with the customs of those who walk in the lusts of the flesh, and mind
earthly things. The work of the Holy Ghost first begins in the
understanding, and is carried on to the will, affections, and
conversation, till there is a change of the whole man into the likeness
of God, in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness. Thus, to be
godly, is to give up ourselves to God.

[Romans 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 12:3</span></span>

Pride is a sin in us by nature; we need to be cautioned and armed
against it. All the saints make up one body in Christ, who is the Head
of the body, and the common Centre of their unity. In the spiritual
body, some are fitted for and called to one sort of work; others for
another sort of work. We are to do all the good we can, one to another,
and for the common benefit. If we duly thought about the powers we have,
and how far we fail properly to improve them, it would humble us. But as
we must not be proud of our talents, so we must take heed lest, under a
pretence of humility and self-denial, we are slothful in laying out
ourselves for the good of others. We must not say, I am nothing,
therefore I will sit still, and do nothing; but, I am nothing in myself,
and therefore I will lay out myself to the utmost, in the strength of
the grace of Christ. Whatever our gifts or situations may be, let us try
to employ ourselves humbly, diligently, cheerfully, and in simplicity;
not seeking our own credit or profit, but the good of many, for this
world and that which is to come.

[Romans 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 12:9</span></span>

The professed love of Christians to each other should be sincere, free
from deceit, and unmeaning and deceitful compliments. Depending on
Divine grace, they must detest and dread all evil, and love and delight
in whatever is kind and useful. We must not only do that which is good,
but we must cleave to it. All our duty towards one another is summed up
in one word, love. This denotes the love of parents to their children;
which is more tender and natural than any other; unforced,
unconstrained. And love to God and man, with zeal for the gospel, will
make the wise Christian diligent in all his wordly business, and in
gaining superior skill. God must be served with the spirit, under the
influences of the Holy Spirit. He is honoured by our hope and trust in
him, especially when we rejoice in that hope. He is served, not only by
working for him, but by sitting still quietly, when he calls us to
suffer. Patience for God's sake, is true piety. Those that rejoice in
hope, are likely to be patient in tribulation. We should not be cold in
the duty of prayer, nor soon weary of it. Not only must there be
kindness to friends and brethren, but Christians must not harbour anger
against enemies. It is but mock love, which rests in words of kindness,
while our brethren need real supplies, and it is in our power to furnish
them. Be ready to entertain those who do good: as there is occasion, we
must welcome strangers. Bless, and curse not. It means thorough good
will; not, bless them when at prayer, and curse them at other times; but
bless them always, and curse not at all. True Christian love will make
us take part in the sorrows and joys of each other. Labour as much as
you can to agree in the same spiritual truths; and when you come short
of that, yet agree in affection. Look upon worldly pomp and dignity with
holy contempt. Do not mind it; be not in love with it. Be reconciled to
the place God in his providence puts you in, whatever it be. Nothing is
below us, but sin. We shall never find in our hearts to condescend to
others, while we indulge conceit of ourselves; therefore that must be
mortified.

[Romans 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 12:17</span></span>

Since men became enemies to God, they have been very ready to be enemies
one to another. And those that embrace religion, must expect to meet
with enemies in a world whose smiles seldom agree with Christ's.
Recompense to no man evil for evil. That is a brutish recompence,
befitting only animals, which are not conscious of any being above them,
or of any existence hereafter. And not only do, but study and take care
to do, that which is amiable and creditable, and recommends religion to
all with whom you converse. Study the things that make for peace; if it
be possible, without offending God and wounding conscience. Avenge not
yourselves. This is a hard lesson to corrupt nature, therefore a remedy
against it is added. Give place unto wrath. When a man's passion is up,
and the stream is strong, let it pass off; lest it be made to rage the
more against us. The line of our duty is clearly marked out, and if our
enemies are not melted by persevering kindness, we are not to seek
vengeance; they will be consumed by the fiery wrath of that God to whom
vengeance belongeth. The last verse suggests what is not easily
understood by the world; that in all strife and contention, those that
revenge are conquered, and those that forgive are conquerors. Be not
overcome of evil. Learn to defeat ill designs against you, either to
change them, or to preserve your own peace. He that has this rule over
his spirit, is better than the mighty. God's children may be asked
whether it is not more sweet unto them than all earthly good, that God
so enables them by his Spirit, thus to feel and act.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 13](rom013)

</div>
