<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom014)  [Next](rom016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 15:0</span></span>

([Rom 15:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001).md) Directions how to behave
towards the weak.

([Rom 15:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008).md) All to receive one
another as brethren.

([Rom 15:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014).md) The writing and
preaching of the apostle.

([Rom 15:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022).md) His purposed journeys.

([Rom 15:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030).md) He requests their
prayers.

[Romans 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 15:1</span></span>

Christian liberty was allowed, not for our pleasure, but for the glory
of God, and the good of others. We must please our neighbour, for the
good of his soul; not by serving his wicked will, and humouring him in a
sinful way; if we thus seek to please men, we are not the servants of
Christ. Christ's whole life was a self-denying, self-displeasing life.
And he is the most advanced Christian, who is the most conformed to
Christ. Considering his spotless purity and holiness, nothing could be
more contrary to him, than to be made sin and a curse for us, and to
have the reproaches of God fall upon him; the just for the unjust. He
bore the guilt of sin, and the curse for it; we are only called to bear
a little of the trouble of it. He bore the presumptuous sins of the
wicked; we are called only to bear the failings of the weak. And should
not we be humble, self-denying, and ready to consider one another, who
are members one of another? The Scriptures are written for our use and
benefit, as much as for those to whom they were first given. Those are
most learned who are most mighty in the Scriptures. That comfort which
springs from the word of God, is the surest and sweetest, and the
greatest stay to hope. The Spirit as a Comforter, is the earnest of our
inheritance. This like-mindedness must be according to the precept of
Christ, according to his pattern and example. It is the gift of God; and
a precious gift it is, for which we must earnestly seek unto him. Our
Divine Master invites his disciples, and encourages them by showing
himself as meek and lowly in spirit. The same disposition ought to mark
the conduct of his servants, especially of the strong towards the weak.
The great end in all our actions must be, that God may be glorified;
nothing more forwards this, than the mutual love and kindness of those
who profess religion. Those that agree in Christ may well agree among
themselves.

[Romans 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 15:8</span></span>

Christ fulfilled the prophecies and promises relating to the Jews, and
the Gentile converts could have no excuse for despising them. The
Gentiles, being brought into the church, are companions in patience and
tribulation. They should praise God. Calling upon all the nations to
praise the Lord, shows that they shall have knowledge of him. We shall
never seek to Christ till we trust in him. And the whole plan of
redemption is suited to reconcile us to one another, as well as to our
gracious God, so that an abiding hope of eternal life, through the
sanctifying and comforting power of the Holy Spirit, may be attained.
Our own power will never reach this; therefore where this hope is, and
is abounding, the blessed Spirit must have all the glory. "All joy and
peace;" all sorts of true joy and peace, so as to suppress doubts and
fears, through the powerful working of the Holy Spirit.

[Romans 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 15:14</span></span>

The apostle was persuaded that the Roman Christians were filled with a
kind and affectionate spirit, as well as with knowledge. He had written
to remind them of their duties and their dangers, because God had
appointed him the minister of Christ to the Gentiles. Paul preached to
them; but what made them sacrifices to God, was, their sanctification;
not his work, but the work of the Holy Ghost: unholy things can never be
pleasing to the holy God. The conversion of souls pertains unto God;
therefore it is the matter of Paul's glorying, not the things of the
flesh. But though a great preacher, he could not make one soul obedient,
further than the Spirit of God accompanied his labours. He principally
sought the good of those that sat in darkness. Whatever good we do, it
is Christ who does it by us.

[Romans 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 15:22</span></span>

The apostle sought the things of Christ more than his own will, and
would not leave his work of planting churches to go to Rome. It concerns
all to do that first which is most needful. We must not take it ill if
our friends prefer work which is pleasing to God, before visits and
compliments, which may please us. It is justly expected from all
Christians, that they should promote every good work, especially that
blessed work, the conversion of souls. Christian society is a heaven
upon earth, an earnest of our gathering together unto Christ at the
great day. Yet it is but partial, compared with our communion with
Christ; for that only will satisfy the soul. The apostle was going to
Jerusalem, as the messenger of charity. God loves a cheerful giver.
Every thing that passes between Christians should be a proof and
instance of the union they have in Jesus Christ. The Gentiles received
the gospel of salvation from the Jews; therefore were bound to minister
to them in what was needed for the body. Concerning what he expected
from them he speaks doubtfully; but concerning what he expected from God
he speaks confidently. We cannot expect too little from man, nor too
much from God. And how delightful and advantageous it is to have the
gospel with the fulness of its blessings! What wonderful and happy
effects does it produce, when attended with the power of the Spirit!

[Romans 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 15:30</span></span>

Let us learn to value the effectual fervent prayers of the righteous.
How careful should we be, lest we forfeit our interest in the love and
prayers of God's praying people! If we have experienced the Spirit's
love, let us not be wanting in this office of kindness for others. Those
that would prevail in prayer, must strive in prayer. Those who beg the
prayers of others, must not neglect to pray for themselves. And though
Christ knows our state and wants perfectly, he will know them from us.
As God must be sought, for restraining the ill-will of our enemies, so
also for preserving and increasing the good-will of our friends. All our
joy depends upon the will of God. Let us be earnest in prayer with and
for each other, that for Christ's sake, and by the love of the Holy
Spirit, great blessings may come upon the souls of Christians, and the
labours of ministers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 16](rom016.md)

</div>
