<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom001)  [Next](rom003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 2:0</span></span>

(v. 1-16) The Jews could not be justified by the law of Moses, any more
than the Gentiles by the law of nature.

([Rom 2:17-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017).md) The sins of the Jews
confuted all their vain confidence in their outward privileges.

[Romans 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 2:1</span></span>

The Jews thought themselves a holy people, entitled to their privileges
by right, while they were unthankful, rebellious, and unrighteous. But
all who act thus, of every nation, age, and description, must be
reminded that the judgment of God will be according to their real
character. The case is so plain, that we may appeal to the sinner's own
thoughts. In every wilful sin, there is contempt of the goodness of God.
And though the branches of man's disobedience are very various, all
spring from the same root. But in true repentance, there must be hatred
of former sinfulness, from a change wrought in the state of the mind,
which disposes it to choose the good and to refuse the evil. It shows
also a sense of inward wretchedness. Such is the great change wrought in
repentance, it is conversion, and is needed by every human being. The
ruin of sinners is their walking after a hard and impenitent heart.
Their sinful doings are expressed by the strong words, "treasuring up
wrath." In the description of the just man, notice the full demand of
the law. It demands that the motives shall be pure, and rejects all
actions from earthly ambition or ends. In the description of the
unrighteous, contention is held forth as the principle of all evil. The
human will is in a state of enmity against God. Even Gentiles, who had
not the written law, had that within, which directed them what to do by
the light of nature. Conscience is a witness, and first or last will
bear witness. As they kept or broke these natural laws and dictates,
their consciences either acquitted or condemned them. Nothing speaks
more terror to sinners, and more comfort to saints, than that Christ
shall be the Judge. Secret services shall be rewarded, secret sins shall
be then punished, and brought to light.

[Romans 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 2:17</span></span>

The apostle directs his discourse to the Jews, and shows of what sins
they were guilty, notwithstanding their profession and vain pretensions.
A believing, humble, thankful glorying in God, is the root and sum of
all religion. But proud, vain-glorious boasting in God, and in the
outward profession of his name, is the root and sum of all hypocrisy.
Spiritual pride is the most dangerous of all kinds of pride. A great
evil of the sins professors is, the dishonour done to God and religion,
by their not living according to their profession. Many despise their
more ignorant neighbours who rest in a dead form of godliness; yet
themselves trust in a form of knowledge, equally void of life and power,
while some glory in the gospel, whose unholy lives dishonour God, and
cause his name to be blasphemed.

[Romans 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 2:25</span></span>

No forms, ordinances, or notions can profit, without regenerating grace,
which will always lead to seeking an interest in the righteousness of
God by faith. For he is no more a Christian now, than he was really a
Jew of old, who is only one outwardly: neither is that baptism, which is
outward in the flesh: but he is the real Christian, who is inwardly a
true believer, with an obedient faith. And the true baptism is that of
the heart, by the washing of regeneration and the renewal of the Holy
Ghost; bringing a spiritual frame of mind, and a willing following of
truth in its holy ways. Let us pray that we may be made real Christians,
not outwardly, but inwardly; in the heart and spirit, not in the letter;
baptized, not with water only, but with the Holy Ghost; and let our
praise be, not of men, but of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 3](rom003.md)

</div>
