<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut000)  [Next](rut002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

([Rut 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)) Elimelech and his sons
die in the land of Moab.

([Rut 1:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#006)) Naomi returns home.

([Rut 1:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015)) Orpah stays behind, but
Ruth goes with Naomi.

([Rut 1:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019)) They come to Bethlehem.

[Ruth 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 1:1</span></span>

Elimelech's care to provide for his family, was not to be blamed; but
his removal into the country of Moab could not be justified. And the
removal ended in the wasting of his family. It is folly to think of
escaping that cross, which, being laid in our way, we ought to take up.
Changing our place seldom is mending it. Those who bring young people
into bad acquaintance, and take them out of the way of public
ordinances, thought they may think them well-principled, and armed
against temptation, know not what will be the end. It does not appear
that the women the sons of Elimelech married, were proselyted to the
Jewish religion. Earthly trials or enjoyments are of short continuance.
Death continually removes those of every age and situation, and mars all
our outward comforts: we cannot too strongly prefer those advantages
which shall last for ever.

[Ruth 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rut 1:6</span></span>

Naomi began to think of returning, after the death of her two sons. When
death comes into a family, it ought to reform what is amiss there. Earth
is made bitter to us, that heaven may be made dear. Naomi seems to have
been a person of faith and piety. She dismissed her daughters-in-law
with prayer. It is very proper for friends, when they part, to part with
them thus part in love. Did Naomi do well, to discourage her daughters
from going with her, when she might save them from the idolatry of Moab,
and bring them to the faith and worship of the God of Israel? Naomi, no
doubt, desired to do that; but if they went with her, she would not have
them to go upon her account. Those that take upon them a profession of
religion only to oblige their friends, or for the sake of company, will
be converts of small value. If they did come with her, she would have
them make it their deliberate choice, and sit down first and count the
cost, as it concerns those to do who make a profession of religion. And
more desire "rest in the house of a husband," or some wordly settlement
or earthly satisfaction, than the rest to which Christ invites our
souls; therefore when tried they will depart from Christ, though perhaps
with some sorrow.

[Ruth 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 1:15</span></span>

See Ruth's resolution, and her good affection to Naomi. Orpah was loth
to part from her; yet she did not love her well enough to leave Moab for
her sake. Thus, many have a value and affection for Christ, yet come
short of salvation by him, because they will not forsake other things
for him. They love him, yet leave him, because they do not love him
enough, but love other things better. Ruth is an example of the grace of
God, inclining the soul to choose the better part. Naomi could desire no
more than the solemn declaration Ruth made. See the power of resolution;
it silences temptation. Those that go in religious ways without a
stedfast mind, stand like a door half open, which invites a thief; but
resolution shuts and bolts the door, resists the devil and forces him to
flee.

[Ruth 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rut 1:19</span></span>

Naomi and Ruth came to Bethlehem. Afflictions will make great and
surprising changes in a little time. May God, by his grace, fit us for
all such changes, especially the great change!, Naomi signifies
"pleasant," or "amiable;" Mara, "bitter," or "bitterness." She was now a
woman of a sorrowful spirit. She had come home empty, poor, a widow and
childless. But there is a fulness for believers of which they never can
be emptied; a good part which shall not be taken from those who have it.
The cup of affliction is a "bitter" cup, but she owns that the
affliction came from God. It well becomes us to have our hearts humbled
under humbling providences. It is not affliction itself, but affliction
rightly borne, that does us good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 2](rut002)

</div>
