<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1014)  [Next](sa1016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 15:0</span></span>

([Sa1 15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001)) Saul sent to destroy
Amalek.

([Sa1 15:10-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#010)) Saul excuses and
commends himself.

([Sa1 15:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#024)) Saul's imperfect
humiliation.

([Sa1 15:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#032)) Agag put to death,
Samuel and Saul part.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 15:1</span></span>

The sentence of condemnation against the Amalekites had gone forth long
before, [Exo 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#014); [Deu
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#019), but they had been spared till
they filled up the measure of their sins. We are sure that the righteous
Lord does no injustice to any. The remembering the kindness of the
ancestors of the Kenites, in favour to them, at the time God was
punishing the injuries done by the ancestors of the Amalekites, tended
to clear the righteousness of God in this dispensation. It is dangerous
to be found in the company of God's enemies, and it is our duty and
interest to come out from among them, lest we share in their sins and
plagues, [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004). As the commandment
had been express, and a test of Saul's obedience, his conduct evidently
was the effect of a proud, rebellious spirit. He destroyed only the
refuse, that was good for little. That which was now destroyed was
sacrificed to the justice of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 15:10</span></span>

Repentance in God is not a change of mind, as it is in us, but a change
of method. The change was in Saul; "He is turned back from following
me." Hereby he made God his enemy. Samuel spent a whole night in
pleading for Saul. The rejection of sinners is the grief of believers:
God delights not in their death, nor should we. Saul boasts to Samuel of
his obedience. Thus sinners think, by justifying themselves, to escape
being judged of the Lord. The noise the cattle made, like the rust of
the silver, [Jam 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003), witnessed
against him. Many boast of obedience to the command of God; but what
means then their indulgence of the flesh, their love of the world, their
angry and unkind spirit, and their neglect of holy duties, which witness
against them? See of what evil covetousness is the root; and see what is
the sinfulness of sin, and notice that in it which above any thing else
makes it evil in the sight of the Lord; it is disobedience: "Thou didst
not obey the voice of the Lord." Carnal, deceitful hearts, like Saul,
think to excuse themselves from God's commandments by what pleases
themselves. It is hard to convince the children of disobedience. But
humble, sincere, and conscientious obedience to the will of God, is more
pleasing and acceptable to him than all burnt-offering and sacrifices.
God is more glorified and self more denied, by obedience than by
sacrifice. It is much easier to bring a bullock or lamb to be burned
upon the altar, than to bring every high thought into obedience to God,
and to make our will subject to his will. Those are unfit and unworthy
to rule over men, who are not willing that God should rule over them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 15:24</span></span>

There were several signs of hypocrisy in Saul's repentance. 1. He
besought Samuel only, and seemed most anxious to stand right in his
opinion, and to gain his favour. 2. He excuses his fault, even when
confessing it; that is never the way of a true penitent. 3. All his care
was to save his credit, and preserve his interest in the people. Men are
fickle and alter their minds, feeble and cannot effect their purposes;
something happens they could not foresee, by which their measures are
broken; but with God it is not so. The Strength of Israel will not lie.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 15:32</span></span>

Many think the bitterness of death is past when it is not gone by; they
put that evil day far from them, which is very near. Samuel calls Agag
to account for his own sins. He followed the example of his ancestors'
cruelty, justly therefore is all the righteous blood shed by Amalek
required. Saul seems unconcerned at the token of God's displeasure which
he lay under, yet Samuel mourns day and night for him. Jerusalem was
carnally secure while Christ wept over it. Do we desire to do the whole
will of God? Turn to him, not in form and appearance, but with
sincerity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](sa1016)

</div>
