<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1000)  [Next](sa1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

([Sa1 1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)) Elkanah and his family.

([Sa1 1:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009)) Hannah's prayer.

([Sa1 1:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)) Samuel, Hannah presents
him to the Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 1:1</span></span>

Elkanah kept up his attendance at God's altar, notwithstanding the
unhappy differences in his family. If the devotions of a family prevail
not to put an end to its divisions, yet let not the divisions put a stop
to the devotions. To abate our just love to any relation for the sake of
any infirmity which they cannot help, and which is their affliction, is
to make God's providence quarrel with his precept, and very unkindly to
add affliction to the afflicted. It is evidence of a base disposition,
to delight in grieving those who are of a sorrowful spirit, and in
putting those out of humour who are apt to fret and be uneasy. We ought
to bear one another's burdens, not add to them. Hannah could not bear
the provocation. Those who are of a fretful spirit, and are apt to lay
provocations too much to heart, are enemies to themselves, and strip
themselves of many comforts both of life and godliness. We ought to
notice comforts, to keep us from grieving for crosses. We should look at
that which is for us, as well as what is against us.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 1:9</span></span>

Hannah mingled tears with her prayers; she considered the mercy of our
God, who knows the troubled soul. God gives us leave, in prayer, not
only to ask good things in general, but to mention that special good
thing we most need and desire. She spoke softly, none could hear her.
Hereby she testified her belief of God's knowledge of the heart and its
desires. Eli was high priest, and judge in Israel. It ill becomes us to
be rash and hasty in censures of others, and to think people guilty of
bad things while the matter is doubtful and unproved. Hannah did not
retort the charge, and upbraid Eli with the wicked conduct of his own
sons. When we are at any time unjustly censured, we have need to set a
double watch before the door of our lips, that we do not return censure
for censure. Hannah thought it enough to clear herself, and so must we.
Eli was willing to acknowledge his mistake. Hannah went away with
satisfaction of mind. She had herself by prayer committed her case to
God, and Eli had prayed for her. Prayer is heart's ease to a gracious
soul. Prayer will smooth the countenance; it should do so. None will
long remain miserable, who use aright the privilege of going to the
mercy-seat of a reconciled God in Christ Jesus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 1:19</span></span>

Elkanah and his family had a journey before them, and a family of
children to take with them, yet they would not move till they had
worshipped God together. Prayer and provender do not hinder a journey.
When men are in such haste to set out upon journeys, or to engage in
business, that they have not time to worship God, they are likely to
proceed without his presence and blessing. Hannah, though she felt a
warm regard for the courts of God's house, begged to stay at home. God
will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Those who are detained from public
ordinances, by the nursing and tending of little children, may take
comfort from this instance, and believe, that if they do that duty in a
right spirit, God will graciously accept them therein. Hannah presented
her child to the Lord with a grateful acknowledgment of his goodness in
answer to prayer. Whatever we give to God, it is what we have first
asked and received from him. All our gifts to him were first his gifts
to us. The child Samuel early showed true piety. Little children should
be taught to worship God when very young. Their parents should teach
them in it, bring them to it, and put them on doing it as well as they
can; God will graciously accept them, and will teach them to do better.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa1002)

</div>
