<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1024)  [Next](sa1026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 25:0</span></span>

([Sa1 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001).md) Death of Samuel.

([Sa1 25:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002).md) David's request;
Nabal's churlish refusal.

([Sa1 25:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#012).md) David's intention to
destroy Nabal.

([Sa1 25:18-31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018).md) Abigail takes a
present to David.

([Sa1 25:32-39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032).md) He is pacified, Nabal
dies.

([Sa1 25:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039).md) David takes Abigail to
wife.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 25:1</span></span>

All Israel lamented Samuel, and they had reason. He prayed daily for
them. Those have hard hearts, who can bury faithful ministers without
grief; who do not feel their loss of those who have prayed for them, and
taught them the way of the Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 25:2</span></span>

We should not have heard of Nabal, if nothing had passed between him and
David. Observe his name, Nabal, "A fool;" so it signifies. Riches make
men look great in the eye of the world; but to one that takes right
views, Nabal looked very mean. He had no honour or honesty; he was
churlish, cross, and ill-humoured; evil in his doings, hard and
oppressive; a man that cared not what fraud and violence he used in
getting and saving. What little reason have we to value the wealth of
this world, when so great a churl as Nabal abounds, and so good a man as
David suffers want!, David pleaded the kindness Nabal's shepherds had
received. Considering that David's men were in distress and debt, and
discontented, and the scarcity of provisions, it was by good management
that they were kept from plundering. Nabal went into a passion, as
covetous men are apt to do, when asked for any thing, thinking thus to
cover one sin with another; and, by abusing the poor, to excuse
themselves from relieving them. But God will not thus be mocked. Let
this help us to bear reproaches and misrepresentations with patience and
cheerfulness, and make us easy under them; it has often been the lot of
the excellent ones of the earth. Nabal insists much on the property he
had in the provisions of his table. May he not do what he will with his
own? We mistake, if we think we are absolute lords of what we have, and
may do what we please with it. No; we are but stewards, and must use it
as we are directed, remembering it is not our own, but His who intrusted
us with it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 25:12</span></span>

God is kind to the evil and unthankful, and why may not we be so? David
determined to destroy Nabal, and all that belonged to him. Is this thy
voice, O David? Has he been so long in the school of affliction, where
he should have learned patience, and yet is so passionate? He at other
times was calm and considerate, but is put into such a heat by a few
hard words, that he seeks to destroy a whole family. What are the best
of men, when God leaves them to themselves, that they may know what is
in their hearts? What need to pray, Lord, lead us not into temptation!

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 25:18</span></span>

By a present Abigail atoned for Nabal's denial of David's request. Her
behaviour was very submissive. Yielding pacifies great offences. She
puts herself in the place of a penitent, and of a petitioner. She could
not excuse her husband's conduct. She depends not upon her own
reasonings, but on God's grace, to soften David, and expects that grace
would work powerfully. She says that it was below him to take vengeance
on so weak and despicable an enemy as Nabal, who, as he would do him no
kindness, so he could do him no hurt. She foretells the glorious end of
David's present troubles. God will preserve thy life; therefore it
becomes not thee unjustly and unnecessarily to take away the lives of
any, especially of the people of thy God and Saviour. Abigail keeps this
argument for the last, as very powerful with so good a man; that the
less he indulged his passion, the more he consulted his peace and the
repose of his own conscience. Many have done that in a heat, which they
have a thousand times wished undone again. The sweetness of revenge is
soon turned into bitterness. When tempted to sin, we should consider how
it will appear when we think upon it afterwards.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 25:32</span></span>

David gives God thanks for sending him this happy check in a sinful way.
Whoever meet us with counsel, direction, comfort, caution, or seasonable
reproof, we must see God sending them. We ought to be very thankful for
those happy providences which are the means of keeping us from sinning.
Most people think it enough, if they take reproof patiently; but few
will take it thankfully, and commend those who give it, and accept it as
a favour. The nearer we are to committing sin, the greater is the mercy
of a seasonable restraint. Sinners are often most secure when most in
danger. He was very drunk. A sign he was Nabal, a fool, that could not
use plenty without abusing it; who could not be pleasant with his
friends without making a beast of himself. There is not a surer sign
that a man has but little wisdom, nor a surer way to destroy the little
he has, than drinking to excess. Next morning, how he is changed! His
heart overnight merry with wine, next morning heavy as a stone; so
deceitful are carnal pleasures, so soon passes the laughter of the fool;
the end of that mirth is heaviness. Drunkards are sad, when they reflect
upon their own folly. About ten days after, the Lord smote Nabal, that
he died. David blessed God that he had been kept from killing Nabal.
Worldly sorrow, mortified pride, and an affrighted conscience, sometimes
end the joys of the sensualist, and separate the covetous man from his
wealth; but, whatever the weapon, the Lord smites men with death when it
pleases him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 25:39</span></span>

Abigail believed that David would be king over Israel, and greatly
esteemed his pious and excellent character. She deemed his proposal of
marriage honourable, and advantageous to her, notwithstanding his
present difficulties. With great humility, and doubtless agreeably to
the customs of those times, she consented, being willing to share his
trails. Thus those who join themselves to Christ, must be willing now to
suffer with him, believing that hereafter they shall reign with him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 26](sa1026.md)

</div>
