<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1009)  [Next](sa1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 10:0</span></span>

([Sa1 10:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)) Samuel anoints Saul.

([Sa1 10:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009)) Saul prophesies.

([Sa1 10:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)) Saul chosen king.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 10:1</span></span>

The sacred anointing, then used, pointed at the great Messiah, or
Anointed One, the King of the church, and High Priest of our profession,
who was anointed with the oil of the Spirit, not by measure, but without
measure, and above all the priests and princes of the Jewish church. For
Saul's further satisfaction, Samuel gives him some signs which should
come to pass the same day. The first place he directs him to, was the
sepulchre of one of his ancestors; there he must be reminded of his own
mortality, and now that he had a crown before him, must think of his
grave, in which all his honour would be laid in the dust. From the time
of Samuel there appears to have been schools, or places where pious
young men were brought up in the knowledge of Divine things. Saul should
find himself strongly moved to join with them, and should be turned into
another man from what he had been. The Spirit of God changes men,
wonderfully transforms them. Saul, by praising God in the communion of
saints, became another man, but it may be questioned if he became a new
man.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 10:9</span></span>

The signs Samuel had given Saul, came to pass punctually; he found that
God had given him another heart, another disposition of mind. Yet let
not an outward show of devotion, and a sudden change for the present, be
too much relied on; Saul among the prophets was Saul still. His being
anointed was kept private. He leaves it to God to carry on his own work
by Samuel, and sits still, to see how the matter will fall.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 10:17</span></span>

Samuel tells the people, Ye have this day rejected your God. So little
fond was Saul now of that power, which soon after, when he possessed it,
he could not think of parting with, that he hid himself. It is good to
be conscious of our unworthiness and insufficiency for the services to
which we are called; but men should not go into the contrary extreme, by
refusing the employments to which the Lord and the church call them. The
greater part of the people treated the matter with indifference. Saul
modestly went home to his own house, but was attended by a band of men
whose hearts God disposed to support his authority. If the heart bend at
any time the right way, it is because He has touched it. One touch is
enough when it is Divine. Others despised him. Thus differently are men
affected to our exalted Redeemer. There is a remnant who submit to him,
and follow him wherever he goes; they are those whose hearts God has
touched, whom he has made willing. But there are others who despise him,
who ask, How shall this man save us? They are offended in him, and they
will be punished.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](sa1011)

</div>
