<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1015)  [Next](sa1017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 16:0</span></span>

([Sa1 16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001).md) Samuel sent to Bethlehem
to Jesse.

([Sa1 16:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006).md) David is anointed.

([Sa1 16:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014).md) Saul troubled with an
evil spirit, is quieted by David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 16:1</span></span>

It appears that Saul was grown very wicked. Of what would he not be
guilty, who durst think to kill Samuel? The elders of Bethlehem trembled
at Samuel's coming. It becomes us to stand in awe of God's messengers,
and to tremble at his word. His answer was, I come peaceably, for I come
to sacrifice. When our Lord Jesus came into the world, though men had
reason to fear that his errand was to condemn the world, yet he gave
full assurance that he came peaceably, for he came to sacrifice, and he
brought his offering with him; A body hast thou prepared me. Let us
sanctify ourselves, and depend upon His sacrifice.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 16:6</span></span>

It was strange that Samuel, who had been so disappointed in Saul, whose
countenance and stature recommended him, should judge of another man by
that rule. We can tell how men look, but God can tell what they are. He
judges of men by the heart. We often form a mistaken judgment of
characters; but the Lord values only the faith, fear, and love, which
are planted in the heart, beyond human discernment. And God does not
favour our children according to our fond partiality, but often most
honours and blesses those who have been least regarded. David at length
was pitched upon. He was the youngest of the sons of Jesse; his name
signifies Beloved; he was a type of God's beloved Son. It should seem,
David was least set by of all the sons of Jesse. But the Spirit of the
Lord came upon David from that day forward. His anointing was not an
empty ceremony, a Divine power went with that instituted sign; he found
himself advanced in wisdom and courage, with all the qualifications of a
prince, though not advanced in his outward circumstances. This would
satisfy him that his election was of God. The best evidence of our being
predestinated to the kingdom of glory, is, our being sealed with the
Spirit of promise, and experience of a work of grace in our hearts.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 16:14</span></span>

Saul is made a terror to himself. The Spirit of the Lord departed from
him. If God and his grace do not rule us, sin and Satan will have
possession of us. The devil, by the Divine permission, troubled and
terrified Saul, by the corrupt humours of his body, and passions of his
mind. He grew fretful, peevish, and discontented, and at times a madman.
It is a pity that music, which may be serviceable to the good temper of
the mind, should ever be abused, to support vanity and luxury, and made
an occasion of drawing the heart from God and serious things. That is
driving away the good Spirit, not the evil spirit. Music, diversions,
company, or business, have for a time often been employed to quiet the
wounded conscience; but nothing can effect a real cure but the blood of
Christ, applied in faith, and the sanctifying Spirit sealing the pardon,
by his holy comforts. All other plans to dispel religious melancholy are
sure to add to distress, either in this world or the next.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa1017.md)

</div>
