<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1011)  [Next](sa1013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 12:0</span></span>

([Sa1 12:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001).md) Samuel testifies his
integrity.

([Sa1 12:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006).md) Samuel reproves the
people.

([Sa1 12:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016).md) Thunder sent in
harvest time.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 12:1</span></span>

Samuel not only cleared his own character, but set an example before
Saul, while he showed the people their ingratitude to God and to
himself. There is a just debt which all men to their own good name,
especially men in public stations, which is, to guard it against unjust
blame and suspicions, that they may finish their course with honour, as
well as with joy. And that we have in our places lived honestly, will be
our comfort, under any slights and contempt that may be put upon us.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 12:6</span></span>

The work of ministers is to reason with people; not only to exhort and
direct, but to persuade, to convince men's judgments, and so to gain
their wills and affections. Samuel reasons of the righteous acts of the
Lord. Those who follow God faithfully, he will enable to continue
following him. Disobedience would certainly be the ruin of Israel. We
mistake if we think that we can escape God's justice, by trying to shake
off his dominion. If we resolve that God shall not rule us, yet he will
judge us.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 12:16</span></span>

At Samuel's word, God sent thunder and rain, at a season of the year
when, in that country, the like was not seen. This was to convince them
they had done wickedly in asking a king; not only by its coming at an
unusual time, in wheat harvest, and on a clear day, but by the prophet's
giving notice of it before. He showed their folly in desiring a king to
save them, rather than God, or Samuel; promising themselves more from an
arm of flesh, than from the arm of God, or from the power of prayer.
Could their prince command such forces as the prophet could do by his
prayers? It startled them very much. Some will not be brought to see
their sins by any gentler methods than storms and thunders. They entreat
Samuel to pray for them. Now they see their need of him whom shortly
before they slighted. Thus many who will not have Christ to reign over
them, would yet be glad to have him intercede for them, to turn away the
wrath of God. Samuel aims to confirm the people in their religion.
Whatever we make a god of, we shall find it deceive us. Creatures in
their own places are good; but when put in God's place, they are vain
things. We sin if we restrain prayer, and in particular if we cease
praying for the church. They only asked him to pray for them; but he
promises to do more, to teach them. He urges that they were bound in
gratitude to serve God, considering what great things he had done for
them; and that they were bound in interest to serve him, considering
what he would do against them, if they should still do wickedly. Thus,
as a faithful watchman, he gave them warning, and so delivered his own
soul. If we consider what great things the Lord hath done for us,
especially in the great work of redemption, we can neither want motive,
encouragement, nor assistance in serving him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa1013.md)

</div>
