<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2023)  [Next](kg1000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 24:0</span></span>

([Sa2 24:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001).md) David numbers the
people.

([Sa2 24:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010).md) He chooses the
pestilence.

([Sa2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md), [Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017).md) The staying the pestilence.

([Sa2 24:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018).md) David's sacrifice, The
plague removed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 24:1</span></span>

For the people's sin David was left to act wrong, and in his
chastisement they received punishment. This example throws light upon
God's government of the world, and furnishes a useful lesson. The pride
of David's heart, was his sin in numbering of the people. He thought
thereby to appear the more formidable, trusting in an arm of flesh more
than he should have done, and though he had written so much of trusting
in God only. God judges not of sin as we do. What appears to us
harmless, or, at least, but a small offence, may be a great sin in the
eye of God, who discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart. Even
ungodly men can discern evil tempers and wrong conduct in believers, of
which they themselves often remain unconscious. But God seldom allows
those whom he loves the pleasures they sinfully covet.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 24:10</span></span>

It is well, when a man has sinned, if he has a heart within to smite him
for it. If we confess our sins, we may pray in faith that God would
forgive them, and take away, by pardoning mercy, that sin which we cast
away by sincere repentance. What we make the matter of our pride, it is
just in God to take from us, or make bitter to us, and make it our
punishment. This must be such a punishment as the people have a large
share in, for though it was David's sin that opened the sluice, the sins
of the people all contributed to the flood. In this difficulty, David
chose a judgment which came immediately from God, whose mercies he knew
to be very great, rather than from men, who would have triumphed in the
miseries of Israel, and have been thereby hardened in their idolatry. He
chose the pestilence; he and his family would be as much exposed to it
as the poorest Israelite; and he would continue for a shorter time under
the Divine rebuke, however severe it was. The rapid destruction by the
pestilence shows how easily God can bring down the proudest sinners, and
how much we owe daily to the Divine patience.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 24:16</span></span>

Perhaps there was more wickedness, especially more pride, and that was
the sin now chastised, in Jerusalem than elsewhere, therefore the hand
of the destroyer is stretched out upon that city; but the Lord repented
him of the evil, changed not his mind, but his way. In the very place
where Abraham was stayed from slaying his son, this angel, by a like
countermand, was stayed from destroying Jerusalem. It is for the sake of
the great Sacrifice, that our forfeited lives are preserved from the
destroying angel. And in David is the spirit of a true shepherd of the
people, offering himself as a sacrifice to God, for the salvation of his
subjects.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 24:18</span></span>

God's encouraging us to offer to him spiritual sacrifices, is an
evidence of his reconciling us to himself. David purchased the ground to
build the altar. God hates robbery for burnt-offering. Those know not
what religion is, who chiefly care to make it cheap and easy to
themselves, and who are best pleased with that which costs them least
pains or money. For what have we our substance, but to honour God with
it; and how can it be better bestowed? See the building of the altar,
and the offering proper sacrifices upon it. Burnt-offerings to the glory
of God's justice; peace-offerings to the glory of his mercy. Christ is
our Altar, our Sacrifice; in him alone we may expect to escape his
wrath, and to find favour with God. Death is destroying all around, in
so many forms, and so suddenly, that it is madness not to expect and
prepare for the close of life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Introduction](kg1000.md)

</div>
