<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2020)  [Next](sa2022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 21:0</span></span>

([Sa2 21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)) The Gibeonites avenged.

([Sa2 21:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010)) Rizpah's care for the
bodies of Saul's descendants.

([Sa2 21:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)) Battles with the
Philistines.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 21:1</span></span>

Every affliction arises from sin, and should lead us to repent and
humble ourselves before God; but some troubles especially show that they
are sent to bring sin to remembrance. God's judgments often look a great
way back, which requires us to do so, when we are under his rebukes. It
is not for us to object against the people's smarting for the sin of
their king; perhaps they helped him. Nor against this generation
suffering for the sin of the last. God often visits the sins of the
fathers upon the children, and he gives no account of any matters. Time
does not wear out the guilt of sin; nor can we build hopes of escape
upon the delay of judgments. If we cannot understand all the reasons of
Providence in this matter, still we have no right to demand that God
should acquaint us with those reasons. It must be right, because it is
the will of God, and in the end it will be proved to be so. Money is no
satisfaction for blood. It should seem, Saul's posterity trod in his
steps, for it is called a bloody house. It was the spirit of the family,
therefore they are justly reckoned with for his sin, as well as for
their own. The Gibeonites did not require this out of malice against
Saul or his family. It was not to gratify any revenge, but for the
public good. They were put to death at the beginning of harvest; they
were thus sacrificed to turn away the wrath of Almighty God, who had
withheld the harvest-mercies for some years past, and to obtain his
favour in the present harvest. In vain do we expect mercy from God,
unless we do justice upon our sins. Executions must not be thought
cruel, which are for the public welfare.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 21:10</span></span>

That a guilty land should enjoy many years of plenty, calls for
gratitude; and we need not wonder misused abundance should be punished
with scarcity; yet how few are disposed to ask of the Lord concerning
the sinful cause, while numbers search for the second causes by which he
is pleased to work! But the Lord will plead the cause of those who
cannot or will not avenge themselves; and the prayers of the poor are of
great power. When God sent rain to water the earth, these bodies were
buried, for then it appeared that God was entreated for the land. When
justice is done on earth, vengeance from heaven ceases. God is pacified,
and is entreated for us through Christ, who was hanged on a tree, and so
made a curse for us, to do away our guilt, though he was himself
guiltless.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 21:15</span></span>

These events seem to have taken place towards the end of David's reign.
David fainted, but he did not flee, and God sent help in the time of
need. In spiritual conflicts, even strong saints sometimes wax faint;
then Satan attacks them furiously; but those who stand their ground and
resist him, shall be relieved and made more than conquerors. Death is a
Christian's last enemy, and a son of Anak; but through Him that
triumphed for us, believers shall be more than conquerors at last, even
over that enemy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 22](sa2022)

</div>
