<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol006)  [Next](sol008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 7:0</span></span>

([Sol 7:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001).md) The graces of the church.

([Sol 7:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010).md) The delight of the
church in Christ.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 7:1</span></span>

The similitudes here are different from what they were before, and in
the original refer to glorious and splendid clothing. Such honour have
all his saints; and having put on Christ, they are distinguished by
their beautiful and glorious apparel. They adorn the doctrine of God
their Saviour in all things. Consistent believers honour Christ,
recommend the gospel, and convince and awaken sinners. The church
resembles the stately and spreading palm; while her love for Christ, and
the obedience resulting therefrom, are precious fruit of the true Vine.
The King is held in the galleries. Christ takes delight in the
assemblies and ordinances of his people; and admires the fruit of his
grace in them. When applied to the church and to each faithful
Christian, all this denotes that beauty of holiness, in which they shall
be presented to their heavenly Bridegroom.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 7:10</span></span>

The church, the believing soul, triumphs in its relation to Christ, and
interest in him. She humbly desires communion with him. Let us walk
together, that I may receive counsel, instruction, and comfort from
thee; and may make known my wants and my grievances to thee, with
freedom, and without interruption. Communion with Christ is what all
that are made holy earnestly breathe after. And those who would converse
with Christ, must go forth from the world. Wherever we are, we may keep
up communion with God. Nor should we go where we cannot in faith ask him
to go with us. Those who would go abroad with Christ, must begin early
in the morning of their days; must begin every day with him, seek him
early, seek him diligently. A gracious soul can reconcile itself to the
poorest places, if it may have communion with God in them; but the most
delightful fields will not satisfy, unless the Beloved is there. Let us
not think to be satisfied with any earthly object. Our own souls are our
vineyards; they should be planted with useful trees. We should often
search whether we are fruitful in righteousness. Christ's presence will
make the vine flourish, and the tender grapes appear, as the returning
sun revives the gardens. If we can appeal to him, Thou knowest all
things, thou knowest that I love thee; if his Spirit witness with our
spirit, that our souls prosper, it is enough. And we must beg of him to
search and try us, to discover us to ourselves. The fruits and exercises
of graces are pleasant to the Lord Jesus. These must be laid up, and
always ready; that by our bringing forth much fruit, he may be
glorified. It is all from him, therefore it is fit it should be all for
him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](sol008.md)

</div>
