<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol003)  [Next](sol005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 4:0</span></span>

([Sol 4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001).md) Christ sets forth the
graces of the church.

([Sol 4:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008).md) Christ's love to the
church.

([Sol 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016).md) The church desires further
influences of Divine grace.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 4:1</span></span>

If each of these comparisons has a meaning applicable to the graces of
the church, or of the faithful Christian, they are not clearly known;
and great mistakes are made by fanciful guesses. The mountain of myrrh
appears to mean the mountain Moriah, on which the temple was built,
where the incense was burned, and the people worshipped the Lord. This
was his residence till the shadows of the law given to Moses were
dispersed by the breaking of the gospel day, and the rising of the Sun
of righteousness. And though, in respect of his human nature, Christ is
absent from his church on earth, and will continue to be so till the
heavenly day break, yet he is spiritually present in his ordinances, and
with his people. How fair and comely are believers, when justified in
Christ's righteousness, and adorned with spiritual graces! when their
thoughts, words, and deeds, though imperfect, are pure, manifesting a
heart nourished by the gospel!

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 4:8</span></span>

Observe the gracious call Christ gives to the church. It is, 1. A
precept; so this is Christ's call to his church to come off from the
world. These hills seem pleasant, but there are in them lions' dens;
they are mountains of the leopards. 2. As a promise; many shall be
brought as members of the church, from every point. The church shall be
delivered from her persecutors in due time, though now she dwells among
lions, [Psa 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md). Christ's heart is
upon his church; his treasure is therein; and he delights in the
affection she has for him; its working in the heart, and its works in
the life. The odours wherewith the spouse is perfumed, are as the gifts
and graces of the Spirit. Love and obedience to God are more pleasing to
Christ than sacrifice or incense. Christ having put upon his spouse the
white raiment of his own righteousness, and the righteousness of saints,
and perfumed it with holy joy and comfort, he is well pleased with it.
And Christ walks in his garden unseen. A hedge of protection is made
around, which all the powers of darkness cannot break through. The souls
of believers are as gardens enclosed, where is a well of living water,
[Joh 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md); [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038.md), the influences of the Holy
Spirit. The world knows not these wells of salvation, nor can any
opposer corrupt this fountain. Saints in the church, and graces in the
saints, are fitly compared to fruits and spices. They are planted, and
do not grow of themselves. They are precious; they are the blessings of
this earth. They will be kept to good purpose when flowers are withered.
Grace, when ended in glory, will last for ever. Christ is the source
which makes these gardens fruitful; even a well of living waters.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 4:16</span></span>

The church prays for the influences of the blessed Spirit, to make this
garden fruitful. Graces in the soul are as spices in these gardens, that
in them which is valuable and useful. The blessed Spirit, in his work
upon the soul, is as the wind. There is the north wind of conviction,
and the south wind of comfort. He stirs up good affections, and works in
us both to will and to do that which is good. The church invites Christ.
Let him have the honour of all the garden produces, and let us have the
comfort of his acceptance of it. We can invite him to nothing but what
is his own already. The believer can have no joy of the fruits, unless
they redound some way or other to the glory of Christ. Let us then seek
to keep separate from the world, as a garden enclosed, and to avoid
conformity thereto.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](sol005.md)

</div>
