<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol001)  [Next](sol003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 2:0</span></span>

([Sol 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001).md) The mutual love of Christ
and his church.

([Sol 2:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008).md) The hope and calling of
the church.

([Sol 2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014).md) Christ's care of the
church, Her faith and hope.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 2:1</span></span>

Believers are beautiful, as clothed in the righteousness of Christ; and
fragrant, as adorned with the graces of his Spirit; and they thrive
under the refreshing beams of the Sun of righteousness. The lily is a
very noble plant in the East; it grows to a considerable height, but has
a weak stem. The church is weak in herself, yet is strong in Him that
supports her. The wicked, the daughters of this world, who have no love
to Christ, are as thorns, worthless and useless, noxious and hurtful.
Corruptions are thorns in the flesh; but the lily now among thorns,
shall be transplanted into that paradise where there is no brier or
thorn. The world is a barren tree to the soul; but Christ is a fruitful
one. And when poor souls are parched with convictions of sin, with the
terrors of the law, or the troubles of this world, weary and heavy
laden, they may find rest in Christ. It is not enough to pass by this
shadow, but we must sit down under it. Believers have tasted that the
Lord Jesus is gracious; his fruits are all the precious privileges of
the new covenant, purchased by his blood, and communicated by his
Spirit; promises are sweet to a believer, and precepts also. Pardons are
sweet, and peace of conscience sweet. If our mouths are out of taste for
the pleasures of sin, Divine consolations will be sweet to us. Christ
brings the soul to seek and to find comforts through his ordinances,
which are as a banqueting-house where his saints feast with him. The
love of Christ, manifested by his death, and by his word, is the banner
he displays, and believers resort to it. How much better is it with the
soul when sick from love to Christ, than when surfeited with the love of
this world! And though Christ seemed to have withdrawn, yet he was even
then a very present help. All his saints are in his hand, which tenderly
holds their aching heads. Finding Christ thus nigh to her, the soul is
in great care that her communion with him is not interrupted. We easily
grieve the Spirit by wrong tempers. Let those who have comfort, fear
sinning it away.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 2:8</span></span>

The church pleases herself with thoughts of further communion with
Christ. None besides can speak to the heart. She sees him come. This may
be applied to the prospect the Old Testament saints had of Christ's
coming in the flesh. He comes as pleased with his own undertaking. He
comes speedily. Even when Christ seems to forsake, it is but for a
moment; he will soon return with everlasting loving-kindness. The saints
of old saw him, appearing through the sacrifices and ceremonial
institutions. We see him through a glass darkly, as he manifests himself
through the lattices. Christ invites the new convert to arise from sloth
and despondency, and to leave sin and worldly vanities, for union and
communion with him. The winter may mean years passed in ignorance and
sin, unfruitful and miserable, or storms and tempests that accompanied
his conviction of guilt and danger. Even the unripe fruits of holiness
are pleasant unto Him whose grace has produced them. All these
encouraging tokens and evidences of Divine favour, are motives to the
soul to follow Christ more fully. Arise then, and come away from the
world and the flesh, come into fellowship with Christ. This blessed
change is owing wholly to the approaches and influences of the Sun of
righteousness.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 2:14</span></span>

The church is Christ's dove; she returns to him, as her Noah. Christ is
the Rock, in whom alone she can think herself safe, and find herself
easy, as a dove in the hole of a rock, when struck at by the birds of
prey. Christ calls her to come boldly to the throne of grace, having a
great High Priest there, to tell what her request is. Speak freely, fear
not a slight or a repulse. The voice of prayer is sweet and acceptable
to God; those who are sanctified have the best comeliness. The first
risings of sinful thoughts and desires, the beginnings of trifling
pursuits which waste the time, trifling visits, small departures from
truth, whatever would admit some conformity to the world; all these, and
many more, are little foxes which must be removed. This is a charge to
believers to mortify their sinful appetites and passions, which are as
little foxes, that destroy their graces and comforts, and crush good
beginnings. Whatever we find a hinderance to us in that which is good,
we must put away. He feedeth among the lilies; this shows Christ's
gracious presence among believers. He is kind to all his people. It
becomes them to believe this, when under desertion and absence, and so
to ward off temptations. The shadows of the Jewish dispensation were
dispelled by the dawning of the gospel day. And a day of comfort will
come after a night of desertion. Come over the mountains of Bether, "the
mountains that divide," looking forward to that day of light and love.
Christ will come over every separating mountain to take us home to
himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](sol003.md)

</div>
