<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol000)  [Next](sol002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

([Sol 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)) The title.

([Sol 1:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002)) The church confesses her
deformity.

([Sol 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007), [Sol
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008)) The church beseeches Christ to
lead her to the resting-place of his people.

([Sol 1:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009)) Christ's commendation of
the church, Her esteem for Him.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 1:1</span></span>

This is "the Song of songs," excellent above any others, for it is
wholly taken up with describing the excellences of Christ, and the love
between him and his redeemed people.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 1:2</span></span>

The church, or rather the believer, speaks here in the character of the
spouse of the King, the Messiah. The kisses of his mouth mean those
assurances of pardon with which believers are favoured, filling them
with peace and joy in believing, and causing them to abound in hope by
the power of the Holy Ghost. Gracious souls take most pleasure in loving
Christ, and being loved of him. Christ's love is more valuable and
desirable than the best this world can give. The name of Christ is not
now like ointment sealed up, but like ointment poured forth; which
denotes the freeness and fulness of the setting forth of his grace by
the gospel. Those whom he has redeemed and sanctified, are here the
virgins that love Jesus Christ, and follow him whithersoever he goes,
[Rev 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004). They entreat him to draw
them by the quickening influences of his Spirit. The more clearly we
discern Christ's glory, the more sensible shall we be that we are unable
to follow him suitably, and at the same time be more desirous of doing
it. Observe the speedy answer given to this prayer. Those who wait at
Wisdom's gate, shall be led into truth and comfort. And being brought
into this chamber, our griefs will vanish. We have no joy but in Christ,
and for this we are indebted to him. We will remember to give thanks for
thy love; it shall make more lasting impressions upon us than any thing
in this world. Nor is any love acceptable to Christ but love in
sincerity, [Eph 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024). The daughters of
Jerusalem may mean professors not yet established in the faith. The
spouse was black as the tents of the wandering Arabs, but comely as the
magnificent curtains in the palaces of Solomon. The believer is black,
as being defiled and sinful by nature, but comely, as renewed by Divine
grace to the holy image of God. He is still deformed with remains of
sin, but comely as accepted in Christ. He is often base and contemptible
in the esteem of men, but excellent in the sight of God. The blackness
was owing to the hard usage that had been suffered. The children of the
church, her mother, but not of God, her Father, were angry with her.
They had made her suffer hardships, which caused her to neglect the care
of her soul. Thus, under the emblem of a poor female, made the chosen
partner of a prince, we are led to consider the circumstances in which
the love of Christ is accustomed to find its objects. They were wretched
slaves of sin, in toil, or in sorrow, weary and heavy laden, but how
great the change when the love of Christ is manifested to their souls!

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 1:7</span></span>

Observe the title given to Christ, O Thou whom my soul loveth. Those
that do so, may come to him boldly, and may humbly plead with him. Is it
with God's people a noon-time of outward troubles, inward conflicts?
Christ has rest for them. Those whose souls love Jesus Christ, earnestly
desire to share in the privileges of his flock. Turning aside from
Christ is what gracious souls dread more than anything else. God is
ready to answer prayer. Follow the track, ask for the good old way,
observe the footsteps of the flock, look what has been the practice of
godly people. Sit under the direction of good ministers; beside the
tents of the under shepherds. Bring thy charge with thee, they shall all
be welcome. It will be the earnest desire and prayer of the Christian,
that God would so direct him in his worldly business, and so order his
situation and employment, that he may have his Lord and Saviour always
before him.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 1:9</span></span>

The Bridegroom gives high praises of his spouse. In the sight of Christ
believers are the excellent of the earth, fitted to be instruments for
promoting his glory. The spiritual gifts and graces which Christ bestows
on every true believer, are described by the ornaments then in use, [Sol
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010), [Sol
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#011). The graces of the saints are
many, but there is dependence upon each other. He who is the Author,
will be the Finisher of the good work. The grace received from Christ's
fulness, springs forth into lively exercises of faith, affection, and
gratitude. Yet Christ, not his gifts, is most precious to them. The word
translated "camphire," signifies "atonement or propitiation." Christ is
dear to all believers, because he is the propitiation for their sins. No
pretender must have his place in the soul. They resolved to lodge him in
their hearts all the night; during the continuance of the troubles of
life. Christ takes delight in the good work which his grace has wrought
on the souls of believers. This should engage all who are made holy, to
be very thankful for that grace which has made those fair, who by nature
were deformed. The spouse (the believer) has a humble, modest eye,
discovering simplicity and godly sincerity; eyes enlightened and guided
by the Holy Spirit, that blessed Dove. The church expresses her value
for Christ. Thou art the great Original, but I am but a faint and
imperfect copy. Many are fair to look at, yet their temper renders them
unpleasant: but Christ is fair, yet pleasant. The believer, [Sol
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#016), speaks with praise of those holy
ordinances in which true believers have fellowship with Christ. Whether
the believer is in the courts of the Lord, or in retirement; whether
following his daily labours, or confined on the bed of sickness, or even
in a dungeon, a sense of the Divine presence will turn the place into a
paradise. Thus the soul, daily having fellowship with the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Spirit, enjoys a lively hope of an incorruptible,
undefiled, and unfading inheritance above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 2](sol002)

</div>
