<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1002)  [Next](th1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 3:0</span></span>

([Th1 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)) The apostle sent Timothy
to establish and comfort the Thessalonian.

([Th1 3:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006)) He rejoiced at the good
tidings of their faith and love.

([Th1 3:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011)) And for their increase
in grace.

[1 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 3:1</span></span>

The more we find pleasure in the ways of God, the more we shall desire
to persevere therein. The apostle's design was to establish and comfort
the Thessalonians as to the object of their faith, that Jesus Christ was
the Saviour of the world; and as to the recompence of faith, which was
more than enough to make up all their losses, and to reward all their
labours. But he feared his labours would be in vain. If the devil cannot
hinder ministers from labouring in the word and doctrine, he will, if
possible, hinder the success of their labours. No one would willingly
labour in vain. It is the will and purpose of God, that we enter into
his kingdom through many afflictions. And the apostles, far from
flattering people with the expectation of worldly prosperity in
religion, told them plainly they must count upon trouble in the flesh.
Herein they followed the example of their great Master, the Author of
our faith. Christians were in danger, and they should be forewarned;
they will thus be kept from being improved by any devices of the
tempter.

[1 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 3:6</span></span>

Thankfulness to God is very imperfect in the present state; but one
great end of the ministry of the word is to help faith forward. That
which was the instrument to obtain faith, is also the means of
increasing and confirming it, namely, the ordinances of God; and as
faith cometh by hearing, so it is confirmed by hearing also.

[1 Thessalonians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th1 3:11</span></span>

Prayer is religious worship, and all religious worship is due unto God
only. Prayer is to be offered to God as our Father. Prayer is not only
to be offered in the name of Christ, but offered up to Christ himself,
as our Lord and our Saviour. Let us acknowledge God in all our ways, and
he will direct our paths. Mutual love is required of all Christians. And
love is of God, and is fulfilling the gospel as well as the law. We need
the Spirit's influences in order to our growth in grace; and the way to
obtain them, is prayer. Holiness is required of all who would go to
heaven; and we must act so that we do not contradict the profession we
make of holiness. The Lord Jesus will certainly come in his glory; his
saints will come with him. Then the excellence as well as the necessity
of holiness will appear; and without this no hearts shall be established
at that day, nor shall any avoid condemnation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 4](th1004)

</div>
