<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2.md)  
  [Previous](th2001)  [Next](th2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001.md)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 2:0</span></span>

([Th2 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001).md) Cautions against the
error that the time of Christ's coming was just at hand. There would
first be a general apostacy from the faith, and a revealing of the
antichristian man of sin.

([Th2 2:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#005).md) His destruction, and
that of those who obey him.

([Th2 2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013).md) The security of the
Thessalonians from apostacy; an exhortation to stedfastness, and prayer
for them.

[2 Thessalonians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 2:1</span></span>

If errors arise among Christians, we should set them right; and good men
will be careful to suppress errors which rise from mistaking their words
and actions. We have a cunning adversary, who watches to do mischief,
and will promote errors, even by the words of Scripture. Whatever
uncertainty we are in, or whatever mistakes may arise about the time of
Christ's coming, that coming itself is certain. This has been the faith
and hope of all Christians, in all ages of the church; it was the faith
and hope of the Old Testament saints. All believers shall be gathered
together to Christ, to be with him, and to be happy in his presence for
ever. We should firmly believe the second coming of Christ; but there
was danger lest the Thessalonians, being mistaken as to the time, should
question the truth or certainty of the thing itself. False doctrines are
like the winds that toss the water to and fro; and they unsettle the
minds of men, which are as unstable as water. It is enough for us to
know that our Lord will come, and will gather all his saints unto him. A
reason why they should not expect the coming of Christ, as at hand, is
given. There would be a general falling away first, such as would
occasion the rise of antichrist, that man of sin. There have been great
disputes who or what is intended by this man of sin and son of
perdition. The man of sin not only practises wickedness, but also
promotes and commands sin and wickedness in others; and is the son of
perdition, because he is devoted to certain destruction, and is the
instrument to destroy many others, both in soul and body. As God was in
the temple of old, and worshipped there, and is in and with his church
now; so the antichrist here mentioned, is a usurper of God's authority
in the Christian church, who claims Divine honours.

[2 Thessalonians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 2:5</span></span>

Something hindered or withheld the man of sin. It is supposed to be the
power of the Roman empire, which the apostle did not mention more
plainly at that time. Corruption of doctrine and worship came in by
degrees, and the usurping of power was gradual; thus the mystery of
iniquity prevailed. Superstition and idolatry were advanced by pretended
devotion, and bigotry and persecution were promoted by pretended zeal
for God and his glory. This mystery of iniquity was even then begun;
while the apostles were yet living, persons pretended zeal for Christ,
but really opposed him. The fall or ruin of the antichristian state is
declared. The pure word of God, with the Spirit of God, will discover
this mystery of iniquity, and in due time it shall be destroyed by the
brightness of Christ's coming. Signs and wonders, visions and miracles,
are pretended; but they are false signs to support false doctrines; and
lying wonders, or only pretended miracles, to cheat the people; and the
diabolical deceits with which the antichristian state has been
supported, are notorious. The persons are described, who are his willing
subjects. Their sin is this; They did not love the truth, and therefore
did not believe it; and they were pleased with false notions. God leaves
them to themselves, then sin will follow of course, and spiritual
judgments here, and eternal punishments hereafter. These prophecies
have, in a great measure, come to pass, and confirm the truth of the
Scriptures. This passage exactly agrees with the system of popery, as it
prevails in the Romish church, and under the Romish popes. But though
the son of perdition has been revealed, though he has opposed and
exalted himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; and
has spoken and acted as if he were a god upon earth, and has proclaimed
his insolent pride, and supported his delusions, by lying miracles and
all kinds of frauds; still the Lord has not yet fully destroyed him with
the brightness of his coming; that and other prophecies remain to be
fulfilled before the end shall come.

[2 Thessalonians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th2 2:13</span></span>

When we hear of the apostacy of many, it is a great comfort and joy,
that there is a remnant according to the election of grace, which does
and shall persevere; especially we should rejoice, if we have reason to
hope that we are of that number. The preservation of the saints, is
because God loved them with an everlasting love, from the beginning of
the world. The end and the means must not be separated. Faith and
holiness must be joined together as well as holiness and happiness. The
outward call of God is by the gospel; and this is rendered effectual by
the inward working of the Spirit. The belief of the truth brings the
sinner to rely on Christ, and so to love and obey him; it is sealed by
the Holy Spirit upon his heart. We have no certain proof of any thing
having been delivered by the apostles, more than what we find contained
in the Holy Scriptures. Let us then stand fast in the doctrines taught
by the apostles, and reject all additions, and vain traditions.

[2 Thessalonians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 2:16</span></span>

We may and should direct our prayers, not only to God the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, but also to our Lord Jesus Christ
himself. And we should pray in his name unto God, not only as his
Father, but as our Father in and through him. The love of God in Christ
Jesus, is the spring and fountain of all the good we have or hope for.
There is good reason for strong consolations, because the saints have
good hope through grace. The free grace and mercy of God are what they
hope for, and what their hopes are founded on, and not any worth or
merit of their own. The more pleasure we take in the word, and works,
and ways of God, the more likely we shall be to persevere therein. But,
if we are wavering in faith, and of a doubtful mind, halting and
faltering in our duty, no wonder that we are strangers to the joys of
religion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](th2003.md)

</div>
