<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2.md)  
  [Previous](th2002)  [Next](ti1000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001.md)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 3:0</span></span>

([Th2 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001).md) The apostle expresses
confidence in the Thessalonians, and prays for them.

([Th2 3:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006).md) He charges them to
withdraw from disorderly walkers, particularly from the lazy and
busybodies.

([Th2 3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016).md) And concludes with a
prayer for them, and a greeting.

[2 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 3:1</span></span>

Those who are far apart still may meet together at the throne of grace;
and those not able to do or receive any other kindness, may in this way
do and receive real and very great kindness. Enemies to the preaching of
the gospel, and persecutors of its faithful preachers, are unreasonable
and wicked men. Many do not believe the gospel; and no wonder if such
are restless and show malice in their endeavours to oppose it. The evil
of sin is the greatest evil, but there are other evils we need to be
preserved from, and we have encouragement to depend upon the grace of
God. When once the promise is made, the performance is sure and certain.
The apostle had confidence in them, but that was founded upon his
confidence in God; for there is otherwise no confidence in man. He prays
for them for spiritual blessings. It is our sin and our misery, that we
place our affections upon wrong objects. There is not true love of God,
without faith in Jesus Christ. If, by the special grace of God, we have
that faith which multitudes have not, we should earnestly pray that we
may be enabled, without reserve, to obey his commands, and that we may
be enabled, without reserve, to the love of God, and the patience of
Christ.

[2 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 3:6</span></span>

Those who have received the gospel, are to live according to the gospel.
Such as could work, and would not, were not to be maintained in
idleness. Christianity is not to countenance slothfulness, which would
consume what is meant to encourage the industrious, and to support the
sick and afflicted. Industry in our callings as men, is a duty required
by our calling as Christians. But some expected to be maintained in
idleness, and indulged a curious and conceited temper. They meddled with
the concerns of others, and did much harm. It is a great error and abuse
of religion, to make it a cloak for idleness or any other sin. The
servant who waits for the coming of his Lord aright, must be working as
his Lord has commanded. If we are idle, the devil and a corrupt heart
will soon find us somewhat to do. The mind of man is a busy thing; if it
is not employed in doing good, it will be doing evil. It is an
excellent, but rare union, to be active in our own business, yet quiet
as to other people's. If any refused to labour with quietness, they were
to note him with censure, and to separate from his company, yet they
were to seek his good by loving admonitions. The Lords is with you while
you are with him. Hold on your way, and hold on to the end. We must
never give over, or tire in our work. It will be time enough to rest
when we come to heaven.

[2 Thessalonians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 3:16</span></span>

The apostle prays for the Thessalonians. And let us desire the same
blessings for ourselves and our friends. Peace with God. This peace is
desired for them always, or in every thing. Peace by all means; in every
way; that, as they enjoyed the means of grace, they might use all
methods to secure peace. We need nothing more to make us safe and happy,
nor can we desire any thing better for ourselves and our friends, than
to have God's gracious presence with us and them. No matter where we
are, if God be with us; nor who is absent, if God be present. It is
through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we hope to have peace
with God, and to enjoy the presence of God. This grace is all in all to
make us happy; though we wish ever so much to others, there remains
enough for ourselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Introduction](ti1000.md)

</div>
