<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1001)  [Next](ti1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 2:0</span></span>

([Ti1 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001).md) Prayer to be made for all
persons, since the grace of the gospel makes no difference of ranks or
stations.

([Ti1 2:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008).md) How men and women ought
to behave, both in their religious and common life.

[1 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 2:1</span></span>

The disciples of Christ must be praying people; all, without distinction
of nation, sect, rank, or party. Our duty as Christians, is summed up in
two words; godliness, that is, the right worshipping of God; and
honesty, that is, good conduct toward all men. These must go together:
we are not truly honest, if we are not godly, and do not render to God
his due; and we are not truly godly, if not honest. What is acceptable
in the sight of God our Saviour, we should abound in. There is one
Mediator, and that Mediator gave himself a ransom for all. And this
appointment has been made for the benefit of the Jews and the Gentiles
of every nation; that all who are willing may come in this way, to the
mercy-seat of a pardoning God, to seek reconciliation with him. Sin had
made a quarrel between us and God; Jesus Christ is the Mediator who
makes peace. He is a ransom that was to be known in due time. In the Old
Testament times, his sufferings, and the glory that should follow, were
spoken of as things to be revealed in the last times. Those who are
saved must come to the knowledge of the truth, for that is God's
appointed way to save sinners: if we do not know the truth, we cannot be
ruled by it.

[1 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 2:8</span></span>

Under the gospel, prayer is not to be confined to any one particular
house of prayer, but men must pray every where. We must pray in our
closets, pray in our families, pray at our meals, pray when we are on
journeys, and pray in the solemn assemblies, whether more public or
private. We must pray in charity; without wrath, or malice, or anger at
any person. We must pray in faith, without doubting, and without
disputing. Women who profess the Christian religion, must be modest in
apparel, not affecting gaudiness, gaiety, or costliness. Good works are
the best ornament; these are, in the sight of God, of great price.
Modesty and neatness are more to be consulted in garments than elegance
and fashion. And it would be well if the professors of serious godliness
were wholly free from vanity in dress. They should spend more time and
money in relieving the sick and distressed, than in decorating
themselves and their children. To do this in a manner unsuitable to
their rank in life, and their profession of godliness, is sinful. These
are not trifles, but Divine commands. The best ornaments for professors
of godliness, are good works. According to St. Paul, women are not
allowed to be public teachers in the church; for teaching is an office
of authority. But good women may and ought to teach their children at
home the principles of true religion. Also, women must not think
themselves excused from learning what is necessary to salvation, though
they must not usurp authority. As woman was last in the creation, which
is one reason for her subjection, so she was first in the transgression.
But there is a word of comfort; that those who continue in sobriety,
shall be saved in child-bearing, or with child-bearing, by the Messiah,
who was born of a woman. And the especial sorrow to which the female sex
is subject, should cause men to exercise their authority with much
gentleness, tenderness, and affection.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 3](ti1003.md)

</div>
