<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1000)  [Next](ti1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

([Ti1 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)) The apostle salutes
Timothy.

([Ti1 1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)) The design of the law as
given by Moses.

([Ti1 1:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)) Of his own conversion
and call to the apostleship.

([Ti1 1:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018)) The obligation to
maintain faith and a good conscience.

[1 Timothy 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 1:1</span></span>

Jesus Christ is a Christian's hope; all our hopes of eternal life are
built upon him; and Christ is in us the hope of glory. The apostle seems
to have been the means of Timothy's conversion; who served with him in
his ministry, as a dutiful son with a loving father. That which raises
questions, is not for edifying; that which gives occasion for doubtful
disputes, pulls down the church rather than builds it up. Godliness of
heart and life can only be kept up and increased, by the exercise of
faith in the truths and promises of God, through Jesus Christ.

[1 Timothy 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 1:5</span></span>

Whatever tends to weaken love to God, or love to the brethren, tends to
defeat the end of the commandment. The design of the gospel is answered,
when sinners, through repentance towards God and faith in Jesus Christ,
are brought to exercise Christian love. And as believers were righteous
persons in God's appointed way, the law was not against them. But unless
we are made righteous by faith in Christ, really repenting and forsaking
sin, we are yet under the curse of the law, even according to the gospel
of the blessed God, and are unfit to share the holy happiness of heaven.

[1 Timothy 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 1:12</span></span>

The apostle knew that he would justly have perished, if the Lord had
been extreme to mark what was amiss; and also if his grace and mercy had
not been abundant to him when dead in sin, working faith and love to
Christ in his heart. This is a faithful saying; these are true and
faithful words, which may be depended on, That the Son of God came into
the world, willingly and purposely to save sinners. No man, with Paul's
example before him, can question the love and power of Christ to save
him, if he really desires to trust in him as the Son of God, who once
died on the cross, and now reigns upon the throne of glory, to save all
that come to God through him. Let us then admire and praise the grace of
God our Saviour; and ascribe to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three
Persons in the unity of the Godhead, the glory of all done in, by, and
for us.

[1 Timothy 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti1 1:18</span></span>

The ministry is a warfare against sin and Satan; carried on under the
Lord Jesus, who is the Captain of our salvation. The good hopes others
have had of us, should stir us up to duty. And let us be upright in our
conduct in all things. The design of the highest censures in the
primitive church, was, to prevent further sin, and to reclaim the
sinner. May all who are tempted to put away a good conscience, and to
abuse the gospel, remember that this is the way to make shipwreck of
faith also.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 2](ti1002)

</div>
