<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2003)  [Next](tit000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 4:0</span></span>

([Ti2 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)) The apostle solemnly
charges Timothy to be diligent, though many will not bear sound
doctrine.

([Ti2 4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006)) Enforces the charge from
his own martyrdom, then at hand.

([Ti2 4:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009)) Desires him to come
speedily.

([Ti2 4:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014)) He cautions, and
complains of such as had deserted him; and expresses his faith as to his
own preservation to the heavenly kingdom.

([Ti2 4:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019)) Friendly greetings and
his usual blessing.

[2 Timothy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 4:1</span></span>

People will turn away from the truth, they will grow weary of the plain
gospel of Christ, they will be greedy of fables, and take pleasure in
them. People do so when they will not endure that preaching which is
searching, plain, and to the purpose. Those who love souls must be ever
watchful, must venture and bear all the painful effects of their
faithfulness, and take all opportunities of making known the pure
gospel.

[2 Timothy 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 4:6</span></span>

The blood of the martyrs, though not a sacrifice of atonement, yet was a
sacrifice of acknowledgment to the grace of God and his truth. Death to
a good man, is his release from the imprisonment of this world, and his
departure to the enjoyments of another world. As a Christian, and a
minister, Paul had kept the faith, kept the doctrines of the gospel.
What comfort will it afford, to be able to speak in this manner toward
the end of our days! The crown of believers is a crown of righteousness,
purchased by the righteousness of Christ. Believers have it not at
present, yet it is sure, for it is laid up for them. The believer,
amidst poverty, pain, sickness, and the agonies of death, may rejoice;
but if the duties of a man's place and station are neglected, his
evidence of interest in Christ will be darkened, and uncertainty and
distress may be expected to cloud and harass his last hours.

[2 Timothy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 4:9</span></span>

The love of this world, is often the cause of turning back from the
truths and ways of Jesus Christ. Paul was guided by Divine inspiration,
yet he would have his books. As long as we live, we must still learn.
The apostles did not neglect human means, in seeking the necessaries of
life, or their own instruction. Let us thank the Divine goodness in
having given us so many writings of wise and pious men in all ages; and
let us seek that by reading them our profiting may appear to all.

[2 Timothy 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 4:14</span></span>

There is as much danger from false brethren, as from open enemies. It is
dangerous having to do with those who would be enemies to such a man as
Paul. The Christians at Rome were forward to meet him, Acts 28, but when
there seemed to be a danger of suffering with him, then all forsook him.
God might justly be angry with them, but he prays God to forgive them.
The apostle was delivered out of the mouth of the lion, that is, of
Nero, or some of his judges. If the Lord stands by us, he will
strengthen us in difficulties and dangers, and his presence will more
than supply every one's absence.

[2 Timothy 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti2 4:19</span></span>

We need no more to make us happy, than to have the Lord Jesus Christ
with our spirits; for in him all spiritual blessings are summed up. It
is the best prayer we can offer for our friends, that the Lord Jesus
Christ may be with their spirits, to sanctify and save them, and at last
to receive them to himself. Many who believed as Paul, are now before
the throne, giving glory to their Lord: may we be followers of them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Introduction](tit000)

</div>
