<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2002)  [Next](ti2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 3:0</span></span>

([Ti2 3:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)) The apostle foretells the
rise of dangerous enemies to the gospel.

([Ti2 3:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)) Proposes his own
example to Timothy.

([Ti2 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014)) And exhorts him to
continue in the doctrine he had learned from the Holy Scriptures.

[2 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 3:1</span></span>

Even in gospel times there would be perilous times; on account of
persecution from without, still more on account of corruptions within.
Men love to gratify their own lusts, more than to please God and do
their duty. When every man is eager for what he can get, and anxious to
keep what he has, this makes men dangerous to one another. When men do
not fear God, they will not regard man. When children are disobedient to
their parents, that makes the times perilous. Men are unholy and without
the fear of God, because unthankful for the mercies of God. We abuse
God's gifts, if we make them the food and fuel of our lusts. Times are
perilous also, when parents are without natural affection to children.
And when men have no rule over their own spirits, but despise that which
is good and to be honoured. God is to be loved above all; but a carnal
mind, full of enmity against him, prefers any thing before him,
especially carnal pleasure. A form of godliness is very different from
the power; from such as are found to be hypocrites, real Christians must
withdraw. Such persons have been found within the outward church, in
every place, and at all times. There ever have been artful men, who, by
pretences and flatteries, creep into the favour and confidence of those
who are too easy of belief, ignorant, and fanciful. All must be ever
learning to know the Lord; but these follow every new notion, yet never
seek the truth as it is in Jesus. Like the Egyptian magicians, these
were men of corrupt minds, prejudiced against the truth, and found to be
quite without faith. Yet though the spirit of error may be let loose for
a time, Satan can deceive the nations and the churches no further, and
no longer, than God will permit.

[2 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 3:10</span></span>

The more fully we know the doctrine of Christ, as taught by the
apostles, the more closely we shall cleave to it. When we know the
afflictions of believers only in part, they tempt us to decline the
cause for which they suffer. A form of godliness, a profession of
Christian faith without a godly life, often is allowed to pass, while
open profession of the truth as it is in Jesus, and resolute attention
to the duties of godliness, stir up the scorn and enmity of the world.
As good men, by the grace of God, grow better, so bad men, through the
craft of Satan, and the power of their own corruptions, grow worse. The
way of sin is down-hill; such go on from bad to worse, deceiving and
being deceived. Those who deceive others, deceive themselves, as they
will find at last, to their cost. The history of the outward church,
awfully shows that the apostle spake this as he was moved by the Holy
Ghost.

[2 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 3:14</span></span>

Those who would learn the things of God, and be assured of them, must
know the Holy Scriptures, for they are the Divine revelation. The age of
children is the age to learn; and those who would get true learning,
must get it out of the Scriptures. They must not lie by us neglected,
seldom or never looked into. The Bible is a sure guide to eternal life.
The prophets and apostles did not speak from themselves, but delivered
what they received of God, [Pe2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021).
It is profitable for all purposes of the Christian life. It is of use to
all, for all need to be taught, corrected, and reproved. There is
something in the Scriptures suitable for every case. Oh that we may love
our Bibles more, and keep closer to them! then shall we find benefit,
and at last gain the happiness therein promised by faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the main subject of both Testaments. We best oppose
error by promoting a solid knowledge of the word of truth; and the
greatest kindness we can do to children, is to make them early to know
the Bible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 4](ti2004)

</div>
