<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Titus Index](tit.md)  
  [Previous](tit001)  [Next](tit003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001.md)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 2:0</span></span>

([Tit 2:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001).md) The duties which become
sound doctrine.

([Tit 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009.md), [Tit
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#010).md) Believing servants must be
obedient.

([Tit 2:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011).md) All is enforced from
the holy design of the gospel, which concerns all believers.

[Titus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 2:1</span></span>

Old disciples of Christ must behave in every thing agreeably to the
Christian doctrine. That the aged men be sober; not thinking that the
decays of nature will justify any excess; but seeking comfort from
nearer communion with God, not from any undue indulgence. Faith works
by, and must be seen in love, of God for himself, and of men for God's
sake. Aged persons are apt to be peevish and fretful; therefore need to
be on their guard. Though there is not express Scripture for every word,
or look, yet there are general rules, according to which all must be
ordered. Young women must be sober and discreet; for many expose
themselves to fatal temptations by what at first might be only want of
discretion. The reason is added, that the word of God may not be
blasphemed. Failures in duties greatly reproach Christianity. Young men
are apt to be eager and thoughtless, therefore must be earnestly called
upon to be sober-minded: there are more young people ruined by pride
than by any other sin. Every godly man's endeavour must be to stop the
mouths of adversaries. Let thine own conscience answer for thine
uprightness. What a glory is it for a Christian, when that mouth which
would fain open itself against him, cannot find any evil in him to speak
of!

[Titus 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">tit 2:9</span></span>

Servants must know and do their duty to their earthly masters, with a
reference to their heavenly one. In serving an earthly master according
to Christ's will, He is served; such shall be rewarded by him. Not
giving disrespectful or provoking language; but to take a check or
reproof with silence, not making confident or bold replies. When
conscious of a fault, to excuse or justify it, doubles it. Never putting
to their own use that which is their master's, nor wasting the goods
they are trusted with. Showing all good fidelity to improve a master's
goods, and promote his thriving. If ye have not been faithful in that
which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own? [Luk
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#012.md). True religion is an honour to
the professors of it; and they should adorn it in all things.

[Titus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">tit 2:11</span></span>

The doctrine of grace and salvation by the gospel, is for all ranks and
conditions of men. It teaches to forsake sin; to have no more to do with
it. An earthly, sensual conversation suits not a heavenly calling. It
teaches to make conscience of that which is good. We must look to God in
Christ, as the object of our hope and worship. A gospel conversation
must be a godly conversation. See our duty in a very few words; denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, living soberly, righteously, and godly,
notwithstanding all snares, temptations, corrupt examples, ill usage,
and what remains of sin in the believer's heart, with all their
hinderances. It teaches to look for the glories of another world. At,
and in, the glorious appearing of Christ, the blessed hope of Christians
will be complete: To bring us to holiness and happiness was the end of
Christ's death. Jesus Christ, that great God and our Saviour, who saves
not only as God, much less as Man alone; but as God-man, two natures in
one person. He loved us, and gave himself for us; and what can we do
less than love and give up ourselves to him! Redemption from sin and
sanctification of the nature go together, and make a peculiar people
unto God, free from guilt and condemnation, and purified by the Holy
Spirit. All Scripture is profitable. Here is what will furnish for all
parts of duty, and the right discharge of them. Let us inquire whether
our whole dependence is placed upon that grace which saves the lost,
pardons the guilty, and sanctifies the unclean. And the further we are
removed from boasting of fancied good works, or trusting in them, so
that we glory in Christ alone, the more zealous shall we be to abound in
real good works.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 3](tit003.md)

</div>
