<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Titus Index](tit.md)  
  [Previous](tit002)  [Next](plm000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001.md)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 3:0</span></span>

([Tit 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001).md) Obedience to magistrates,
and becoming behaviour towards all, are enforced from what believers
were before conversion, and what they are made, through Christ.

([Tit 3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008).md) Good works to be done,
and useless disputes avoided.

([Tit 3:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012).md) Directions and
exhortations.

[Titus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 3:1</span></span>

Spiritual privileges do not make void or weaken, but confirm civil
duties. Mere good words and good meanings are not enough without good
works. They were not to be quarrelsome, but to show meekness on all
occasions, not toward friends only, but to all men, though with wisdom,
[Jam 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#013.md). And let this text teach us
how wrong it is for a Christian to be churlish to the worst, weakest,
and most abject. The servants of sin have many masters, their lusts
hurry them different ways; pride commands one thing, covetousness
another. Thus they are hateful, deserving to be hated. It is the misery
of sinners, that they hate one another; and it is the duty and happiness
of saints to love one another. And we are delivered out of our miserable
condition, only by the mercy and free grace of God, the merit and
sufferings of Christ, and the working of his Spirit. God the Father is
God our Saviour. He is the fountain from which the Holy Spirit flows, to
teach, regenerate, and save his fallen creatures; and this blessing
comes to mankind through Christ. The spring and rise of it, is the
kindness and love of God to man. Love and grace have, through the
Spirit, great power to change and turn the heart to God. Works must be
in the saved, but are not among the causes of their salvation. A new
principle of grace and holiness is wrought, which sways, and governs,
and makes the man a new creature. Most pretend they would have heaven at
last, yet they care not for holiness now; they would have the end
without the beginning. Here is the outward sign and seal thereof in
baptism, called therefore the washing of regeneration. The work is
inward and spiritual; this is outwardly signified and sealed in this
ordinance. Slight not this outward sign and seal; yet rest not in the
outward washing, but look to the answer of a good conscience, without
which the outward washing will avail nothing. The worker therein is the
Spirit of God; it is the renewing of the Holy Ghost. Through him we
mortify sin, perform duty, walk in God's ways; all the working of the
Divine life in us, and the fruits of righteousness without, are through
this blessed and holy Spirit. The Spirit and his saving gifts and
graces, come through Christ, as a Saviour, whose undertaking and work
are to bring to grace and glory. Justification, in the gospel sense, is
the free forgiveness of a sinner; accepting him as righteous through the
righteousness of Christ received by faith. God, in justifying a sinner
in the way of the gospel, is gracious to him, yet just to himself and
his law. As forgiveness is through a perfect righteousness, and
satisfaction is made to justice by Christ, it cannot be merited by the
sinner himself. Eternal life is set before us in the promise; the Spirit
works faith in us, and hope of that life; faith and hope bring it near,
and fill with joy in expectation of it.

[Titus 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">tit 3:8</span></span>

When the grace of God towards mankind has been declared, the necessity
of good works is pressed. Those who believe in God, must make it their
care to maintain good works, to seek opportunities for doing them, being
influenced by love and gratitude. Trifling, foolish questions must be
avoided, and subtle distinctions and vain inquiries; nor should people
be eager after novelties, but love sound doctrine which tends most to
edifying. Though we may now think some sins light and little, if the
Lord awaken the conscience, we shall feel even the smallest sin heavy
upon our souls.

[Titus 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">tit 3:12</span></span>

Christianity is not a fruitless profession; and its professors must be
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ, to
the glory and praise of God. They must be doing good, as well as keeping
away from evil. Let "ours" follow some honest labour and employment, to
provide for themselves and their families. Christianity obliges all to
seek some honest work and calling, and therein to abide with God. The
apostle concludes with expressions of kind regard and fervent prayer.
Grace be with you all; the love and favour of God, with the fruits and
effects thereof, according to need; and the increase and feeling of them
more and more in your souls. This is the apostle's wish and prayer,
showing his affection to them, and desire for their good, and would be a
means of obtaining for them, and bringing down on them, the thing
requested. Grace is the chief thing to be wished and prayed for, with
respect to ourselves or others; it is "all good."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Introduction](plm000.md)

</div>
