<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac008)  [Next](zac010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 9:0</span></span>

([Zac 9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)) God's defence of his
church.

([Zac 9:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)) Christ's coming and his
kingdom.

([Zac 9:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012)) Promises to the church.

[Zechariah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 9:1</span></span>

Here are judgements foretold on several nations. While the Macedonians
and Alexander's successors were in warfare in these countries, the Lord
promised to protect his people. God's house lies in the midst of an
enemy's country; his church is as a lily among thorns. God's power and
goodness are seen in her special preservation. The Lord encamps about
his church, and while armies of proud opposers shall pass by and return,
his eyes watch over her, so that they cannot prevail, and shortly the
time will come when no exactor shall pass by her any more.

[Zechariah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 9:9</span></span>

The prophet breaks forth into a joyful representation of the coming of
the Messiah, of whom the ancient Jews explained this prophecy. He took
the character of their King, when he entered Jerusalem amidst the
hosannas of the multitude. But his kingdom is a spiritual kingdom. It
shall not be advanced by outward force or carnal weapons. His gospel
shall be preached to the world, and be received among the heathen. A
sinful state is a state of bondage; it is a pit, or dungeon, in which
there is no water, no comfort; and we are all by nature prisoners in
this pit. Through the precious blood of Christ, many prisoners of Satan
have been set at liberty from the horrible pit in which they must
otherwise have perished, without hope or comfort. While we admire Him,
let us seek that his holiness and truth may be shown in our own spirits
and conduct. These promises have accomplishment in the spiritual
blessings of the gospel which we enjoy by Jesus Christ. As the
deliverance of the Jews was typical of redemption by Christ, so this
invitation speaks to all the language of the gospel call. Sinners are
prisoners, but prisoners of hope; their case is sad, but not desperate;
for there is hope in Israel concerning them. Christ is a Strong-hold, a
strong Tower, in whom believers are safe from the fear of the wrath of
God, the curse of the law, and the assaults of spiritual enemies. To him
we must turn with lively faith; to him we must flee, and trust in his
name under all trials and sufferings. It is here promised that the Lord
would deliver his people. This passage also refers to the apostles, and
the preachers of the gospel in the early ages. God was evidently with
them; his words from their lips pierced the hearts and consciences of
the hearers. They were wondrously defended in persecution, and were
filled with the influences of the Holy Spirit. They were saved by the
Good Shepherd as his flock, and honoured as jewels of his crown. The
gifts, graces, and consolations of the Spirit, poured forth on the day
of Pentecost, Acts 2 and in succeeding times, are represented. Sharp
have been, and still will be, the conflicts of Zion's sons, but their
God will give them success. The more we are employed, and satisfied with
his goodness, the more we shall admire the beauty revealed in the
Redeemer. Whatever gifts God bestows on us, we must serve him cheerfully
with them; and, when refreshed with blessings, we must say, How great is
his goodness!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 10](zac010)

</div>
