<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac003)  [Next](zac005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 4:0</span></span>

([Zac 4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001).md) A vision of a
candlestick, with two olive trees.

([Zac 4:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#008).md) Further encouragement.

([Zac 4:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011).md) An explanation
respecting the olive trees.

[Zechariah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 4:1</span></span>

The prophet's spirit was willing to attend, but the flesh was weak. We
should beg of God that, whenever he speaks to us, he would awaken us,
and we should then stir up ourselves. The church is a golden
candlestick, or lamp-bearer, set up for enlightening this dark world,
and holding forth the light of Divine revelation. Two olive trees were
seen, one on each side the candlestick, from which oil flowed into the
bowl without ceasing. God brings to pass his gracious purposes
concerning his church, without any art or labour of man; sometimes he
makes use of his instruments, yet he needs them not. This represented
the abundance of Divine grace, for the enlightening and making holy the
ministers and members of the church, and which cannot be procured or
prevented by any human power. The vision assures us that the good work
of building the temple, should be brought to a happy end. The difficulty
is represented as a great mountain. But all difficulties shall vanish,
and all the objections be got over. Faith will remove mountains, and
make them plains. Christ is our Zerubbabel; mountains of difficulty were
in the way of his undertaking, but nothing is too hard for him. What
comes from the grace of God, may, in faith, be committed to the grace of
God, for he will not forsake the work of his own hands.

[Zechariah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 4:8</span></span>

The exact fulfilment of Scripture prophecies is a convincing proof of
their Divine original. Though the instruments be weak and unlikely, yet
God often chooses such, to bring about great things by them. Let not the
dawning light be despised; it will shine more and more to the perfect
day. Those who despaired of finishing the work, shall rejoice when they
see Zerubbabel giving directions what to do, and taking care that the
work be done. It is a comfort to us that the same all-wise, almighty
Providence, which governs the earth, is in particular conversant about
the church. All that have the plummet in their hands, must look up to
the eyes of the Lord, have constant regard to Divine Providence, act in
dependence on its guidance and submission to its disposals. Let us fix
our faith on Christ, and view Him carrying on his work according to his
own glorious plan, and daily bringing his spiritual building nearer to
completion.

[Zechariah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 4:11</span></span>

Zechariah desires to know what are the two olive trees. Zerubbabel and
Joshua, this prince and this priest, were endued with the gifts and
graces of God's Spirit. They lived at the same time, and both were
instruments in the work and service of God. Christ's offices of King and
Priest were shadowed forth by them. From the union of these two offices
in his person, both God and man, the fullness of grace is received and
imparted. They built the temple, the church of God. So does Christ
spiritually. Christ is not only the Messiah, the Anointed One himself,
but he is the Good Olive to his church; and from his fulness we receive.
And the Holy Spirit is the unction or anointing which we have received.
From Christ the Olive Tree, by the Spirit the Olive Branch, all the
golden oil of grace flows to believers, which keeps their lamps burning.
Let us seek, through the intercession and bounty of the Saviour,
supplies from that fulness which has hitherto sufficed for all his
saints, according to their trials and employments. Let us wait on him in
his ordinances, desiring to be sanctified wholly in body, soul, and
spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 5](zac005.md)

</div>
