<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac001)  [Next](zac003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 2:0</span></span>

([Zac 2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001).md) The prosperity of
Jerusalem.

([Zac 2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006).md) The Jews called to return
to their own land.

([Zac 2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010).md) A promise of God's
presence.

[Zechariah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 2:1</span></span>

The Son of David, even the Man Christ Jesus, whom the prophet sees with
a measuring line in his hand, is the Master-Builder of his church. God
notices the extent of his church, and will take care that whatever
number of guests are brought to the wedding-supper, there shall be room.
This vision means well to Jerusalem. The walls of a city, as they defend
it, so they straiten its inhabitants; but Jerusalem shall be extended as
freely as if it had no walls at all, yet shall be as safe as if it had
the strongest walls. In the church of God there yet is room for other
multitudes, more than man can number. None shall be refused who trust in
Christ; and He never shuts out from heaven one true member of the church
on earth. God will be a Wall of fire round them, which can neither be
broken through nor undermined, nor can it be assailed without danger to
those who attack. This vision was to have its full accomplishment in the
gospel church, which is extended by admitting the Gentiles into it; and
which has the Son of God for its Prince and Protector; especially in the
glorious times yet to come.

[Zechariah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 2:6</span></span>

If God will build Jerusalem for the people and their comfort, they must
inhabit it for him and his glory. The promises and privileges with which
God's people are blessed, should engage us to join them, whatever it
costs us. When Zion is enlarged to make room for all God's Israel, it is
the greatest madness for any of them to stay in Babylon. The captivity
of a sinful state is by no means to be continued in, though a man may be
easy in worldly matters. Escape for thy life, look not behind thee.
Christ has proclaimed that deliverance to the captives, which he has
himself wrought out, and it concerns every one to resolve that sin shall
not have dominion over him. Those who would be found among God's
children, must save themselves from this world, see [Act
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040.md). What Christ will do for his
church, shall be an evident proof of God's care and affection. He that
touches you, touches the apple of his eye. This is a strong expression
of God's love to his church. He takes what is done against her as done
against the tenderest part of the eye, to which the least touch is a
great offence. Christ is sent to be the Protector of his church.

[Zechariah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 2:10</span></span>

Here is a prediction of the coming of Christ in human nature. Many
nations in that day would renounce idolatry, and God will own those for
his people who join him with purpose of heart. Glorious times are
foretold as a prophecy of our Lord's coming and kingdom. God is about to
do something unexpected, and very surprising, and to plead his people's
cause, which had long seemed neglected. Silently submit to his holy
will, and patiently wait the event; assured that God will complete all
his work. He will ere long come to judgment, to complete the salvation
of his people, and to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their
sins.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 3](zac003.md)

</div>
