<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac002)  [Next](zac004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 3:0</span></span>

([Zac 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001).md) The restoration of the
church.

([Zac 3:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#006).md) A promise concerning the
Messiah.

[Zechariah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 3:1</span></span>

The angel showed Joshua, the high priest, to Zechariah, in a vision.
Guilt and corruption are great discouragements when we stand before God.
By the guilt of the sins committed by us, we are liable to the justice
of God; by the power of sin that dwells in us, we are hateful to the
holiness of God. Even God's Israel are in danger on these accounts; but
they have relief from Jesus Christ, who is made of God to us both
righteousness and sanctification. Joshua, the high priest, is accused as
a criminal, but is justified. When we stand before God, to minister to
him, or stand up for God, we must expect to meet all the resistance
Satan's subtlety and malice can give. Satan is checked by one that has
conquered him, and many times silenced him. Those who belong to Christ,
will find him ready to appear for them, when Satan appears most strongly
against them. A converted soul is a brand plucked out of the fire by a
miracle of free grace, therefore shall not be left a prey to Satan.
Joshua appears as one polluted, but is purified; he represents the
Israel of God, who are all as an unclean thing, till they are washed and
sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
Israel now were free from idolatry, but there were many things amiss in
them. There were spiritual enemies warring against them, more dangerous
than any neighbouring nations. Christ loathed the filthiness of Joshua's
garments, yet did not put him away. Thus God by his grace does with
those whom he chooses to be priests to himself. The guilt of sin is
taken away by pardoning mercy, and the power of it is broken by renewing
grace. Thus Christ washes those from their sins in his own blood, whom
he makes kings and priests to our God. Those whom Christ makes spiritual
priests, are clothed with the spotless robe of his righteousness, and
appear before God in that; and with the graces of his Spirit, which are
ornaments to them. The righteousness of saints, both imputed and
implanted, is the fine linen, clean and white, with which the bride, the
Lamb's wife, is arrayed, [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008.md).
Joshua is restored to former honours and trusts. The crown of the
priesthood is put on him. When the Lord designs to restore and revive
religion, he stirs up prophets and people to pray for it.

[Zechariah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 3:6</span></span>

All whom God calls to any office he finds fit, or makes so. The Lord
will cause the sins of the believer to pass away by his sanctifying
grace, and will enable him to walk in newness of life. As the promises
made to David often pass into promises of the Messiah, so the promises
to Joshua look forward to Christ, of whose priesthood Joshua's was a
shadow. Whatever trials we pass through, whatever services we perform,
our whole dependence must rest on Christ, the Branch of righteousness.
He is God's servant, employed in his work, obedient to his will, devoted
to his honour and glory. He is the Branch from which all our fruit must
be gathered. The eye of his Father was upon him, especially in his
sufferings, and when he was buried in the grave, as the
foundation-stones are under ground, out of men's sight. But the prophecy
rather denotes the attention paid to this precious Corner-stone. All
believers, from the beginning, had looked forward to it in the types and
predictions. All believers, after Christ's coming, would look to it with
faith, hope, and love. Christ shall appear for all his chosen, as the
high priest when before the Lord, with the names of all Israel graven in
the precious stones of his breastplate. When God gave a remnant to
Christ, to be brought through grace to glory, then he engraved this
precious stone. By him sin shall be taken away, both the guilt and the
dominion of it; he did it in one day, that day in which he suffered and
died. What should terrify when sin is taken away? Then nothing can hurt,
and we sit down under Christ's shadow with delight, and are sheltered by
it. And gospel grace, coming with power, makes men forward to draw
others to it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 4](zac004.md)

</div>
