<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](zep000)  [Next](zep002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

([Zep 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)) Threatenings against
sinners.

([Zep 1:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)) More threatenings.

([Zep 1:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)) Distress from the
approaching judgments.

[Zephaniah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 1:1</span></span>

Ruin is coming, utter ruin; destruction from the Almighty. The servants
of God all proclaim, There is no peace for the wicked. The expressions
are figurative, speaking every where desolation; the land shall be left
without inhabitants. The sinners to be consumed are, the professed
idolaters, and those that worship Jehovah and idols, or swear to the
Lord, and to Malcham. Those that think to divide their affections and
worship between God and idols, will come short of acceptance with God;
for what communion can there be between light and darkness? If Satan
have half, he will have all; if the Lord have but half, he will have
none. Neglect of God shows impiety and contempt. May none of us be among
those who draw back unto perdition, but of those who believe to the
saving of the soul.

[Zephaniah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 1:7</span></span>

God's day is at hand; the punishment of presumptuous sinners is a
sacrifice to the justice of God. The Jewish royal family shall be
reckoned with for their pride and vanity; and those that leap on the
threshold, invading their neighbours' rights, and seizing their
possessions. The trading people and the rich merchants are called to
account. Secure and careless people are reckoned with. They are secure
and easy; they say in their heart, the Lord will not do good, neither
will he do evil; that is, they deny his dispensing rewards and
punishments. But in the day of the Lord's judgment, it will clearly
appear that those who perish, fall a sacrifice to Divine justice for
breaking God's law, and because they have no interest by faith in the
Redeemer's atoning sacrifice.

[Zephaniah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 1:14</span></span>

This warning of approaching destruction, is enough to make the sinners
in Zion tremble; it refers to the great day of the Lord, the day in
which he will show himself by taking vengeance on them. This day of the
Lord is very near; it is a day of God's wrath, wrath to the utmost. It
will be a day of trouble and distress to sinners. Let them not be laid
asleep by the patience of God. What is a man profited if he gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? And what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Let us flee from the wrath to come, and choose
the good part that shall never be taken from us; then we shall be
prepared for every event; nothing shall separate us from the love of God
in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 2](zep002)

</div>
