<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep.md)  
  [Previous](zep002)  [Next](hag000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Complete Commentary on the Whole Bible*, by Matthew Henry, at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001.md)

[Zephaniah](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zep 3:0</span></span>

([Zep 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001).md) Further reproofs for sin.

([Zep 3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008).md) Encouragement to look
for mercy.

([Zep 3:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014).md) Promises of future
favour and prosperity.

[Zephaniah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 3:1</span></span>

The holy God hates sin most in those nearest to him. A sinful state is,
and will be, a woful state. Yet they had the tokens of God's presence,
and all the advantages of knowing his will, with the strongest reasons
to do it; still they persisted in disobedience. Alas, that men often are
more active in doing wickedness than believers are in doing good.

[Zephaniah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 3:8</span></span>

The preaching of the gospel is predicted, when vengeance would be
executed on the Jewish nation. The purifying doctrines of the gospel, or
the pure language of the grace of the Lord, would teach men to use the
language of humility, repentance, and faith. Purity and piety in common
conversation is good. The pure and happy state of the church in the
latter days seems intended. The Lord will shut out boasting, and leave
men nothing to glory in, save the Lord Jesus, as made of God to them
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Humiliation for
sin, and obligations to the Redeemer, will make true believers upright
and sincere, whatever may be the case among mere professors.

[Zephaniah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 3:14</span></span>

After the promises of taking away sin, follow promises of taking away
trouble. When the cause is removed, the effect will cease. What makes a
people holy, will make them happy. The precious promises made to the
purified people, were to have full accomplishment in the gospel. These
verses appear chiefly to relate to the future conversion and restoration
of Israel, and the glorious times which are to follow. They show the
abundant peace, comfort, and prosperity of the church, in the happy
times yet to come. He will save; he will be Jesus; he will answer the
name, for he will save his people from their sins. Before the glorious
times foretold, believers would be sorrowful, and objects of reproach.
But the Lord will save the weakest believer, and cause true Christians
to be greatly honoured where they had been treated with contempt. One
act of mercy and grace shall serve, both to gather Israel out of their
dispersions and to lead them to their own land. Then will God's Israel
be made a name and a praise to eternity. The events alone can fully
answer the language of this prophecy. Many are the troubles of the
righteous, but they may rejoice in God's love. Surely our hearts should
honour the Lord, and rejoice in him, when we hear such words of
condescension and grace. If now kept from his ordinances, it is our
trial and grief; but in due time we shall be gathered into his temple
above. The glory and happiness of the believer will be perfect,
unchangeable, and eternal, when he is freed from earthly sorrows, and
brought to heavenly bliss.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Introduction](hag000.md)

</div>
