<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mmm06)  [Next](mmm08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOOXI/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traces of a Hidden Tradition in Masonry and Medieval Mysticism*, by
Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM OF THE HOLY GRAIL.

#### PART II.

#### THE ORIGIN OF THE TRADITION.—II.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">. . . THE Grail, throughout all Ages, may never by
man be known,  
Save by him God calleth to It, whose name God doth know alone.  
And the tale shall be told in all lands . . . .  
              *Parzival*, translated by J. L. WESTON, i. 162.</span>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">WE must trace the history of the World-Religion,
alike through the secret Christian sects as through those of other great
religious subdivisions of the race; for the Secret Doctrine is the
Truth, and that religion is nearest divine that has contained it with
the least adulteration. Our search takes us hither and thither, but
never aimlessly do we bring sects, widely separated in chronological
order, into critical juxtaposition. There is one purpose in our work to
be kept constantly in view—the analysis of religious beliefs, and the
definition of their descent from the past to the present.  
                  BLAVATSKY (H. P.), *Isis Unveiled*, ii., 292.</span>

</div>

IT is now necessary to add some more important details to the question
of the origin of the tradition of the Holy Grail. Too much care cannot
be given

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

by students to the most fundamental portion of this research.

It has already been said that many German <span
id="fr_158"></span>[\*](#fn_158) and French writers, in their zealous
efforts to prove the Grail tradition to be a myth, have made efforts to
disprove the existence of Guiot von Provins, but owing to the careful
researches of San Marte <span id="fr_159"></span>[†](#fn_159) there is
evidence of his existence so conclusive that no further doubt can
remain; in the review from which we quote he gives a careful *résumé* of
the evidence, and he has made a thorough study of Guiot's *Bible*, which
was written as a denunciation of the priests of that period, and of the
iniquities of the Roman Church: "Guiot was, without doubt, a learned
man, and had been a monk as well as a courtier," says San Marte, from
whose article the following summary is made.

<span class="small">He was present in the year 1184, at Mainz, at the
great court day of the Emperor Frederick I., at which the French
nobility were also present in great numbers. He further assures us that
he had seen the Hospitaliers at Jerusalem; the information he gives us
as regards the Knight Templars in Syria will consequently rest likewise
on first-hand observation. In the east <span
id="fr_160"></span>[‡](#fn_160) he saw King Amalrich of</span>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span class="small">Jerusalem, who died in the year 1173, in the flower
of his age and his glory. But in the year 1147 there was the second, and
in the year 1190 the third Crusade . . . . it may be inferred from his
writing that he journeyed into the Holy Land, not as a warrior, but in
the retinue of a Prince or Baron, and we learn that Guiot was also in
the monastery of Clairvaux, <span id="fr_161"></span>[\*](#fn_161) and
moreover, when he wrote his *Bible* he had already worn the black cowl
for more than twelve years; thus his denunciations would rest on
personal observations, and not on any mere gossip or scandal.</span>

Guiot shows himself, in this writing, to be a man of scholarly
education, of penetrating mind, keen observation and full of biting
sarcasm. His comparisons and examples are of incisive acuteness, he has
an exact knowledge of the Bible, and brings forward passages from the
Scriptures in confirmation of his judgment, and in justification of his
reproaches of the clergy. To quote again from San Marte:

<span class="small">His language is incisive and severe . . . . .
pouring out his noble anger, galling blame and bitter sarcasm, over
priests and nobles, higher and lower clergy,</span>

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

<span class="small">and over pretended erudition, he nevertheless loves
to add that, of course, there are glorious exceptions. . . . We perceive
in him a mind which, formed in the school of life, has seen and
experienced much; a man who with keen vision and solid judgment watched
and weighed the crimes of all positions. . . . . He very clearly
distinguishes genuine piety from the hypocritical appearance of holiness
the true faith from professional sanctity. . . . . Truth is for him
beyond all else; it is his light.</span>

Such is the judgment of this well-known German author upon the man
through whom the tradition comes. Miss Weston, another authority, says:

<span class="small">Such a man would have been thoroughly familiar with
the legends that had gathered round the early Angevin Princes, as well
as with the historical facts connected with their successors; he would
have come into contact with the Order of the Knights Templars . . . . he
would be familiar with many a legend of precious stones, the favourite
talismans of the East, and would know the special virtue ascribed to
each. . . . In fact, if we will allow the existence of such a writer as
a travelled Angevin might well have been, we shall find all the
principal problems of the Parzifal admit of a rational explanation. Even
the central puzzle, Wolfram's representation of the Grail, is explicable
on such a hypothesis. We know how very vague Chrêtien's <span
id="fr_162"></span>[\*](#fn_162) account of the Grail is; how much in
the dark he leaves us as to Its outward form, Its influence and its
origin. A writer before Chrétien is scarcely likely to have been more
explicit; what more likely than that a man long resident in the east,
and familiar, as has been said above, with eastern jewel talismans, and
the legends connected with them, when</span>

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="small">confronted with this mysterious Grail, of which no
definite account was given, yet which apparently exercised a magical
life-sustaining influence, should have jumped to the conclusion of Its,
at least partial, identity with the precious stones of the power of
which he had heard so much?</span>

Then later on the same writer says:

<span class="small">To sum up the entire question, the drift of the
internal evidence of the Parzival seems to indicate that the author of
Wolfram's Source was a warm partisan of the House of Anjou, <span
id="fr_163"></span>[\*](#fn_163) sometime resident in the East, familiar
with the history of the House whose fortunes he followed, and with much
curious oriental lore, and thoroughly imbued with the broader views of
life and religion inspired by the crusades. That he wrote his poem after
1172 seems most likely from the connection between England, Anjou and
Ireland noted in Book IX; . . . if we grant the correctness of the
Angevin allusions to be found in the earlier parts of the, poem, we must
logically grant that these two first books, and as a consequence the
latter part of the poem which agrees with them, are due to the French
source rather than the German redaction; that it was Kiot (Guiot de
Provins) who introduced the characters of Gamuret, Belakané, Feirefis
and Lâhelein; that to Kiot is due the first germ of the ethical
interpretation amplified by Wolfram. It was probably in a great measure
owing to the unecclesiastical nature of Kiot's teaching, and the freedom
with which he handled the Grail myth, that his work failed to attain the
popularity of Chrêtien's. When the Grail legend was once definitely
stamped with the traditional</span>

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> Christian character which it finally assumed and
retained, the semi-pagan character of Kiot's treatment would cause his
version to be regarded with disfavour by the monkish compilers of his
day. <span id="fr_164"></span>[\*](#fn_164)</span>

There is no difficulty in perceiving that the Christian version has
become the more popular, almost to the extinction of the oriental
tradition, but the suggestion here made by the writer is of
importance—for Guiot, having been in contact with the Secret and
Mystical Societies in the East, would certainly bring that doctrine into
his work, which accounts for what Miss Weston terms the
"unecclesiastical nature of Kiot's (Guiot) teaching."

It is an important fact for the students of this tradition to bear in
mind, that the Roman Church monopolized and adopted this Legend of the
Holy Grail, laying stress upon the version given by Chrêtien de Troyes,
ignoring its oriental descent, and popularizing the idea that the Legend
was founded on a purely Christian basis; hence many of the
contemporaries of Wolfram von Eschenbach were writing solely from the
Christian standpoint; but we have also many writers who took a broader
view, and who recognized that the tradition had descended from some
earlier doctrine. In San Marte (A. Schulz), for instance, we have a
German scholar of profound research adopting practically the same view
as that of Eugene Aroux in his *Mystères de la Chevalerie*, to which
book reference was made in the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

last number. We must now summarize some important passages from this new
source, relating as they do to the same view, namely, that the Legend of
the Holy Grail is, in truth, part of the mystical tradition of those
so-called heretical sects, the Albingenses, the Cathari, and others of
that date, descendants of the older Gnostic Sects. Says San Marte:

<span class="small">The conflicts of the Hohenstaufen with Rome bear
witness to the strength of this movement in Germany; princes, knights
and poets accepted <span id="fr_165"></span>[\*](#fn_165) it with
fullest consciousness \[of its significance\]. Guiot's *Bible*, and
other similar writings, the Provençal poets, the numerous heretical
sects of Southern France, of Northern Italy and Spain prove the same
thing regarding these countries. Among the Waldensians there even
gradually arose, under the influence of the Provençal poets, a
literature, the content of which was chiefly spiritual, and which, in a
poetical form, made the peculiar principles of the sect current and
familiar among the people. <span id="fr_166"></span>[†](#fn_166) We may
mention the</span>

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="small">celebrated didactic poem, written about 1180, *La
nobla Leyczon*, which leads up to Waldensian through sacred history, and
other poems such as *La Barca*, *Lo novel Sermon*, *Lo novel Confort*,
*Lo Payre Eternal*, *Lo Desprecza del Mont* (*Contentio Mundi*) and
*L’Avangeli de li quatre Semenez*, which deals with the parable, Matthew
xiii. 5, of the different seeds. They all possess peculiarly strong
anti-papistic elements and belong to those products of anti-hierarchy,
which transplanted the conflict against Rome from ecclesiastical domain
to the ground of popular life. How wrathful is Bernard of Clairvaux
against Abelard; <span id="fr_167"></span>[\*](#fn_167) he says that,
thanks to him, the street-boys of Paris are to be heard discussing the
doctrine of the Trinity! It was a storm which raged through the whole of
western Christendom in all strata of the population, a process of
fermentation which, originally repressed by force, repeated itself in
the Reformation and forced itself to the forefront. When, therefore,
Reichel <span id="fr_168"></span>[†](#fn_168) reproaches me with having
introduced far more theological elements than the poem itself justifies,
into my interpretation of the oracle of the Grail and of Parzival's
refraining from questions, I reply that, on the contrary, not nearly
enough of the theology of the twelfth century has been applied to the
understanding of our poem,</span>

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

and my attempt to examine it from that standpoint is only a first
beginning on those lines.

For that which we now after the lapse of centuries can only laboriously
and yet imperfectly discover about the explanation of the external
historical phenomena of those religious conflicts—all that surround the
then existing world like a fiery atmosphere in which it breathed, and
which penetrated all the pores of its life, the elements of religious
discord which can now hardly be understood and methodically arranged by
the scholars who make the subject their special study—was formerly in
the minds and mouths of the masses and urged them on to action; and if
the poems <span id="fr_169"></span>[\*](#fn_169) of that period afford
us in almost every other respect a faithful mirror of contemporary
phenomena in action and thought, the same must be true of a work which
has a predominatingly religious tendency, that finds expression even in
the first two lines \[of the poem\].

It is very desirable that the Church historians of to-day should, in
their writings and academic lectures, pay greater attention than they do
to the investigations and the treasures which have been brought to light
in the ever-increasing study of the early German and French literatures,
indeed they would then find much which preceded and led up to the
Reformation, and would recognize more clearly the forms taken by the
dogmatic theses in the practical faith and opinions of the people, and
the special expression which they there received. For there is a
difference between the doctrinal formulation of an article of faith and
its acceptance and transmission by the laity.

The position taken up by Wolfram, whether Guelph or Ghibelline,
Apostolic-Evangelical or Roman-Hierarchic,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

must determine the standpoint from which his poem must be judged and
understood. And even if we condemn the poet as a heretic, we must not
demand of his poem that it should teach what he rejects, <span
id="fr_170"></span>[\*](#fn_170) but in order to do it justice we must
enter into his religious tendency, which it brings quite clearly and
candidly to light. In view of the historical situation and the religious
stream of tendency at the end of the twelfth century the intention of
our poet can no longer be open to doubt. He wished, namely, to depict in
the institution of the Templars a Christian brotherhood, <span
id="fr_171"></span>[†](#fn_171) a kingdom of the faithful and the elect
of the Lord, without a Roman hierarchy, without a Pope and a privileged
priesthood, without ban, interdict or Inquisition, where God Himself,
through the revelation of the Grail, is, in the spirit of the pure
Gospel, Ruler and Judge of His people. He considered the real priesthood
to belong to the individuals struggling towards a true knowledge of God,
not to an exclusive class, however highly he may have esteemed the
latter; finally, he borrowed from the order of the Templars, at that
time still flourishing and immaculate, the poetical symbol of the ideal
constitution of this brotherhood.

This idea, plainly heretical from the Roman point of view, necessarily
implied that the Kingdom of the Grail, which alone led to salvation,
stood in quite as sharp a contrast to Roman orthodox Christianity, as
represented by the existing visible Church, as it did to paganism; <span
id="fr_172"></span>[‡](#fn_172) but it is a fine trait in the poet that
he is neither led away into open

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

polemic against the ruling Church nor into fanatical hostility to
Paganism. There is, therefore, small ground for astonishment at the
facts 'that no trace is to be found in the poem of any subordination of
the Templars to clergy or Pope,' that Parzival attains to the kingdom of
the Grail without any ecclesiastical mediation, and that he did not gain
the crown of martyrdom in the conflict, as the fundamental thought of
the poet logically demanded. <span id="fr_173"></span>[\*](#fn_173)

This fundamental thought, however, is not based on the Dictatus Gregorii
VII. nor on the saying of Innocent III., '*Papa veri Dei vicem gerit in
terra*,' but directly on the Gospel and on the saying of the Apostle:
'But ye are a chosen generation—a royal priesthood—a holy nation—a
peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who hath
called you out of darkness into his marvellous light'; <span
id="fr_174"></span>[†](#fn_174) which saying is repeated almost
literally in strophes 44 and 45 of Wolfram's *Titurel-fragments*. It is,
therefore, inadmissible to regard the Grail as 'a Christian relic,' to
make it the representment of the pre-cosmic genesis of Evil, and to
speak of 'the spiritual side of the poem' as 'weighed down by the
fetishism of the impersonal relic'; this view could only arise through
the introduction of evidence regarding Lucifer's fall and the Holy Grail
much later than Wolfram's poem, or which—in the cases when this
\[evidence\] is earlier, he does not himself introduce, and which,
therefore, must be treated as non-existent in the criticism of our poem.
Wolfram makes no special allusion to the dish of Cæsarea <span
id="fr_175"></span>[‡](#fn_175) used in the Lord's Supper, never speaks
of Joseph of Arimathea, nor does he mention the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="small">Stone of the Grail having been originally in the
crown of Lucifer; on the contrary, according to him, it is the *lapis
exilis*, <span id="fr_176"></span>[\*](#fn_176) the Stone <span
id="fr_177"></span>[†](#fn_177) of the Lord, which at the beginning of
all things was with God.</span>

The symbolism of man as a stone, is the idea that is being expressed by
the writer; an ancient idea, and one that is found in almost every
religion.

There is one beautiful tradition connected with this legend of the
Grail, supposed to have had its origin in Great Britain, and therefore
of peculiar interest to us. It is said to have been inscribed in the
*Chronicles of Helinandus*, who was "well-known at the time the Romance
was written, not only as a historian but as a Troubadour, at one time in
high favour at the Court of Philip Augustus, and in later years as one
of the most ardent preachers of the Albigensian Crusade." <span
id="fr_178"></span>[‡](#fn_178) He lived about 1229. The passages here
summarized are from Paulin Paris's charming work; the marvellous vision
was revealed to a hermit in Britain about 720, and runs thus:

<span class="small">On Holy Thursday of the year 717, after
concluding</span>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

the office of the Tenebrae, I fell asleep, and presently methought I
heard in a piercing voice these words:—"*Awake! Hearken to three in one,
and to one in three!*" I opened my eyes—I found myself surrounded by an
extraordinary brightness. Before me stood a man of most marvellous
beauty: "Hast thou rightly understood my words?" he said. "Sire, I
should not dare to say so." "It is the proclamation of the Trinity. Thou
didst doubt whether in the three Persons there were only one God, one
only Power. Canst thou now say who I am?" "Sire, my eyes are mortal; Thy
great brightness dazzles me, and the tongue of man cannot give utterance
to that which is above humanity."

The Unknown bent towards me and breathed upon my face. Thereupon my
senses expanded, my mouth was filled with infinity of speech. But when I
would fain have spoken I thought I saw bursting forth from my lips a
fiery brand which checked the first words I would have uttered.

"Take courage," said the Unknown to me; "I am the source of all truth,
the fount of all wisdom. I am the Great Master, he of whom Nicodemus
said: 'We know that thou art God.' I come, after confirming thy faith,
to reveal to thee the greatest secret in the world."

He then held out to me a book which could easily have been held in the
hollow of the hand; " I entrust to you," he said, "the greatest marvel
that man can ever receive. This is a book written by my own hand, which
must be read with the heart, no mortal tongue being able to pronounce
the words without affecting the four elements, troubling the heavens,
disturbing the air, rending the earth, and changing the colour of the
waters. For every man who shall open it with a pure heart, it is the joy
of both body and soul, and whosoever shall see it need have no fear of
sudden death, whatever be the enormity of his sins."

The great light that I had already found so hard to

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

endure then increased until I was blinded by it. I fell, unconscious,
and when I felt my senses returning, I no longer saw anything around me,
and I should have taken what I had just experienced for a dream, had I
not still found in my hand the book that the Great Master had given me.
I then arose, filled with sweet joy; I said my prayers, then I looked at
the book, and found as its first title: *This is the beginning of thy
lineage*. After reading until Prime, <span
id="fr_179"></span>[\*](#fn_179) it seemed to me that I had only just
begun, so many letters were there in these small pages. I read on again
until Tierce, and continued to follow the steps of my lineage, and the
record of the good life of my predecessors.

Beside them, I was but the shadow of a man, so far was I from equalling
them in virtue. Continuing the book, I read: *Here beginneth the Holy
Grail*. Then, the third heading: *This is the beginning of Fears*. Then,
a fourth heading: *This is the beginning of Wonders*. A flash of
lightning blazed before my eyes, followed by a clap of thunder. The
light continued, I could bear its dazzling brightness no longer, and a
second time I fell unconscious.

How long I remained thus I do not know. When I arose, I found myself in
profound darkness. Little by little, daylight returned, the sun resumed
its brightness, I felt myself pervaded by the most delicious scents, I
heard the sweetest songs that I had ever listened to; the voices from
which they proceeded seemed to touch me, but I neither saw them nor
could I reach them. They praised Our Lord, and repeated: *Honour and
glory to the Vanquisher of death, to the source of life eternal*.

Having repeated these words eight times, the voices ceased; I heard a
great rustling of wings, succeeded by perfect silence; nothing remained
but the perfumes whose sweetness entered into me.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

The hour of Nones came, and I thought myself yet at the earliest dawn.
Then I closed the book and commenced the service for Good Friday. We do
not consecrate on this day, because our Lord chose it for His death. In
presence of the reality one should not have recourse to symbol; and if
we consecrate on other days, it is in commemoration of the real
Sacrifice of the Friday. <span id="fr_180"></span>[\*](#fn_180)

As I was preparing to receive my Saviour, and had already divided the
bread into three portions, an angel came, took hold of my hands and said
to me: "Thou must not make use of these portions until thou hast beheld
what I am about to show thee." Then he raised me into the air, not in
the body but in the spirit, and transported me to a place where I was
immersed in a joy such as no tongue could tell, no ear could hear, no
heart could feel. I should speak no untruth in saying that I was in the
third heaven, whither St. Paul was caught up; but that I be not accused
of vanity I will merely say that there was revealed to me the great
secret which, according to St. Paul, no human speech could utter. The
angel said to me: "Thou hast seen great wonders, prepare thyself to see
still greater." He carried me higher yet, into a place a hundred times
clearer than glass, and a hundred times more brilliant in colouring.
There I had a vision of the Trinity, of the distinction between the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, and of their union in one and the
same form, one and the same Deity, one and the same power. Let not the
envious here reproach me with going against the authority of St. John
the Evangelist, in that he has told us that *mortal eyes never will or
can behold the Eternal Father*, for St. John meant the bodily eyes,
whereas the soul can see, when it is

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

separated from the body, that which the body would prevent it from
perceiving.

While I was thus contemplating I felt the firmament trembling at the
sound of the loudest thunder. An infinite number of heavenly Virtues
surrounded the Trinity, then fell down as if in a swoon. The angel then
took me and brought me back to the place whence he had taken me. Before
restoring its ordinary covering to my soul, he asked me if I had beheld
great marvels. "Ah!" I replied, "so great that no tongue could recount
them." "Then resume thy body, and now that thou hast no longer any
doubts as to the Trinity, go, and receive worthily him whom thou hast
learnt to know."

The hermit, thus restored to the possession of his body, no longer saw
the angel, but only the book, which he read after he had communicated,
and which he laid in the reliquary where was kept the box for the
consecrated wafers. He locked the coffer, returned to his *binnacle*,
and would not touch the book again until after he had chanted the Easter
service. But what were his astonishment and grief when, after the
office, he opened the reliquary and found that it was no longer there,
though the opening had never been unclosed! Presently a voice spoke
these words to him: "Wherefore be surprised that thy book is no longer
where thou didst lay it? Did not God come forth from the sepulchre
without removing the stone from it? Hearken to what the Great Master
doth command thee! To-morrow morning, after chanting mass, thou shalt
break thy fast, and then thou shalt take the path leading to the high
road. This road will lead thee to that of the *Prise*, near the
*Perron*. Thou shalt turn a little aside and take the path towards the
right which leads to the cross-roads of the *Eight Paths*, in the plain
of *Valestoc*. On reaching the *Fountain of Tears*, where the great
slaughter formerly took place, thou wilt find a strange beast
commissioned to be thy guide. When thy eyes lose sight of him, thou wilt

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<span class="small">enter into the land of *Norgave*, <span
id="fr_181"></span>[\*](#fn_181) and that will be the end of thy
quest. <span id="fr_182"></span>[†](#fn_182)</span>

This vision is perhaps one of the most spiritual expressions of the
Grail legend that can be found, and whoever the hermit was to whom the
angel came, or the chronicler who wrote the vision down, the imagination
of the person was pure and holy, and the teaching has the ring in it of
a high and holy truth.

Yet one more version of this many-leaved book must we glance at before
passing on. We have seen the Gnostic Eastern tradition, and the purely
Christian, now must be seen the Druidic, or the so-called pagan
tradition. Mr. Gould says that there exists a "Red Book," a volume of
Welsh prose begun 1318 and finished in 1454, which contains "a Welsh
tale entitled Pheredur, which is indisputably the original of Perceval."
This book is preserved in the library of Jesus College, Oxford.

Pheredur is mentioned as well in the *Annales Cambriæ*, which extend
from the year 444 to 1066. Mr. Gould says:

Pheredur is not a Christian. His habits are barbarous. The Grail is not
a sacred Christian vessel, but a mysterious relic of a past heathen
rite.

Taliesin ben Beirdd, the famous poet says: "This vessel inspires poetic
genius, gives wisdom, discovers the

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

knowledge of futurity, the mysteries of the world, the whole treasure of
human sciences."

That this vessel of the liquor of Wisdom held a prominent place in
British mythology is certain from the allusions made to it by the bards.
Taliesin, in the description of this initiation into the mysteries of
the basin, cries out, "I have lost my speech!" because on all who had
been admitted to the privileges of full membership secrecy was imposed.
This initiation was regarded as a new birth; and those who had once
become joined members were regarded as elect, regenerate, separate from
the rest of mankind, who lay in darkness and ignorance.

This Druidic mystery was adapted to Christianity by a British hermit
A.D. 720. . . . It is likely that the tradition of the ancient druidic
brotherhood lingered on and gained consistency again among the Templars.
Just as the *Miles Tempi* fought for the holy sepulchre, so did the
soldier of Montsalvatsch for the Holy Grail. Both orders were vowed to
chastity and obedience, both were subject to a head, who exercised regal
authority. <span id="fr_183"></span>[\*](#fn_183)

One more link with the ancient Wisdom Religion is forged for us by
another author, one perhaps more sympathetic <span
id="fr_184"></span>[†](#fn_184) and he connects the Grail-cult with that
Gnostic body named "Mendæens" or the "Christians of St. John"; <span
id="fr_185"></span>[‡](#fn_185) this is a point of extreme interest to

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

students of Theosophy, for it makes a direct connection between the
legend of the Holy Grail and the "Order of the Knights Templars," who
were so closely allied with this body.

Mackenzie, <span id="fr_186"></span>[\*](#fn_186) moreover, includes the
"Johannite Christians," as he terms them, among other bodies connected
with Masonry, and indeed many of the Masonic Lodges were dedicated to
St. John the Baptist, and looked on him as their patron saint. Simrock
builds his theory on the solid fact that Prester John, a mysterious
Priest-King of the east (with whom we shall deal next time), was himself
a leader of one of the Gnostic sects, a heretic of course; but, as the
author points out, the Grail Legend is too intimately interwoven with
him for him to be left out. It is to India <span
id="fr_187"></span>[†](#fn_187) indeed, that the Grail goes when the
western world becomes too cold for worship, too dead for ideals to stir
it to a higher life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[152:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_158) Lachmann (K.),
*Wolfram von Eschenbach*, xxiv., and Gervinus, *Deutsche National
Literatur*, i., 358, 1835, are both of this opinion.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[152:†](mmm07.htm#fr_159) San Marte (A.
Schulz), "Wolfram von Eschenbach and Guiot von Provins"; *Germania*,
iii. 445. Wien, 186e.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[152:‡](mmm07.htm#fr_160) This fact that Guiot
von Provins was himself in the East, that he was, moreover, a
Troubadour, gives us those links which were needed to prove the direct
connection of this Grail Tradition with the Eastern Wisdom; as a
Troubadour he was one of the Secret Society already <span
id="page_153">p. 153</span> mentioned both by Rossetti in his
*Disquisitions on the Anti-papal Spirit which produced the Reformation*,
(ii., 115. London, 1834), and by Aroux; see *The Theosophical Review*,
xxiv., p. 207. San Marte added a footnote stating that he was preparing
an edition of Guiot's *Bible* and Lyric Poems, in French and German, to
which Professor G. Wohlfart was adding notes.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[153:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_161) S. Bernard of
Clairvaux was one of the Church Mystics of the twelfth century; he gave
the first rules to the Order of the Knights-Templars, the regulations
having been arranged at the Council of Troyes in 1118. The great Abbey
of Clairvaux was one of the chief centres of education at this period.
S. Bernard considered the contemplative life as the highest, and he was
himself a contemplative mystic.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[154:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_162) Troyes (Chrêtien
de), *Li conte del Graal*. 1189.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[155:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_163) He was in the
retinue of Fulk of Anjou, who, in 1129, became the son-in-law of
Baldwin, King of Jerusalem, and eventually became its King. There is,
however, a much earlier connection of the House of Anjou with the East,
for in 987 Fulk Nerra, or Fulk the Palmer, went to Jerusalem. See
*Croniques des Comtes d’Anjou*, par M. Émile Mabille, p. lxxviii. Paris,
1856.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[156:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_164) Weston (Jessie L.),
*Parzival*, ii. 191, 197, 198. London, 1894.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[157:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_165) The writer is
referring to the enormous spread of these mystical and heretical
teachers. See San Marte (A. Schulz), "Wolfram's Parzival and seine
Beurtheiler," in *Germania*, vii., p. 60. Wien, 1862.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[157:†](mmm07.htm#fr_166) This was the secret
language to which Aroux refers so often. In one passage he says: "Let
the philologists make as much outcry as they will, our old *Troveurs*
knew more about it than they do, and when they adopted certain names
they thought far more of the hidden meaning than of the actual
etymology, for which they cared very little"; again, referring to the
well-known legend of Amadis, "the Knight of the Lion, "he adds: "We may
easily recognize him, by these various signs, as a 'Poor-man of Lyons.'
Like his colleagues, this Apostle of the Albigensian Gospel leaves
Aquitanian Gaul, his own country, to go into Spain and win over that
country to the Religion of Love, as in other romances. What gives an
account of his acts and deeds is the journal, the record of his
apostolic feats, of his triumph over the agents of Rome. What could be
easier to recognise? Amadis, the 'Perfect Knight of Lyons,' under <span
id="page_158">p. 158</span> disguise of person and language is enamoured
of the beautiful Oriane. This name, derived from the East, also
indicates the close connection established between the local Vaudism and
the oriental Albigensianism typified by the beautiful lady, Flower,
Rose, Star of the East. All light, all good, was in this literature
reputed to come from the East." Aroux (E.), *Les Mystères de la
Chevalerie*, pp. 175, 176. Paris, 1858.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[158:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_167) One of the
Scholastic mystics, a heretic, and condemned by the Pope about 1140; he
opposed the view of those who extol the faith that yields an unreasoning
assent, without examination, to whatever is heard. See Blunt, D.D. (J.
H.), article, "Schoolmen"; *Dictionary of Sects and Heresies*, p. 530.
London, 1874.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[158:†](mmm07.htm#fr_168) Reichel, *Studien zu
Wolfram's Parzival*, p. 6. Wien, 1858. San Marte (A. Schulz), *Parzival
Studien*, Heft ii. Halle; Waisenhaus, 1861.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[159:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_169) The poems of the
Troubadours, which contained the mystical teaching, as we have seen from
Aroux, in his *Mystères de la Chevalerie*, and also from Rutherford in
his *Troubadours, their Loves and Lyrics*, p. 43. London, 1873. See for
quotation, *The Theosophical Review*, xxiv., p. 202.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[160:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_170) This is precisely
what the dogmatic Christian writers have tried to do by eliminating the
Gnostic traces, and the yet more eastern sources of the grand old
tradition.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[160:†](mmm07.htm#fr_171) This is the true
Christian Brotherhood open to every soul, the Elect of Humanity, that
"Communion of Saints" of which the Great White Lodge is the sole earthly
representative.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[160:‡](mmm07.htm#fr_172) Even San Marte, in
spite of his frankly acknowledged change of position, is still bound by
the obsolete views about paganism.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[161:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_173) See Studies, l.c.,
pp. 20 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[161:†](mmm07.htm#fr_174) I Peter, ii., 9, 10.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[161:‡](mmm07.htm#fr_175) The "dish of Cæsarea"
belongs to the other version, *Joseph of Arimathea*, by Sires Robiers de
Borron, which was "englisht" in 5450, by Henry Lonelich. See *The Grand
St. Graal*, from Furnivall's edition. Early English Text Society.
Trubner, 1874.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[162:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_176) Writers vary in
their spelling of the stone; *Lapis*, *Lapsit* or *Jaspes*, *exilles*,
*exilexor*, exillis, and other variants are given. *Lapis Electrix* is
given by William Hertz in his *Parzival*, pp. 160, 528. Stuttgart, 1898.
He draws attention to the fiery and life-giving properties of the stone.
This to some students of Theosophy will be a valuable suggestion.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[162:†](mmm07.htm#fr_177) In the old symbolism,
"Man," chiefly the Inner Spiritual Man, is called a "stone." Christ is
called a corner stone, and Peter refers to all men as "lively" (living)
stones. Blavatsky (H. P.), *The Secret Doctrine*, ii. 663, 3rd edition.
London, 1893.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[162:‡](mmm07.htm#fr_178) Evans (Sebastian),
*The High History of the Holy Grail*, II., p. 293. London, 1898.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[164:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_179) Six o'clock in the
morning. Tierce corresponds to 9; Sexte, Nones, and Vespers to noon, 3
o'clock and 6 o'clock.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[165:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_180) "For where the truth
is, the symbol should be put in the background. On other days we
consecrate in remembrance of his being sacrificed. But on that day of
Good Friday he was veritably sacrificed; for there is no meaning
whatever in it when the day comes on which he was actually sacrificed."

<span id="fn_181"></span>[167:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_181) I have not
discovered a trace of any of these names of places; I am much inclined
to think them disguised.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[167:†](mmm07.htm#fr_182) Paris (A. Paulin),
*Romans de la Table Ronde*, i., pp. 156-162. Paris, 1868.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[168:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_183) Baring-Gould (S),
*Curious Myths of the Middle Ages*, pp. 617, 622-3-4. London, 1881.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[168:†](mmm07.htm#fr_184) Simrock (R., jr.),
*Parzival and Titurel*, p. 776. Stuttgart and Augsberg, 1857.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[168:‡](mmm07.htm#fr_185) See Blunt (J. H.),
*Dictionary of Sects and Heresies*, p. 309. London, 1874. He says: "An
ancient Eastern Sect found in Persia and Arabia, but chiefly at Bussara
. . . who profess to be *Mendai-Ijahi* or disciples of St. John the
Baptist! They are called 'Christians of St. John' by many European
writers, and Sabians or Tzabians by the Mahometans."

<span id="fn_186"></span>[169:\*](mmm07.htm#fr_186) Mackenzie (R. R.
H.), *The Royal Masonic Cyclopædia*, p. 386. New York, 1877.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[169:†](mmm07.htm#fr_187) Weston (Jessie L.),
*Parzival*, ii., notes 184, line 589, p. 223. "The belief in a Christian
Kingdom in the east, ruled over by a king who was at the same time a
priest, was very widely spread in the middle ages, but it is very
curious to find it thus connected with the Grail Legend. Simrock takes
this connection to be a confirmation of his theory, that the Grail Myth
was originally closely connected with St. John the Baptist. According to
*Der Jüngere Titurel*, a poem which, professedly written by Wolfram and
long supposed to be his, is now known to be the work of a certain Albert
von Scharffenberg, the Grail, with its guardians, Parzival, Lohengrin,
Konwiramur, and all the Templars, eventually left Monsalväsch and found
a home in the domains of Prester John, but the story seems to be due
rather to the imagination of the writer than to any real legendary
source."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III.](mmm08)

</div>
