<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mmm07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002RHOOXI/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traces of a Hidden Tradition in Masonry and Medieval Mysticism*, by
Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

### THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM OF THE HOLY GRAIL.

#### PART III.

#### II.

#### THE HISTORY OF TITUREL.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The fairest of old men ancient whom ever his eyes had seen,  
Grey was he as mists of morning.  
                       *Parzifal*, i. 137. by JESSIE WESTON.

And the Grail, it chooseth strictly, a: its Knights must be chaste and
pure.—*Ibid*., i. 283.

</div>

TO the founding of the Palace Spiritual, and to Titurel, the noble
ancestor of the Grail-Kings, our attention must now be turned. Many and
varied are the versions which may be found of the history of this
Grail-Race, and each interpretation of its traditional history differs
according to the writer's sympathy with and comprehension of the
mystical history of the human family. Few and far between are those
clear-sighted critics who recognize, in this fascinating tradition of
Oriental generation, a link which relates the outer life of man to its
hidden basis, and sets forth the type of an ideal life which had its

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

inception on this earth when the "Sons of God" still trod its paths, and
the "Children of the Fire-mist" had not withdrawn from the outer world,
but yet dwelt among the children of men.

From the despised mental dust-bins of the "Dark Middle Ages"—as they are
termed—precious gems of rarest literary worth are being disinterred, of
quality so pure, with richness so wondrous, that the geniuses of the
19th century show poor and forlorn when measured by the power and mental
strength of their predecessors of that despised time. No peers are the
modern poets of those noble singers who created the chivalric virtues in
the hearts of the men and women of their time, and who sent their
burning words ringing through the centuries fraught with love ideals
both pure and true, and religious fervour at once self-sacrificing and
humble. Their ideals of noble manhood and pure womanhood are still the
ideals of the present time, for the "Legend of the Holy Grail" is yet
potent, nor can time destroy its "infinite variety." Titurel, the
Perfected One, who

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                      Like a flying star  
Led on the gray-haired Wisdom of the East,</span>

</div>

is in modern days deemed to be but the poetical creation of a more than
usually fertile-brained troubadour of the Middle Ages; but it is the
chronicle of this first spotless Grail-King which must now be studied,
for he was the type of the model ruler, pure in life, just in action,
living for his people,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

with his heart set on a higher kingdom than his earthly realm.

The most detailed description of the descent and genealogy of Titurel
that we can briefly summarize is given by a group of German
authors <span id="fr_188"></span>[\*](#fn_188) in a careful and
laborious study of the "Jüngere," <span id="fr_189"></span>[†](#fn_189)
which runs as follows: Among the princes who gathered round Vespasian at
the siege of Jerusalem were Sennabor, a Prince of Cappadocia <span
id="fr_190"></span>[‡](#fn_190) and his three sons, Parille, Azubar and
Sabbilar. After the fall of the city these three brothers went to Rome,
and were overwhelmed with gracious gifts by the Emperor. Parille
received his daughter Argusilla <span id="fr_191"></span>[§](#fn_191)
for wife, and some provinces in France were also given to him. To the
brothers Azubar and Sabbilar were given Anschowe (Anjou) and Kornwaleis
(Cornwall). To Parille and Argusilla was born a son whom they

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

named Titurisone, who became the stem of the Grail-Race. Parille tried
to reform and Christianize his pagan provinces, which had fallen into
degraded superstitions, but he was poisoned by the people and Titurisone
reigned in his place.

He married Elizabel of Arragonia, and the royal couple went on a
pilgrimage to Jerusalem. There it was they received the prophecy about
the great future of the son who should be born to them. He was to be
under the special protection of God, and he would be dowered with, great
gifts. His name was to be formed from those of his father and mother;
thus Titurel was he called, which includes a part of Titurisone and
Elizabel. He grew in grace and in "favour with God and man." In him was
embodied the true type of the ideal Knight, noble, pure, tender and
chivalrous. Such was Titurel, the first Grail-King; and—say some
accounts—he conquered the rebellious heathen of Auvergne and Navarre,
with the help of the Provençals, and the people of Arles and
Lotheringen. These combined forces—so runs the tradition—conquered the
Saracenic union, and put down the degraded remnants of the old Druidical
worship. It was after these long struggles were completed that Titurel
was bidden to prepare and build the Temple for the reception of the Holy
Grail—that perfect treasure which was to be entrusted to his charge.
Amongst the "powers" and "gifts" with which Titurel was dowered was that
of " length of days," for when the temple was builded,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

and he was commanded to marry, in order that the Grail-Race might be
continued, Titurel had reached four hundred years of age. The site where
the sacred Shrine, or Grail-Temple, was to be founded was shown to him
by an angel-guide; so carefully secluded was the spot, that it could not
be discovered but by the aid of a higher Power.

It is without doubt on the far side of Pyrenees <span
id="fr_192"></span>[\*](#fn_192) that we find this legend most deeply
engrafted, though the name of its abiding place is differently rendered
by various writers. Thus the name *Mon Salväsch*, <span
id="fr_193"></span>[†](#fn_193) or Mont Salvat, may from its wild and
inaccessible position only mean the uncultivated mountain, *Mont
Salvatge* or *Sauvage*. It is said that between Navarre and Arragon
there is still a place named Salvaterra.

The site of the Temple was shown to Titurel, and the "Invisible Helpers"
brought him materials for the building; the description is marvellously
elaborate, full of symbolical detail, <span
id="fr_194"></span>[‡](#fn_194) entirely oriental in its whole
construction, both material and ideal, but it cannot here be given, as
our sketch is limited to

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Titurel himself.
When the building of the Temple was completed he was four hundred years
old, but such was the power of the Holy Grail that he looked—says the
tradition—only forty. And now he gathered around himself that goodly
company of knights—the Knights of the Temple Holy—and gradually their
influence and their power spread into other lands; first Arragon and
then Navarre were drawn to this spiritual society, then followed
Catalonia, Grenada and Gallicia; the chief town of this great alliance
was concealed in the forests on the boundaries between Navarre and
Arragon, on the ridge of the Pyrenees. The centre of the spiritual
supremacy of the new faith reached from Gallicia beyond Provence,
towards Burgundy and Lorraine. All of this was done during the four
hundred years of Titurel's reign. San Marte speaks of it as a " similar
institution to that which existed in the Pythagorean Alliance."

The Sacred Grail was enshrined in the Temple, and the instructions to
the King and his knights appeared on its surface, remained there for a
while, then faded slowly away. And now was given the order for Titurel
to marry, and the wife chosen for him was Richonde, a maiden consecrated
to God. Her father's name was Frimutelle, a king of a Spanish province;
messengers were sent to her, and she came to Mon Salvatsch accompanied
by a great suite of maidens and of warriors, all of whom returned to
Spain except those

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

whom the Grail ordered to remain. Titurel had to select two hundred
knights from amongst those who came; moral qualifications alone fitted
them to enter the service of the Grail. Two children were born to
Titurel. His son Frimutel, who married the daughter of the King of
Grenat, became the next Grail-King, and they had five children—Amfortas,
who succeeded him as Grail-King; Herzeloide, the mother of Parzival;
Treverizent, the hermit; Tchoysiane, and Urepanse. This was the male
line. The daughter of Titurel married Kailet, King of Spain, the capital
of which was, at this time, Toledo, and this marriage connected the
Kings of Spain with the Kings of the Grail-Race. It must be remembered
that it was at Toledo that the manuscript on the Holy Grail legend was
found by Flegetanis, the contents of which gave the Eastern sources of
this tradition.

By daily contemplation of the Grail Titurel's life <span
id="fr_195"></span>[\*](#fn_195) had been prolonged for five hundred
years, and when he knew his forces were beginning to fail him, he
gathered his children round him to instruct them on the spiritual
significance of the Holy Grail.

Thus he taught: no one may ever see the Grail but the elect; those who
do not live a holy life, and guard themselves in purity and from all
strife, are not fit to gaze upon that holiness; no tongue may ever tell
the Grail's true form.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

Titurel also instructed his knights as to the inner meaning of the
symbols and ceremonial they used, particularly the spiritual
significance and power of the twelve precious stones. He sorrowed that
his son Frimutelle had not been "called" by the Grail to be the
Grail-King. Shortly after this, we are told, the name of Frimutelle
appeared on the Grail, and then followed the names of the Knights who
were to enter the Grail service. Titurel was also warned that his son,
and his grandson, Amfortas, would suffer bodily injuries, as the result
of their ungoverned natures. Finally, Titurel died in India, more than
five hundred years old. <span id="fr_196"></span>[\*](#fn_196) Of his
journey thither we know nothing, but the tradition runs, that there is a
"waiting place," <span id="fr_197"></span>[†](#fn_197) whence the return
of these knightly souls is expected, in that region of peace, where they
dwell and watch over the human race. Thus passes the Founder of the
Grail-Kingship from our immediate view; he had but to strike the keynote
of a higher purity and a nobler manhood, and his work in the material
world of that period ended.

<span class="small">He still holds, we are told, communication with
the</span>

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="small">world, and occasionally despatches a faithful
champion to grant assistance in cases of momentous need. There also the
Grail maintains the sanctity of its character, and becomes at once the
register of human grievances and necessities, and the interpreter of the
will of heaven as to the best mode of redressing them.</span>

Immense stress is laid on the necessity for a perfect purity, but so
corrupt did the court grow, that at one time only the infant children of
Perceval and Lancelot, and the daughter of Gawain, were considered
worthy to step within the sacred shrine.

Warton speaks quite frankly in his book of "esoteric doctrines" which
belonged to the "heathen world" (*sic*), and which have been
transplanted into Christendom, a new name having therein been given to
the old teachings of the East. <span id="fr_198"></span>[\*](#fn_198)

But we must pass on to the other aspects of this legend, and one of the
most curious is the connection traced by many authors between the Holy
Grail and the traditions of the Knights Templars. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[†](#fn_199)

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

Aroux is very definite on this point:

<span class="small">"It must be acknowledged," says he, "that the
romances of the Sangreal (the legend of which is borrowed from the
Apocryphal Gospels) composed, according to an essentially Albigensian
idea, in glorification of the Templars, mark the period when the poets
of the South felt the need of procuring auxiliaries in the North." <span
id="fr_200"></span>[\*](#fn_200)</span>

It is Aroux to whom we are chiefly indebted for the secret thread which
guides us through much of the tangled maze of the struggles of the
mystics during the Middle Ages. He points out that the Holy Grail was a
mystic Gospel <span id="fr_201"></span>[†](#fn_201) as well as the Holy
Chalice, containing a mysterious power. Another German <span
id="fr_202"></span>[‡](#fn_202) thinker connects the legend of Titurel
with the origin of the Masonic Orders, and the early *Ritter-Orden* in
Germany. It is Herr Doctor Simrock who has given us much detail with
regard to the tradition of the Holy Grail and its connection with the
"Order of the Knights Templars"; it is his view, and that of other
serious students, that that Holy Grail tradition, which is termed by
Aroux the "book of the Gospels," was in reality the Secret Doctrine of
the Templars, for which they suffered so bitterly.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Founded in 1118 on
the base of the old Society of the Magian Brothers, drawn together by
the same guiding powers, the Templars did but develop the ideal seed
which Titurel had sown. Let us see what Simrock says on these points.

<span class="small">It seems our duty to bring forward here that which
has already been shown to hold good as regards this view. Fauriel, who
finds in the *Templeisenthum*—or the Knighthood of the Grail—that there
is only a play on the Knights Templars, appeals to the evidence given by
the power and the riches which that Order had already obtained in
Southern France and the South-East of Spain, but especially in the
Pyrenees, where since the founding of the Temple-lands as the first in
Europe, by Roger III. Graf von Foix, castles, churches, temples, and
chapels had rapidly increased. San Marte lays stress on the agreement of
the name as well as on the different rules and customs of the Order
which coincided \[with those of the Grail\]: for instance the Templars
at the Lord's Supper, diverging from the Roman Liturgy, made use of the
opening words of the Gospel of St. John, which change also occurs at the
baptism of Feirefis; <span id="fr_203"></span>[\*](#fn_203) but he bases
his arguments chiefly upon the heresies of which the Templars are known
to have been accused: the worship of certain idols . . . . their belief
in spirits and demons, which recall the " Heavenly Host " \[around the
Grail\]—angels who, according to Trevrezent's statement had to serve the
Grail as they</span>

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span class="small">hovered around it. The fact remains, however
undecided \[to San Marte\] whether the accusers took their incriminating
charges from the Romances of the Grail, or from the scraps which had
been published of the real teachings of the Templars. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[\*](#fn_204) Other authorities <span
id="fr_205"></span>[†](#fn_205) think that by these Templeisen are to be
understood the Knights of San Salvador de Mont Real, who were, however,
founded at a much later date, in the year 1120. Another Knightly</span>

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">Order was founded at this period, who wore a "five-pointed
star" upon their breasts; they were the Knights of Monfrac in Castille
and Knights of Mongoia, on Mont Gaudii in Catalonia. There had,
moreover, been a close connection between the Order of the Templars and
the House of Anjou, for a tax on his dominions for the benefit of the
Templars had been imposed by Fulk. V. of Anjou, on his return from
Jerusalem in 1120. It is, however the learned Baron von
Hammer-Purgestall <span id="fr_206"></span>[\*](#fn_206) who gives the
most detail on the connection of the Templars with the Holy Grail, by
tracing its history from the identity of hieroglyphs which he found on
the old churches and buildings in the Danubian Provinces. He
unfortunately is for ever trying to find the most unsavoury
interpretation for all the ancient symbolism; with his views we are not
concerned, but to the work of research which he carried on with such
ability we are profoundly indebted. His statement is very decided, for
on p. 88, in note 33, of his article, he says: The whole poem T8
Titurel, is nothing but the allegory of the Society and the doctrines of
the Templars.</span>

Upon these details we cannot dwell, for we must trace the passing of the
Holy Grail to India, and this will bring to view another mysterious
personage, whose name was Prestre John—a man about whom legends were
rife in both East and West during the early Middle Ages. Colonel Yule
speaks of his history as

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

"that of a phantom taking many forms." <span
id="fr_207"></span>[\*](#fn_207) The so-called apostate Nestorians, and
the personage called Presbyter Johannes, appear to have been Manichæan
Buddhists; the country of Prestre John was Indian Tartary, and the real
Prestre John was the Grand Lama, the incarnation of Wisdom or
Gnyâna. <span id="fr_208"></span>[†](#fn_208) Every authority joins in
admitting that there was some mysterious and powerful individual of this
name, some identifying him with Gengis-Khan. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[‡](#fn_209)

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

We must now return to the Grail Legend and trace the connection which is
therein made between this cryptic entity and that tradition.

<span class="small">"The passage of the Grail to India," says San Marte,
"and the transformation of Parzival into Prestre John is important for
us to notice; according to the version of Wolfram, this curious and
interesting person is the son of Urepanse, <span
id="fr_210"></span>[\*](#fn_210) hence a cousin of Parzival; no details
are given to us about this mysterious personage, whose existence,
however, cannot be denied. The Monk Wilhelm von Rubruquis, <span
id="fr_211"></span>[†](#fn_211) passing through the East about 1253,
told of a ruler in the northern regions of India, in 1057, called
Ken-Khan. The Turks sought his help against the Christians. The
Nestorians called him King Johannes. Interior Asia was peopled by
numerous sects; besides the Nestorians were the Jacobites, Monophysites,
and the Zaböer or Johannes Christians. All travellers of the
thirteenth</span>

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="small">century speak of a widely-spread Christianity in the
East, and the information thereof may have come to the West with the
first crusade—confused with vague intelligence about the Hierarchy of
the Dalai Lama, of whom Kiot may have heard." <span
id="fr_212"></span>[\*](#fn_212)</span>

Writing on the " Disciples of St. John," Madame Blavatsky <span
id="fr_213"></span>[†](#fn_213) says:

Glancing rapidly at the Ophites and Nazareans, we shall pass to their
scions which yet exist in Syria and Palestine, under the name of Druzes
of Mount Lebanon; and near Basra or Bassorah, in Persia, under that of
Mendaeans, or Disciples of St. John. All these sects have an immediate
connection with our subject, for they are of kabalistic parentage and
have once held to the secret "Wisdom-Religion," recognizing as the One
Supreme, the Mystery-God of the *Ineffable Name*. Noticing these
numerous secret societies of the past, we will bring them into direct
comparison with several of the modern.

Our object is not to write the history of either of them; but only to
compare these sorely-abused communities with the Christian sects, past
and present, and then, taking historical facts for our guidance, to
defend the secret science as well as the men who are its students and
champions against any unjust imputation.

One by one the tide of time engulfed the sects of the early centuries,
until of the whole number only one survived in its primitive integrity.
That one still exists, still teaches the doctrine of its founder, still
exemplifies its faith in works of power. The quicksands which swallowed
up every other outgrowth of the religious agitation of the times

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<span class="small">of Jesus, with its records, relics, and traditions,
proved firm ground for this. Driven from their native land, its members
found refuge in Persia, and to-day the anxious traveller may converse
with the direct descendants of the "Disciples of John," who listened, on
the Jordan's shore, to the "man sent from God," and were baptized and
believed. This curious people, numbering thirty thousand or more, are
mis-called "Christians of St. John," but, in fact, should be known by
their old name of Nazareans, or their new one of Mendaeans.</span>

The poem entitled *Der Jüngere Titurel* <span
id="fr_214"></span>[\*](#fn_214) deals most minutely with the passing of
the Grail-Kings to the realms of Prestre John; and in this work it is
not Parzival around whom the chief interest is grouped, but Titurel and
his race, as they follow the Founder; then—when the darkening of the
spiritual fervour begins, and the falling away from the standard of
purity grows more general—then with prayer and fasting do the few
sorrowing knightly souls, the Templeisen, make preparations to return to
that east whence had come their early inspiration. Led by Parzival they
pass from West to East. The description of the kingdom of Prestre John
far surpasses, however, in splendour that of the Holy Grail. There, we
are told, the whole of nature is sanctified; it is a land free from
crime, perfidy, scoffing, and lack of faith.

Prestre John is described as a man holy before God and man, perfect in
virtue, and glorified with

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

humility: he gives honour to Parzival, who comes bringing the Holy Grail
to its Indian home, and the Priest-King of that land offers his crown
and kingdom to the king of the Grail-Race; Parzival desires, in his
humility, to give himself to the service of Prestre John, and finally it
is the Grail which decides the noble strife of these two great souls.
The decree was given that Parzival should accept the kingship, but his
name was to be changed into that of Prestre John.

Then was fulfilled a prophecy, formerly made by an angel, that Prestre
John should receive a son who should be a more powerful ruler than
himself. But it was also decreed that Parzival should only wear the
crown for ten years, since he was not entirely purified from the sin
that his mother, Herzeloide, had died of grief for him. As San
Marte <span id="fr_215"></span>[\*](#fn_215) points out, the sin was
entirely unintentional on his part; nevertheless, it was still
unexpiated and stained that spotless purity of a perfect life which was
demanded of every knight who entered the service of the Holy Grail. Thus
it appears that even a more perfect condition was required in the office
of the Priest-King Johannes

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

than in that of the Grail-Kingship. The holders of both offices were
nominated by the Holy Grail.

#### III.

#### THE LINKS OF THE MYSTIC CHAIN.

The strongly Eastern tinge that characterises this tradition may be
noticed in many different points. The knowledge, for instance, of the
occult properties of precious stones and metals and their powers; the
stone that enables the wearer to make himself invisible, the condition
being that he should do nothing dishonourable. Then we have the
mysterious land of mist, where people <span
id="fr_216"></span>[\*](#fn_216) are neither dark nor light, but have
lost all ordinary human colour. Again, there is the magic column brought
from India, in which all that happens for miles around is represented;
and one of the most important links is the clear reference made to
reincarnation in the belief held that Titurel and his knights may
return, and that the Perfect King still holds communication with the
earth and its sorrows.

The moral and mystic teaching of the Grail tradition is the most vitally
interesting to the student of Theosophy and mysticism, for the
resemblances between the present laws of spiritual development and those
given to the Knights of the Grail are strikingly identical: The knight
who watched

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

the Grail—the highest office—had to be entirely pure; all sensual love,
even within the bounds

of marriage, was forbidden; one single thought <span
id="fr_217"></span>[\*](#fn_217) of passion would obscure the eye and
conceal the mystic vessel; the only marriage that was permitted amongst
those who stepped on to this "Path" was the marriage of the King, and
even that was not based on personal attractions or attachments; the
Grail alone decided whom the Grail-King should take as wife. Not for
himself, not for gratification, but for the service of the race was he
to marry.

As we search into the mystic chalice symbolism of the Grail myth does it
not become clear that we are face to face with a symbol of man: man who
is the temple of the Holy Spirit. The chalice or cup is but another way
of denoting the "coats of skin," the "veils" or "vestures" which garment
man on earth; robes woven by the nature powers, in which and through
which the divine spark has to dwell, until in process of time the
vestures or chalice become permeated through and through by the divine
light within. Says one writer on this subject:

"In that marvellous relic of Gnostic philosophy called the
*Pistis-Sophia*, the three vestures of the Glorified Christos or
perfected man—what we may all be in some future birth—are thus
described:

"And the disciples saw not Jesus because of the great light with which
he was surrounded, or which proceeded

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

from him. For their eyes were darkened because of it. But they gazed
upon the Light only, shooting forth great rays of light. Nor were the
rays equal to one another, and the Light was of divers modes and various
aspect, from the lower to the higher part thereof, each ray more
admirable than its fellow in infinite manner, in the great radiance of
the immeasurable Light. It stretched from the earth to the heaven. . . .
It was of three degrees, one surpassing the other in infinite manner.
The second, which was in the midst, excelled the first, which was below
it, and the third, the most admirable of all, surpassed the other
twain."

The Master explains this mystery to his disciples as follows:

"Rejoice, therefore, in that the time is come that I should put on my
Vesture.

"Lo! I have put on my Vesture and all power has been given me by the
First Mystery. Yet a little while and I will tell you every Mystery and
every Completion; henceforth from this hour I will conceal naught from
you, but in Perfectness will I perfect you in all Completion, and all
Perfectioning and every Mystery, which indeed are the End of all Ends,
and the Completion of all Completions, and the Wisdom (Gnosis) of all
Wisdoms. Hearken! I will tell you all things which have befallen me.

"It came to pass, when the sun had risen in the places of the East, a
great Stream of Light descended, in which was my Vesture." <span
id="fr_218"></span>[\*](#fn_218)

The vesture of the Self in its perfect glory is of a purity of
transcendent perfection. No mortal stained with earthly passion can gaze
upon that garment of the soul.

And as the upward striving soul struggles to free

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

itself from the bondage of the lower bodies and their subtle forces, and
as it purifies one vehicle after another pertaining to the three lower
planes of matter, finally it reaches that step on the Path whereof the
substance is perfect purity, and the soul perceives that "Light vesture"
which is the garment—spoken of in theosophic terms as the buddhic
body—veiling the divine mysterious Self.

This is the great reality which is typified by the Holy Grail, the
symbolic Cup or Chalice, the first container of the Holy Life of the
Logos. In all religions is this myth to be found; truly an "outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace." Titurel had told his
knights that no tongue may ever tell the Grail's true form. This shows
that some mystery was concealed behind the outward symbolism of the Cup
and Chalice, or Gospel.

<span class="small">Burnouf says: "In spite of the difference produced
by the influences of the place, the study of the legend of the Vase
permits us to understand and discover that esoteric teaching which has
never ceased to animate or ensoul the five great Aryan religions. This
theory—which in the Christian churches was transmitted under the name of
the Secret Doctrine, *disciplina secreti*—is of a Fire as the universal
force under different names, always the same at the basis, and
manifesting itself by the same words and symbols." <span
id="fr_219"></span>[\*](#fn_219)</span>

This Fire is the true Spirit of life, the living Word,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

which inflames the soul of man, and gives it that force by which it can
conquer the kingdoms of the lower world, and, crossing the ocean of
births and deaths, can finally land itself on the further shore, a holy,
purified "Son of God," a Saviour of Worlds to come.

Thus runs the Legend of the Holy Grail.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[172:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_188) Hagen (Dr. H. von
der), Docen (B. J.), Büsching (J. G.), *Museum für Altdeutsche Literatur
und Kunst*, i., 502 *et seq*. Berlin, 1809.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[172:†](mmm08.htm#fr_189) Scharffenberg
(Albrecht von), *Der Jüngere Titurel;* *circa* 1270. Vilmar (A. F. C.),
*Geschichte der deutschen National-Literatur*, i, 147. Marburg u.
Leipzig, 1870.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[172:‡](mmm08.htm#fr_190) Cappadocia was at
this time a Roman Province. Sennabor is rendered by some authorities as
"Senbar." Says San Marte: "The first forerunners of Christianity in the
west were demigods; and in Asia is rooted the main stem of the
Senaboriden. (Bóreaden) Senebar der Reiche—Senber, in Arabic a sage—he
came from Cappadocia, from the Caucasus, and Colchis, whence Odin also
brought his bloody worship." See "Der Mythus vom Heiligen Gral" in the
*Neue Mittheilungen aus dem Gebiet historisch antiquarischer
Forschungen*. Herausgegeben von dem Thüringisch-Sächsichen Verein für
Erforschung des vaterländischen Alterthums, III., iii., 5.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[172:§](mmm08.htm#fr_191) Sometimes given as
Orgusille.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[174:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_192) Says Görres: "The
Temple of *Mont Salvatsch* stands in Salvatierra, and not as people
thought in distant Gallizein, but in Arragonia just at the entrance into
Spain, and close to the Valley of Ronceval and the great road which
leads from France towards Gallicia and Compostella."—*Lohengrin*.
Koblentz, 1812.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[174:†](mmm08.htm#fr_193) Sometimes called
*San-Salvador*, or *Salvez*.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[174:‡](mmm08.htm#fr_194) See Boisserée
(Sulpiz), *Über die Beschreibung des Heiligen Grals*. Munich, 1834. Also
*Transactions of the Munich Academy*, i. 30. The description is in the
*Jüngere Titurel*, edited by Hahn, strophe 311, 5842. San Marte (A.
Schulz), *Leben and Dichten Wolfram's van Eschenbach*, ii., 357.
Magdeburg, 1836.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[176:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_195) In Persian history
the life of Jemshad was extended to nearly seven centuries from a
similar cause.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[177:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_196) One of the few
definite dates is given to us by Görres in his *Lohengrin*, p. lxiii.
where, speaking of Lohengrin's death, he says: "It was known now to the
murderers who this Prince was . . . . they became monks . . . these
events took place five hundred years after the birth of Jesus Christ."

<span id="fn_197"></span>[177:†](mmm08.htm#fr_197) Here we have a clear
and most definite hint given that the doctrine of re-incarnation was
taught by this Troubadour, who is handing down the Secret Wisdom of the
Holy Grail.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[178:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_198) Warton (Thomas,
B.D.), *The History of English Poetry*, i., 85, London, 1824.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[178:†](mmm08.htm#fr_199) "Le Temple du Graal
une fois bâti dans les Pyrénées, Titurel institua pour sa defense et
pour sa garde une milice, une Chevalerie spéciale, qui se nomme la
Chevalerie du Temple, et dont les membres prennent le nom de Templiens,
ou de Templiers. Ces Chevaliers font vœu de chasteté, et sont tenus à
une grande pureté de sentimens et de conduite. L’objet de leur vie,
c’est de défendre le Graal, ou pour mieux dire, la foi chrétienne, dont
ce vase est le symbole, contre les infidèles. Je l’ai déjà insinué, et
je puis ici l’affirmer expressément, il y a dans cette milice religieuse
du Graal une allusion manifeste à la milice des Templiers. Le but, le
caractère religieux, le nom, tout se rapporte entre cette dernière
Chevalerie et la Chevalerie idéale du Graal: et l’on <span
id="page_179">p. 179</span> a quelque peine à comprendre la fiction de
celle-ci, si l’on fait abstraction de l’existence réelle de l’autre."
Fauriel (C.), "Romans Provençaux," *Revue des Deux Mendes;* Première
série, viii. 185. Paris, 1832.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[179:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_200) Aroux (E.), *La
Comédie de Dante*, i. 39. Paris, 1857.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[179:†](mmm08.htm#fr_201) Aroux (E.), *Les
Mystères de la Chevalerie*, p. 166. Paris, 1858.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[179:‡](mmm08.htm#fr_202) Rosenkranz (Karl),
Doctor der Philosophie, zu Halle. *Uber den Titurel und Dante's Komödie
mit einer Vorerinnerung über die Bildung der Geistlichen Ritter-Orden*,
pp. 52-70. Halle u. Leipzig, 1829.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[180:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_203) Baptism had a much
deeper meaning among the Gnostic sects than among the orthodox church
people. A "true baptism is only that which takes place in the living
water;" and again, speaking of S. John the Baptist, "He . . . baptised
with the living baptism and named the Name of Life." Brandt (A. J. H.
W.), *Die Mandäische Religion, ihre Entwickelung and Geschichtliche
Bedeutung*, pp. 98 and 100. Leipzig, 1889. It was an Initiation into the
Real Mysteries, and is so still.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[181:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_204) Simrock (K. Dr.),
*Parzifal and Titurel, Rittergedichte von Wolfram von Eschenbach*, p.
793, third edition. Stuttgart u. Augsburg, 1857.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[181:†](mmm08.htm#fr_205) Hagen (Dr. H. von
der), Docen (B. J.), Büsching (J. G.), *Museum für Altdeutsche Literatur
and Kunst*; i., 507. Berlin, 1809. Shallow J. (J. Y. A. Morshead), *The
Templer's Trials*, p. 62. London, 1888. "M. Loiseleur considers that the
Temple compiled its heresy from the principles of three contemporary
sects—Bogomiles, Euchetes, Luciferians. The actual history of these
sects, however, rather gives one the impression that each was suggested
to some heresiarch by some particular phase of that Manichæan feeling
which always existed in Bulgaria or Asia Minor." Mignard (*Monographie
du Coffret de M. le Duc de Blacas*, Paris, 1852), proves that the
Templars were Cathari—another name for Albigenses—who believed in the
doctrine of reincarnation. Says Aroux: "How did Walther of Aquitaine,
how did the romance of Perceval, the Perfect Knight of the Saint-Graal,
accurately translated by a Templar—Wolfram von Eschenbach, after the
poem of the Troubadour Guiot—become transplanted into Germany, if the
Provençal missionaries had no relations with that country, if their
romances, their symbols were not understood there? . . . . Who but
themselves and their disciples conveyed thither the ideas and romances
of chivalry, and by turning to account the national traditions, worked
on the foundation of the ancient sagas and impressed on the modern ones
the very visible stamp of Albigensianism? Traces are again to be found
not only in Europe, but even as far as Asia. True Knights errant of the
Church Militant, in open war (but more often war secret and hidden) with
Roman Catholicism, they journeyed unceasingly . . . . sometimes they
went as bearers of secret messages or were charged with transmitting
verbally important information from Prince to Prince." Thus was the
secret mystical teaching preserved through the dark ages. Aroux (E.),
*Mystères de la Chevalerie*, p. 189. Paris, 1858.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[182:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_206) Hammer-Purgestall
(J. Baron von), "Mysterium Baphometis Revelatum; seu fratres militiæ
Templi, quâ Gnostici et quidem ophiani, apostasiæ, idololatriæ et quidem
impuritatis convicti per ipsa eorum monumenta." See *Fundgruben des
Orients*, vi. p. 3. Vienna, 1818. Nell (M. von) writing on Hammer's
"Baphometum," says that Hammer insists that the Cup of the Holy Graal is
Gnostic, and of the same set as the Baphometo of the Templars, which all
have Gnostic-Ophite symbols on them. But Nell says they are theosophical
and alchemical: in both cases these authors trace the Grail legend to
heretical sects.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[183:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_207) Yule (Col.): see
*sub voce*, *Encyclo. Brit*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[183:†](mmm08.htm#fr_208) "Prestre John" seems
to have been the title of an office, for the periods of time at which we
hear of this curious person are various. The person who succeeded to the
position took the designation Prestre John.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[183:‡](mmm08.htm#fr_209) Sir John Maundeville,
an old knight, writing in the fourteenth century, relates (Cassell's
National Library, *The Voyages and Travels of Sir John Maundeville*, p.
169) the following: "This Emperor Prester John takes always to wife the
daughter of the great Chan, and the great Chan also in the same wise the
daughter of Prester John. For they two are the greatest lords under the
firmament. . . . And Prester John has under him seventy-two provinces,
and in every province is a king, all which kings are tributary to
Prester John, and in his lordships are many great marvels, for in his
country is the sea called the Gravelly Sea. . . . Three days from that
sea are great mountains, out of which runs a great river which comes
from Paradise, and it is full of precious stones without a drop of
water. . . . Beyond that river is a great plain, and in that plain every
day at sunrise small trees begin to grow, and they grow till midday,
bearing fruit; but no man dare take of that fruit, for it is a thing of
fairie. . . This Emperor Prester John when he goes to battle against any
other lord has no banners borne before him, but he has three large
crosses of gold full of precious stones, and each cross is set in a
chariot full richly arrayed. . . . And when he has no war but rides with
a private company, he has before him but one plain cross of wood, in
remembrance that Jesus Christ suffered death upon a wooden cross. And
they carry before him also a platter of gold full of earth, in token
that his nobleness and his might and his flesh shall turn to earth. And
he has borne before him also a vessel of silver, full of noble jewels of
gold <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> and precious stones, in token of
his lordship, nobility and power . . . the frame of his bed is of fine
sapphires, blended with gold to make him sleep well. This Emperor
Prester John has evermore seven kings with him to serve him, who share
their service by certain months."

<span id="fn_210"></span>[184:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_210) Urepanse was one of
the grand-daughters of Titurel.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[184:†](mmm08.htm#fr_211) In the account of the
travels of Rubruquis, in the *Geography of the Middle Ages*, Book III.,
p. 270, London, 1831, we read: "There is reason to believe that the
Nestorians had penetrated into China as early as the sixth or seventh
century, and carried into that kingdom the civilization of the Bactrian
Greeks." Rubruquis says, that in his time they "inhabited fifteen cities
in Cathay. . . . The Nestorians of Tartary had imbibed the specious
doctrine of the transmigration of souls." They then told him of a child
about three years old who could write and reason, and who stated "that
he had passed through three several bodies." William de Rubruquis—or
more properly, Van Ruysbroek—was a Minorite Friar, from a village of
that name near Brussels. He started on his travels in 1253. He also said
(p. 273), "that he had been told by Baldwin de Hainault at
Constantinople some facts about the direction of the rivers in Tartary
which he afterwards found to be true."

<span id="fn_212"></span>[185:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_212) *Neue Mittheilungen
aus dem Gebiete Historisch. Antiquarischer Forschungen*, ii. 36.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[185:†](mmm08.htm#fr_213) Blavatsky (H. P.),
*Isis Unveiled*, ii.; pp. 289, 290. New York, 1884.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[186:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_214) Scharffenberg (A.
von), *Der Jüngere Titurel*, 1270, line 5893 *et seq*.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[187:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_215) San Marte (A.
Schulz), "Vergleichung von Wolfram's Parzival mit Albrecht's Titurel in
Theologischer Beziehung," *Germania*, viii., 454. Wien, 1863. This
writer also remarks in the same interesting article that " the poem
appears as a mirror of those religious movements at the end of the
twelfth century which were struggling towards freedom from the
compulsion of the Church . . . . the fundamental appreciation of both
poems, 'Titurel' and 'Parzival,' is only obtained by comparing them from
the theological standpoint. . . . Titurel is full of learned and varied
reminiscences brought from afar." *Op. cit.* supra, pp. 421, 422.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[188:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_216) Some of the
Kâmalokic planes might be thus described.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[189:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_217) "One single thought
about the past that thou hast left behind will drag thee down."
Blavatsky (H. P.), *The Voice of the Silence*, p. 23. London, 1892.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[190:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_218) Mead (G. R. S.,
B.A.), *The World-Mystery*, pp. 102, 104. London, 1895.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[191:\*](mmm08.htm#fr_219) Burnouf (É.), *Le
Vase Sacré et ce qu’il contient: dans l'Inde, la Perse, la Grèce, et
dans l’Église Chrétienne;* avec un appendice sur le Saint Graal, p. 172.
Paris, 1896.

 
