[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Cherokee](../index)  [Index](index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE CHEROKEE BALL PLAY.

## BY JAMES MOONEY.

#### THE

#### AMERICAN ANTHROPOLOGIST.

##### VOL. III. (Old Series) WASHINGTON, D. C., APRIL, 1890. No. 2. pp. 105-32.

{Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, November 2001}

{p. 105}

The Indian game of the ball play is common to all the tribes from Maine
to California, and from the sunlit waters of the Gulf of Mexico to the
frozen shores of Hudson bay. When or where the Indian first obtained the
game it is not our province to inquire, but we may safely assume that
the {Native American} shaped the pliant hickory staff with his knife and
flint and twisted the net of bear sinew ages before visions of a western
world began to float through the brain of the Italian dreamer.

In its general features, Indian ball play was the same all over the
country, with this important exception, that among the northern and
western tribes the player used but one ball stick, while in the Gulf
States each contestant carried two and caught the ball between them. In
California men and women played together, while among most of the more
warlike tribes to the eastward it was pre-eminently a manly game, and it
was. believed to insure defeat to a party if a woman even so much as
touched a ball stick.

The game has a history, even though that history be fragmentary, like
all that goes to make up the sum of our knowledge of the aboriginal
race. The French, whose light-hearted gaiety and ready adaptability so
endeared them to the hearts of their wild allies, were quick to take up
the Indian ball game as a relief from the dreary monotony of long weeks
in the garrison or lonely days in the forest. It became a favorite
pastime, and still survives among the creoles of Louisiana under the
name of *Raquette*, while in the more invigorating atmosphere of the
North it assumed a new life, and, with the cruder features eliminated,
became the famous Canadian national game of *La Crosse*. It was by means
of a cleverly devised

{p. 106}

stratagem of a ball play that the ... warriors of Pontiac were enabled
to surprise and capture the English garrison of old Fort Mackinaw in
11763. Two years before the Ojibwa chief had sent the ominous message:
"Englishmen, although you have conquered the French, you have not yet
conquered us;" but the warning was unheeded. The vengeance of the
{Native American} may sleep, but never dies. On the fourth of June,
1763, the birthday of King George of England, the warriors of two great
tribes assembled in front of the fort, ostensibly to play a game in
honor of the occasion and to decide the tribal championship. The
commandant himself came out to encourage his favorites and bet on the
result, while the soldiers leaned against the palisades and the {women}
sat about in groups, all intently watching every movement of the play.
Suddenly there comes a crisis in the game. One athletic young fellow
with a powerful stroke sends the ball high in air, and as it descends in
a graceful curve it rolls along the ground to the gate of the fort,
followed by four hundred yelling {Native Americans}. But look! As they
run each painted warrior snatches from his {wife} the hatchet which she
had concealed under her blanket, and the next moment it is buried in the
brain of the nearest soldier. The English, taken completely by surprise,
are cut down without resistance. ...

Let us turn from this dark picture to more recent times. In the late war
three hundred of the East Cherokee entered the Confederate service and
in the summer of 1863--just a century after the fatal day of Mackinaw--a
detachment of them was left to guard the bridge over the Holston river,
at Strawberry Plains, in Tennessee. But an Indian never takes kindly to
anything in the nature of garrison duty, and time hung heavy on their
hands. At last, in a moment of inspiration, one man proposed that they
make some ball sticks and have a game. The suggestion was received with
hearty favor, and soon all hands were at work putting up the poles,
shaping the hickory sticks, and twisting the bark for the netting. The
preliminary ceremonies were dispensed with for once, the players
stripped, and the game began, while the rest of the Indians looked on
with eager interest. Whether Wolf Town or the Big Cove would have

{p. 107}

won that game will never be known, for in the middle of it an advanced
detachment of "the Yankees" slipped in, burned the bridge, and were
moving forward, when the Cherokee, losing all interest in the game,
broke for cover and left the Federals in possession of the ground.

In 1834, before the removal of the Cherokee to the west, a great game
was played near the present site of Jasper, Georgia, between the
settlements of Hickory Log and Coosawattee, in which there were eighteen
players on a side, and the chiefs of the rival settlements wagered
$1,000 apiece on the result.

There is a tradition among the few old traders still living in upper
Georgia, to the effect that a large tract in this part of the state was
won by the Cherokee from the Creeks in a ball play. There are no
Cherokee now living in Georgia to substantiate the story, but I am
inclined to put some faith in it from the fact that Coosawattee,
although the name of a Cherokee settlement, signifies "the old country
of the Creeks." The numerous localities in the Southern States bearing
the name of "Ball Flat," "Ball Ground," and "Ball Play" bear witness to
the fondness of the Indian for the play. To the red warrior it was
indeed a royal game, worthy to be played on the king's day, with the
empire of the northwest for the stake.

As speed and suppleness of limb and a considerable degree of muscular
strength are prime requisites in the game, the players are always
selected from among the most athletic young men, and to be known as an
expert player was a distinction hardly less coveted than fame as a
warrior. To bring the game to its highest perfection, the best players
voluntarily subjected themselves to a regular course of training and
conjuring; so that in time they came to be regarded as professionals who
might be counted on to take part in every contest, exactly like the
professional ball player among the whites. To farther incite them to
strain every nerve for victory, two settlements, or sometimes two rival
tribes, were always pitted against each other, and guns, blankets,
horses--everything the Indian had or valued--were staked upon the
result. The prayers and ceremonies of the shamans, the speeches of the
old men, and the songs of the dancers were all alike calculated to
stimulate to the highest pitch the courage and endurance of the
contestants.

It is a matter of surprise that so little has been said of this game by
travelers and other observers of Indian life, Powers, in his

{p. 108}

great work upon the California tribes, dismisses it in a brief
paragraph; the notices in Schoolcraft's six bulky volumes altogether
make hardly two pages, while even the artist Catlin, who spent years
with the wild tribes, has but little to say of the game itself, although
his spirited ball pictures go far to make amends for the deficiency. All
these writers, however, appear to have confined their attention almost
entirely to the play alone, noticing the ball-play dance only briefly,
if at all, and seeming to be completely unaware of the secret ceremonies
and incantations--the fasting, bathing, and other mystic rites--which
for days and weeks precede the play and attend every step of the game;
so that it may be said without exaggeration that a full exposition of
the Indian ball play would furnish material for a fair sized volume.
During several field seasons spent with the East Cherokee in North
Carolina, the author devoted much attention to the study of the
mythology and ceremonial of this game, which will now be described as it
exists to-day among these Indians. For illustration, the last game
witnessed on the reservation, in September, 1889, will be selected.

According to a Cherokee myth, the animals once challenged the birds to a
great ball play. The wager was accepted, the preliminaries were
arranged, and at last the contestants assembled at the appointed
spot--the animals on the ground, while the birds took position in the
tree-tops to await the throwing up of the ball. On the side of the
animals were the bear, whose ponderous weight bore down all opposition;
the deer, who excelled all others in running; and the terrapin, who was
invulnerable to the stoutest blows. On the side of the birds were the
eagle, the hawk, and the great *Tlániwä*--all noted for their swiftness
and power of flight. While the latter were pruning their feathers and
watching every motion of their adversaries below they noticed two small
creatures, hardly larger than mice, climbing up the tree on which was
perched the leader of the birds. Finally they reached the top and humbly
asked the captain to be allowed to join in the game. The captain looked
at them a moment and, seeing that they were four-footed, asked them why
they did not go to the animals where they properly belonged. The little
things explained that they had done so, but had been laughed at and
rejected on account of their diminutive size. On hearing their story the
bird captain was disposed to take pity on them, but there was one
serious difficulty in the way-how could they join the birds when they
had no wings? The eagle, the

{p. 109}

hawk, and the rest now crowded around, and after some discussion it was
decided to try and make wings for the little fellows. But how to do it!
All at once, by a happy inspiration, one bethought himself of the drum
which was to be used in the dance. The head was made of ground-hog
leather, and perhaps a corner could be cut off and utilized for wings.
No sooner suggested than done. Two pieces of leather taken from the
drum-head were cut into shape and attached to the legs of one of the
small animals, and thus originated *Tlameha*, the bat. The ball was now
tossed up, and the bat was told to catch it, and his expertness in.
dodging and circling about, keeping the ball constantly in motion and
never allowing it to fall to the ground, soon convinced the birds that
they had gained a most valuable ally.

They next turned their attention to the other little creature, and now
behold a worse difficulty! All their leather had been used in making the
wings for the bat, and there was no time to send for more. In this
dilemma it was suggested that perhaps wings might be made by stretching
out the skin of the animal itself. So two large birds seized him from
opposite sides with their strong bills, and by tugging and pulling at
his fur for several minutes succeeded in stretching the skin between the
fore and hind feet until at last the thing was done and there was
*Tewa*, the flying squirrel. Then the bird captain, to try him, threw up
the ball, when the flying squirrel, with a graceful bound, sprang off
the limb and, catching it in his teeth, carried it through the air to
another tree-top a hundred feet away.

When all was ready the game began, but at the very outset the flying
squirrel caught the ball and carried it up a tree, then threw it to the
birds, who kept it in the air for some time, when it dropped; but just
before it reached the ground the bat seized it, and by his dodging and
doubling kept it out of the way of even the swiftest of the animals
until he finally threw it in at the goal, and thus won the victory for
the birds. Because of their assistance on this occasion, the ball player
invokes the aid of the bat and the flying squirrel and ties a small
piece of the bat's wing to his ball stick or fastens it to the frame on
which the sticks are hung during the dance.

The game, which of course has different names among the various tribes,
is called *anetsâ* by the Cherokee. The ball season begins about the
middle of summer and lasts until the weather

{p. 110}

is too cold to permit exposure of the naked body, for the players are
always stripped for the game. The favorite time is in the fall, after
the corn has ripened, for then the Indian has abundant leisure, and at
this season a game takes place somewhere on the reservation at least
every other week, while several parties are always in training. The
training consists chiefly of regular athletic practice, the players of
one side coming together with their ball sticks at some convenient spot
of level bottom land, where they strip to the waist, divide into
parties, and run, tumble, and toss the ball until the sun goes down. The
Indian boys take to this sport as naturally as our youngsters take to
playing soldier, and frequently in my evening walks I have come upon a
group of little fellows from eight to twelve years old, all stripped
like professionals, running, yelling, and tumbling over each other in
their scramble for the ball, while their ball sticks clattered together
at a great rate--altogether as noisy and happy a crowd of children as
can be found anywhere in the world.

In addition to the athletic training, which begins two or three weeks
before the regular game, each player is put under a strict *gaktûnta*,
or tabu, during the same period. He must not eat the flesh of a rabbit
(of which the Indians generally are very fond) because the rabbit is a
timid animal, easily alarmed and liable to lose its wits when pursued by
the hunter. Hence the ball player must abstain from it, lest he too
should become disconcerted and lose courage in the game. He must also
avoid the meat of the frog (another item on the Indian bill of fare)
because the frog's bones are brittle and easily broken, and a player who
should partake of the animal would expect to be crippled in the first
inning. For a similar reason he abstains from eating the young of any
bird or animal, and from touching an infant. He must not eat the fish
called the hog-sucker, because it is sluggish in its movements. He must
not eat the herb called *atûnka* or Lamb's Quarter (*Chenopodium
album*), which the Indians use for greens, because its stalk is easily
broken. Hot food and salt are also forbidden, as in the medical
gaktûnta. The tabu always lasts for seven days preceding the game, but
in most cases is enforced for twenty-eight days--*i. e.*, 4 x 7--four
and seven being sacred numbers. Above all, he must not touch a woman,
and the player who should violate this regulation would expose himself
to the summary vengeance of his fellows. This last tabu continues also
for seven days after the game. As before stated, if a

{p. 111}

woman even so much as touches a ball stick on the eve of a game it is
thereby rendered unfit for use. As the white man's law is now paramount,
extreme measures are seldom resorted to, but in former days the
punishment for an infraction of this regulation was severe, and in some
tribes the penalty was death. Should a player's wife be with child, he
is not allowed to take part in the game under any circumstances, as he
is then believed to be heavy and sluggish in his movements, having lost
just so much of his strength as has gone to the child. At frequent
intervals during the training period the shaman takes the players to
water and performs his mystic rites, as will be explained further on.
They are also "scratched" on their naked bodies, as at the final game,
but now the scratching is done in a haphazard fashion with a piece of
bamboo brier having stout thorns which leave broad gashes on the backs
of the victims.

When a player fears a particular contestant on the other side, as is
frequently the case, his own shaman performs a special incantation,
intended to compass the defeat and even the disabling or death of his
rival. As the contending sides always belong to different settlements,
each party makes all these preliminary arrangements without the
knowledge of the other, and under the guidance of its own shamans,
several of whom are employed on a side in every hotly contested game.
Thus the ball play becomes as well a contest between rival shamans.
Among primitive peoples the shaman is in truth all-powerful, and even so
simple a matter as the ball game is not left to the free enjoyment of
the people, but is so interwoven with priestly rites and influence that
the shaman becomes the most important actor in the play.

Before introducing the ball dance it is in place here to describe the
principal implements of the game, the ball and ball stick. The ball now
used is an ordinary leather-covered ball, but in former days it was made
of deer hair and covered with deer skin. In California the ball is of
wood. The ball sticks vary considerably among different tribes. As
before stated, the Cherokee player uses a pair, catching the ball
between them and throwing it in the same way.

The stick is something less than three feet in length and in its general
appearance closely resembles a tennis racket, or a long wooden spoon,
the bowl of which is a loose network of thongs of twisted squirrel skin
or strings of Indian hemp. The frame is made of a slender hickory stick,
bent upon itself and so trimmed and fashioned that the handle seems to
be one solid round piece, when in fact it

{p. 112}

is double. The other southern tribes generally used sticks of the same
pattern. Among the Sioux and Ojibwa of the north the player uses a
single stick bent around at the end so as to form a hoop, in which a
loose netting is fixed. The ball is caught up in this hoop and held
there in running by waving the stick from side to side in

 

<img src="11200.jpg" width="300" height="470" />

 

INSTRUMENTS OF THE GAME.

|                    |               |             |
|--------------------|---------------|-------------|
| 1 Iroquois.        | 3\. Ojibwa.   | 5\. Drum.   |
| 2\. Passamaquoddy. | 4\. Cherokee. | 6\. Rattle. |

 

a peculiarly dextrous manner. In the St. Lawrence region and Canada, the
home of *La Crosse*, the stick is about four and a half feet long, and
is bent over at the end like a shepherd's crook, with

 

<img src="11300.jpg" width="600" height="425" />

CHOCTAW BALL-PLAY DANCE IN 1832-FROM CATLIN.

 

{p. 114}

the netting extending half way down its length. The Passamaquoddy
Indians of Maine use a stick with a strong, closely woven netting, which
enables the stick to be used for batting. The sticks are ornamented with
designs cut or burnt into the wood, and are sometimes further adorned
with paint and feathers.

On the night preceding the game each party holds the ball-play dance in
its own settlement. On the reservation the dance is always held on
Friday night, so that the game may take place on Saturday afternoon, in
order to give the players and spectators an opportunity to sleep off the
effects on Sunday. It may be remarked here in parenthesis that the
Cherokee word for Sunday signifies "when everybody does nothing all day
long," showing that they fully appreciate its superior advantages as a
day of rest. The dance must be held close to the river, to enable the
players to "go to water" during the night, but the exact spot selected
is always a matter of uncertainty, up to the last moment, excepting with
a chosen few. If this were not the case a spy from the other settlement
might endeavor to insure the defeat of the party by strewing along their
trail a soup made of the hamstrings of rabbits, which would have the
effect of rendering the players timorous and easily confused.

The dance begins soon after dark on the night preceding the game and
lasts until daybreak, and from the time they eat supper before the dance
until after the game, on the following afternoon, no food passes the
lips of the players. On the occasion in question the young men of Yellow
Hill were to contend against those of Raven Town, about ten miles
further up the river, and as the latter place was a large settlement,
noted for its adherence to the old traditions, a spirited game was
expected. My headquarters were at Yellow Hill, and as the principal
shaman of that party was my chief informant and lived in the same house
with me, he kept me well posted in regard to all the preparations.
Through his influence I was enabled to get a number of good photographic
views pertaining to the game, as well as to observe all the shamanistic
ceremonies, which he himself explained, together with the secret prayers
recited during their performance. On a former occasion I attempted to
take views of the game, but was prevented by the shamans, on the ground
that such a proceeding would destroy the efficacy of their incantations.

Each party holds a dance in its own settlement, the game itself taking
place about midway between. The Yellow Hill men were to have their dance
up the river, about half a mile from my house.

{p. 115}

We started about 9 o'clock in the evening--for there was no need to
hurry--and before long began to meet groups of dark figures by twos and
threes going in the same direction or sitting by the roadside awaiting
some lagging companions. It was too dark to distinguish faces, but
familiar voices revealed the identity of the speakers, and among them
were a number who had come from distances of six or eight miles. As we
drew nearer, the measured beat of the Indian drum fell upon the ear, and
soon we saw the figures of the dancers outlined against the firelight,
while the soft voices of the women as they sang the chorus of the ball
songs mingled their plaintive cadences with the shouts of the men.

The spot selected for the dance was a narrow strip of gravelly bottom,
where the mountain came close down to the water's edge. The tract was
only a few acres in extent and was covered with large trees, their tops
bound together by a network of wild grape-vines which hung down on all
sides in graceful festoons. From the road the ground sloped abruptly
down to this bottom, while almost overhead the mountain was dimly
outlined through the night fog, and close at hand one of the rapids, so
frequent in these mountain streams, disturbed the stillness of the night
with its never-ceasing roar.

Several fires were burning and in the fitful blaze the trees sent out
long shadows to melt into the surrounding darkness, while just within
the circle of light, leaning against the trees or stretched out upon the
ground, were the Indians, the women with their motionless figures
muffled up in white sheets seeming like ghosts returned to earth, and
the babies, whose mothers were in the dance, laid away under the bushes
to sleep, with only a shawl between them and the cold ground. Around the
larger fire were the dancers, the men stripped as for the game, with
their ball-sticks in their hands and the firelight playing upon their
naked bodies. It was a; weird, wild picture, not easily effaced from the
memory.

The ball-play dance is participated in by both sexes, but differs
considerably from any other of the dances of the tribe, being a dual
affair throughout. The dancers are the players of the morrow, with seven
women, representing the seven Cherokee clans. The men dance in a circle
around the fire, chanting responses to the sound of a rattle carried by
another performer, who circles around on the outside, while the women
stand in line a few feet away and dance to and fro, now advancing a few
steps toward the men, then wheeling and dancing away from them, but all
the while

{p. 116}

keeping time to the sound of the drum and chanting the refrain to the
ball songs sung by the drummer, who is seated on the ground on the side
farthest from the fire. The rattle is a gourd fitted with a handle and
filled with small pebbles, while the drum resembles a small keg with a
head of ground-hog leather. The drum is partly filled with water, the
head being also moistened to improve the tone, and is beaten with a
single stick. Men and women dance separately throughout, the music, the
evolutions, and the songs being entirely distinct, but all combining to
produce an harmonious whole. The women are relieved at intervals by
others who take their places, but the men dance in the same narrow
circle the whole night long, excepting during the frequent halts for the
purpose of going to water.

At one side of the fire are set up two forked poles, supporting a third
laid horizontally, upon which the ball sticks are crossed in pairs until
the dance begins. As already mentioned, small pieces from the wing of
the bat are sometimes tied to these poles, and also to the rattle used
in the dance, to insure success in the contest. The skins of several
bats and swift-darting insectivorous birds were formerly wrapped up in a
piece of deerskin, together with the cloth and beads used in the
conjuring ceremonies later on, and hung from the frame during the dance.
On finally dressing for the game at the ball ground the players took the
feathers from these skins to fasten in their hair or upon their ball
sticks to insure swiftness and accuracy in their movements. Sometimes
also hairs from the whiskers of the bat are twisted into the netting of
the ball sticks. The players are all stripped and painted, with feathers
in their hair, just as they appear in the game. When all is ready an
attendant takes down the ball sticks from the frame, throwing them over
his arm in the same fashion, and, walking around the circle, gives to
each man his own. Then the rattler, taking his instrument in his hand,
begins to trot around on the outside of the circle, uttering a sharp
*Hï!* to which the players respond with a quick *Hi-hï'!* while slowly
moving around the circle with their ball sticks held tightly in front of
their breasts, Then, with a quicker movement, the song changes to
*Ehu'!* and the response to *Hähï'!--Ehu'! Hähï'! Ehu'! Hähï'!* Then,
with a prolonged shake of the rattle, it changes again to *Ahiye'!* the
dancers responding with the same word *Ahiye'!* but in a higher key; the
movements become more lively and the chorus louder, till at a given
signal with the rattle the players clap their

{p. 117}

ball sticks together, and facing around, go through the motions of
picking up and tossing an imaginary ball. Finally with a grand rush they
dance up close to the women, and the *Hu-u'!* part of the performance
ends with a loud prolonged *Hu-u'!* from the whole crowd.

In the meantime the women have taken position in a line a few feet away,
with their backs turned to the men, while in front of them the drummer
is seated on the ground, but with his back turned toward them and the
rest of the dancers. After a few preliminary taps on the drum he begins
a slow, measured beat and strikes up one of the dance refrains, which
the women take up in chorus. This is repeated a number of times until
all are in harmony with the tune, when he begins to improvise, choosing
words which will harmonize with the measure of the chorus and at the
same time be appropriate to the subject of the dance. As this requires a
ready wit in addition to ability as a singer, the selection of a drummer
is a matter of considerable importance, and that functionary is held in
corresponding estimation. He sings of the game on the morrow, of the
fine things to be won by the men of his party, of the joy with which
they will be received by their friends on their return from the field,
and of the disappointment and defeat of their rivals. Throughout it all
the women keep up the same minor refrain, like an instrumental
accompaniment to vocal music. As Cherokee songs are always in the minor
key, they have a plaintive effect, even when the sentiment is cheerful
or even boisterous, and are calculated to excite the mirth of one who
understands the language. This impression is heightened by the
appearance of the dancers themselves, for the women shuffle solemnly
back and forth all night long without ever a smile upon their faces,
while the occasional laughter of the men seems half subdued, with none
of the hearty ringing tones of the white man or the negro. The
monotonous repetition, too, is something intolerable to any one but an
Indian, the same words, to the same tune, being sometimes sung over and
over again for a half hour or more. Although the singer improvises as he
proceeds, many of the expressions have now become stereotyped and are
used at almost every ball-play dance. The song here given is a good type
of the class.

Through the kind assistance of Prof. John P. Sousa, director of the
Marine band, I am enabled to give also the musical notation.

The words have no fixed order of arrangement and the song may be
repeated indefinitely. *Higanuyahi* is the refrain sung by the

{p. 118}

women and has no meaning. The vowels have the Latin sound and û is the
French nasal *un*:

 

FIRST SONG.

<img src="11800.jpg" width="461" height="250" />

|                |                          |
|----------------|--------------------------|
| Hi'ganu'ya,    | hi'ganu'yahi'            |
| Hi'ganu'ya     | hi'ganu'yahi'            |
| Sâ'kwïli-te'ga | tsï'tûkata'sûni'!        |
| As'taliti'ski  | tsï'tûkata'sûni'!        |
| As'taliti'ski  | tsa'kwakilû'testi'!      |
| U'watu'hi      | tsï'tûkata'sûni'!        |
| Tï'kanane'hi   | a'kwakilû'tati'!         |
| Uwa'tutsû'hi   | tsï'tûkata'sûni'!        |
| Uwa'tutsû'hi   | tsï'tûkata'sûni'!        |
| I'geski'yu     | tsa'kwakilû'testi'!      |
| Tï'kanane'hi   | tsï'tûkata'sûni'!--Hu-û! |

 

Which may be freely rendered:

What a fine horse I shall win!  
I shall win a pacer!  
I shall be riding a pacer!  
I'm going to win a pretty one!  
A stallion for me to ride!  
What a pretty one I shall win!  
What a pretty one I shall ride!  
How proud I'll feel when riding him!  
I'm going, to win a stallion!--Hu-û!

{p. 119}

But *sic transit gloria!*--in these degenerate days the pacer is more
likely to be represented by a cheap jack-knife. Another very pretty
refrain is

SECOND SONG.

<img src="11900.jpg" width="500" height="129" />

Yo'wida'nuwe' Yo'widanu'-da'nuwe'.

At a certain stage of the dance a man, specially selected for the
purpose, leaves the group of spectators around the fire and retires a
short distance into the darkness in the direction of the rival
settlement. Then, standing with his face still turned in the same
direction, he raises his hand to his mouth and utters four yells, the
last prolonged into a peculiar quaver. He is answered by the players
with a chorus of yells--or rather yelps, for the Indian yell resembles
nothing else so much as the bark of a puppy. Then he comes running back
until he passes the circle of dancers, when he halts and shouts out a
single word, which may be translated, "They are already beaten!" Another
chorus of yells greets this announcement. This man is called the
*Talala*, or "woodpecker," on account of his peculiar yell, which is
considered to resemble the sound made by a woodpecker tapping on a dead
tree trunk. According to the orthodox Cherokee belief, this yell is
heard by the rival players in the other settle men--who, it will be
remembered, are having a ball dance of their own at the same time--and
so terrifies them that they lose all heart for the game. The fact that
both sides alike have a *Talala* in no way interferes with the theory.

At frequent intervals during the night all the players, accompanied by
the shaman and his assistant, leave the dance and go down to a retired
spot at the river's bank, where they perform the mystic rite known as
"going to water," hereafter to be described. While the players are
performing this ceremony the women, with the drummer, continue the dance
and chorus. The dance is kept up without intermission, and almost
without change, until daybreak. At the final dance green pine tops are
thrown upon the fire, so as to produce a thick smoke, which envelops the
dancers. Some

{p. 120}

mystic properties are ascribed to this pine smoke, but what they are I
have not yet learned, although the ceremony seems to be intended as an
exorcism, the same thing being done at other dances when there has
recently been a death in the settlement.

At sunrise the players, dressed now in their ordinary clothes, but
carrying their ball sticks in their hands, start for the ball ground,
accompanied by the shamans and their assistants. The place selected for
the game, being always about midway between the two rival settlements,
was in this case several miles above the dance ground and on the
opposite side of the river. On the march each party makes four several
halts, when each player again "goes to water" separately with the
shaman. This occupies considerable time, so that it is usually after
noon before the two parties meet on the ball ground. While the shaman is
busy with his mysteries in the laurel bushes down by the water's edge,
the other players, sitting by the side of the trail, spend the time
twisting extra strings for their ball sticks, adjusting their feather
ornaments and discussing the coming game. In former times the player
during these halts was not allowed. to sit upon a log, a stone, or
anything but the ground itself; neither was it permissible to lean
against anything excepting the back of another player, on penalty of
defeat in the game, with the additional risk of being bitten by a
rattlesnake. This rule is now disregarded, and it is doubtful if any but
the older men are aware that it ever existed.

On coming up from the water after the fourth halt the principal shaman
assembles the players around him and delivers an animated harangue,
exhorting them to do their utmost in the coming contest, telling them
that they will undoubtedly be victorious as the omens are all favorable,
picturing to their delighted vision the stakes to be won and the ovation
awaiting them from their friends after the game, and finally assuring
them in the mystic terms of the formulas that their adversaries Will be
driven through the four gaps into the gloomy shadows of the Darkening
Land, where they will perish forever from remembrance. The address,
delivered in rapid, jerky tones like the speech of an auctioneer, has a
very inspiriting effect upon the hearers and is frequently interrupted
by a burst of exultant yells from the players. At the end, with another
chorus of yells, they again take up the march.

On arriving in sight of the ball ground the *Talala* again comes to the
front and announces their approach with four loud yells,

{p. 121}

ending with a long quaver, as on the previous night at the dance. The
players respond with another yell, and then turn off to a convenient
sheltered place by the river to make the final preparations.

The shaman then marks off a small space upon the ground to represent the
ball field, and, taking in his hand a small bundle of sharpened stakes
about a foot in length, addresses each man in turn, telling him the
position which he is to occupy in the field at the tossing up of the
ball after the first inning, and driving down a stake to represent each
player until he has a diagram of the whole field spread out upon the
ground.

The players then strip for the ordeal of scratching. This painful
operation is performed by an assistant, in this case by an old man named
Standing Water. The instrument of torture is called a *kanuga* and
resembles a short comb with seven teeth, seven being also a sacred
number with the Cherokees. The teeth are made of sharpened splinters
from the leg bone of a turkey and are fixed in a frame made from the
shaft of a turkey quill, in such a manner that by a slight pressure of
the thumb they can be pushed out to the length of a small tack. Why the
bone and feather of the turkey should be selected I have not yet
learned, but there is undoubtedly an Indian reason for the choice.

The players having stripped, the operator begins by seizing the arm of a
player with one hand while holding the *kanuga* in the other, and
plunges the teeth into the flesh at the shoulder, bringing the
instrument down with a steady pressure to the elbow, leaving seven white
lines which become red a moment later, as the blood starts to the
surface. He now plunges the *kanaga* in again at another place near the
shoulder, and again brings it down to the elbow. Again and again the
operation is repeated until the victim's arm is scratched in
twenty-eight lines above the elbow. It will be noticed that twenty-eight
is a combination of four and seven, the two sacred numbers of the
Cherokees. The operator then makes the same number of scratches in the
same manner on the arm below the elbow. Next the other arm is treated in
the same way; then each leg, both above and below the knee, and finally
an **X** is scratched across the breast of the sufferer, the upper ends
are joined by another stroke from shoulder to shoulder, and a similar
pattern is scratched upon his back. By this time the blood is trickling
in little streams from nearly three hundred gashes. None of the
scratches are deep, but they are unquestionably very painful, as all

{p. 122}

agree who have undergone the operation. Nevertheless the young men
endure the ordeal willingly and almost cheerfully, regarding it as a
necessary part of the ritual to secure success in the game. In order to
secure a picture of one young fellow under the operation I stood with my
camera so near that I could distinctly hear the teeth tear through the
flesh at every scratch with a rasping sound that sent a shudder through
me, yet he never flinched, although several times he shivered with cold,
as the chill autumn wind blew upon his naked body. This scratching is
common in Cherokee medical practice, and is variously performed with a
brier, a rattlesnake's tooth, a flint, or even a piece of broken glass.
It was noted by Adair as early as 1775. To cause the blood to flow more
freely the young men sometimes scrape it off with chips as it oozes out.
The shaman then gives to each player a small piece of root, to which he
has imparted magic properties by the recital of certain secret formulas.
Various roots are used, according to the whim of the shaman, their
virtue depending entirely upon the ceremony of consecration. The men
chew these roots and spit out the juice over their limbs and bodies,
rubbing it well into the scratches, then going down to the water plunge
in and wash off the blood, after which they come out and dress
themselves for the game.

The modern Cherokee ball costume consists simply of a pair of short
trunks ornamented with various patterns in red or blue cloth, and a
feather charm worn upon the head. Formerly the breechcloth alone was
worn, as is still the case in some instances, and the strings with which
it was tied were purposely made weak, so that if seized by an opponent
in the scuffle the strings would break, leaving the owner to escape with
the loss of his sole article of raiment. This calls to mind a similar
custom among the ancient Greek athletes, the recollection of which has
been preserved in the etymology of the word gymnast. The ornament worn
in the hair is made up of an eagle's feathers, to give keenness of
sight; a deer tail, to give swiftness; and a snake's rattle, to render
the wearer terrible to his adversaries. If an eagle's feathers cannot be
procured, those of a hawk or any other swift bird of prey are used. In
running, the snake rattle is made to furnish a very good imitation of
the sound made by the rattlesnake when about to strike. The player also
marks his body in various patterns with paint or charcoal. The charcoal
is taken from the dance fire, and whenever possible is procured by
burning the wood of a tree which has been struck by

{p. 123}

 

<img src="12300.jpg" width="400" height="545" />

CHOCTAW BALL PLAYER IN 1832-FROM CATLIN.

 

{p. 124}

lightning, such wood being regarded as peculiarly sacred and endowed
with mysterious properties. According to one formula, the player makes a
cross over his heart and a spot upon each shoulder, using pulverized
charcoal procured from the shaman and made by burning together the wood
of a honey-locust tree and of a tree which has been struck by lightning,
*but not killed*. The charcoal is pulverized and put, together with a
red and a black bead, into an empty cocoon from which one end has been
cut off. This paint preparation makes the player swift like the
lightning and invulnerable as the tree that defies the thunderbolt, and
renders his flesh as hard and firm to the touch as the wood of the
honey-locust. Among the Choctaws, according to Catlin, a tail of horse
hair was also worn, so as to stream out behind as the player ran. Just
before dressing, the players rub their bodies with grease or the chewed
bark of the slippery elm or the sassafras, until their skin is slippery
as that of the proverbial eel.

A number of precautionary measures are also frequently resorted to by
the more prudent players while training in order to make assurance
doubly sure. They bathe their limbs with a decoction of the *Tephrosia
Virginiana* or Catgut in order to render their muscles tough like the
roots of that plant. They bathe themselves with a decoction of the small
rush (*Juncus tenuis*) which grows by the roadside, because its stalks
are always erect and will not lie flat upon the ground, however much
they may be stamped and trodden upon. In the same way they bathe with a
decoction of the wild crabapple or the ironwood, because the trunks of
these trees, even when thrown down, are supported and kept up from the
ground by their spreading tops. To make themselves more supple they whip
themselves with the tough stalks of the *Wä'takû* or Stargrass or with
switches made from the bark of a hickory sapling which has grown up from
under a log that has fallen across it, the bark being taken from the
bend thus produced in the sapling. After the first scratching the player
renders himself an object of terror to his opponents by eating a portion
of a rattlesnake which has been killed and cooked by the shaman. He rubs
himself with an eel skin to make himself slippery like the eel, and rubs
each limb down once with the fore and hind leg of a turtle because the
legs of that animal are remarkably stout. He applies to the shaman to
conjure a dangerous opponent, so that he may be unable to see the ball
in its flight, or may dislocate a wrist or break a leg. Sometimes the
shaman draws upon the ground

{p. 125}

an armless figure of his rival, with a hole where his heart should be.
Into this hole he drops two black beads, covers them with earth and
stamps upon them, and thus the dreaded rival is doomed, unless (and this
is always the saving clause) his own shaman has taken precautions
against such a result, or the one in whose behalf the charm is made has
rendered the incantation unavailing by a violation of some one of the
interminable rules of the gaktunta.

The players having dressed are now ready to "go to water" for the last
time, for which purpose the shaman selects a bend of the river where he
can look toward the east while facing up-stream. This ceremony of going
to water is the most sacred and impressive in the whole Cherokee ritual,
and must always be performed fasting, and in most cases also is preceded
by an all-night vigil. It is used in connection with prayers to obtain a
long life, to destroy an enemy, to win the love of a woman, to secure
success in the hunt and the ball play, and for recovery from a dangerous
illness, but is performed only as a final resort or when the occasion is
one of special importance. The general ceremonial and the principal
formulas are nearly the same in all cases. I have collected a number of
the formulas used on these various occasions, but it is impossible
within the limits of this paper to give more than a general idea of
their nature.

The men stand side by side looking down upon the water, with their ball
sticks clasped upon their breasts, while the shaman stands just behind
them, and an assistant kneeling at his side spreads out upon the ground
the cloth upon which are placed the sacred beads. These beads are of two
colors, red and black, each kind resting upon a cloth of the same color,
and corresponding in number to the number of players. The red beads
represent the players for whom tile shaman performs the ceremony, while
the black beads stand for their opponents, red being symbolic of power
and triumph, while black is emblematic of death and misfortune. All
being ready, the assistant hands to the shaman a red bead, which he
takes between the thumb and finger of his right hand; and then a black
bead, which he takes in the same manner in his left hand. Then, holding
his hands outstretched, with his eyes intently fixed upon the beads, the
shaman prays on behalf of his client to *Yûwï Gûnahi'ta*, the "Long
Man," the sacred name for the river:

"O Long Man, I come to the edge of your body. You are mighty and most
powerful. You bear up great logs and toss them

{p. 126}

about where the foam is white. Nothing can resist you. Grant me such
strength in the contest that my enemy maybe of no weight in my
hands--that I may be able to toss him into the air or dash him to the
earth." In a similar strain he prays to the Red Bat in the Sun Land to
make him expert in dodging; to the Red Deer to make him fleet of foot;
to the great Red Hawk to render him keen of sight, and to the Red
Rattlesnake to render him terrible to all who oppose him.

Then in the same low tone and broken accents in which all the formulas
are recited the shaman declares that his client (mentioning his name and
clan) has now ascended to the first heaven. As he continues praying he
declares that he has now reached the second heaven (and here he slightly
raises his hands); soon he ascends to the third heaven, and the hands of
the shaman are raised still higher; then in the same way he ascends to
the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth heaven, and finally, as he raises
his trembling hands aloft, he declares that the spirit of the man has
now risen to the seventh heaven, where his feet are resting upon the Red
Seats, from which they shall never be displaced.

Turning now to his client the shaman, in a low voice, asks him the name
of his most dreaded rival on the opposite side. The reply is given in a
whisper, and the shaman, holding his hands outstretched as before, calls
down the most withering curses upon the head of the doomed victim,
mentioning him likewise by name and clan. He prays to the Black Fog to
cover him so that he may be unable to see his way; to the Black
Rattlesnake to envelop him in its slimy folds; and at last to the Black
Spider to let down his black thread from above, wrap it about the soul
of the victim and drag it from his body along the black trail to the
Darkening Land in the west, there to bury it in the black coffin under
the black clay, never to reappear. At the final imprecation he stoops
and, making a hole in the soft earth with his finger (symbolic of
stabbing the doomed man to the heart), drops the black bead into it and
covers it from sight with a vicious stamp of his foot; then with a
simultaneous movement each man dips his ball sticks into the water, and
bringing them up, touches them to his lips; then stooping again he dips
up the water in his hand and laves his head and breast.

Below is given a translation of one of these formulas, from the
collection of original Cherokee manuscripts obtained by the writer. The
formulistic name for the player signifies "admirer

{p. 127}

or lover of the ball play." The shaman directs his attention alternately
to his clients and their opponents, looking by turns at the red or the
black bead as he prays. He raises his friends to the seventh heaven and
invokes in their behalf the aid of the bat and a number of birds, which,
according to the Cherokee belief, are so keen of sight and so swift upon
the wing as never to fail to seize their intended prey. The opposing
players, on the other hand, are put under the earth and rendered like
the terrapin, the turtle, the mole, and the bear--all slow and clumsy of
movement. Blue is the color symbolic of defeat, red is typical of
success, and white

signifies joy and happiness. The exultant whoop or shout of the players
is believed to bear them on to victory, as trees are carried along by
the resistless force of a torrent:

"THIS IS TO TAKE THEM TO WATER FOR THE BALL PLAY."

"Sgë! Now, where the white thread has been let down, quickly we are
about to inquire into the fate of the lovers of the ball play.

They are of *such a* descent. They are called *so and so*. (As they
march) they are shaking the road which shall never be joyful. The
miserable terrapin has fastened himself upon them as they go about. They
are doomed to failure. They have become entirely blue.

But now my lovers of the ball play have their roads lying down in this
direction. The Red Bat has come and become one with them. There, in the
first heaven, are the pleasing stakes. There, in the second heaven, are
the pleasing stakes. The Peewee has come and joined them. Their ball
sticks shall be borne along by the immortal whoop, never to fail them in
the contest.

But as for the lovers of the ball play on the other side, the common
turtle has fastened himself to them as they go about. There, under the
earth, they are doomed to failure.

There, in the third heaven, are the pleasing stakes. The Red Tla'niwä
has come and made himself one of them, never to be defeated. There, in
the fourth heaven, are the pleasing stakes. The Crested Flycatcher has
come and joined them, that they may never be defeated. There, in the
fifth heaven, are the pleasing stakes. The Martin has come and joined
them, that they may never be defeated.

The other lovers of the ball play--the Blue Mole has become one with
them, that they may never feel triumphant. They are doomed to failure.

{p. 128}

There, in the sixth heaven, the Chimney Swift has become one with them,
that they may never be defeated. There are the pleasing stakes. There,
in the seventh heaven, the Dragonfly has become one of them, that they
may never be defeated. There are the pleasing stakes.

As for the other lovers of the ball play, the Bear has come and fastened
himself to them, that they may never be triumphant. He has caused the
stakes to slip out of their hands and their share has dwindled to
nothing. Their fate is forecast.

Sgë! Now let me know that the twelve (runs) are mine, O White Dragonfly.
Let me know that their share is mine--that the stakes are mine. Now he
\[the rival player\] is compelled to let go his hold upon the stakes.
They \[the shaman's clients\] are become exultant and gratified. Yû!"

This ceremony ended, the players form in line, headed by the shaman, and
march in single file to the ball ground, where they find awaiting them a
crowd of spectators--men, women and children--sometimes to the number of
several hundred, for the Indians always turn out to the ball play, no
matter how great the distance, from old Big Witch, stooping under the
weight of nearly a hundred years, down to babies slung at their mothers'
backs. The ball ground is a level field by the river side, surrounded by
the high timber-covered mountains. At either end are the goals, each
consisting of a pair of upright poles, between which the ball must be
driven to make a run, the side which first makes twelve home runs being
declared the winner of the game and the stakes. The ball is furnished by
the challengers, who sometimes try to select one so small that it will
fall through the netting of the ball sticks of their adversaries; but as
the others are on the lookout for this, the trick usually fails of its
purpose. After the ball is once set in motion it must be picked up only
with the ball sticks, although after having picked up the ball with the
sticks the player frequently takes it in his hand and, throwing away the
sticks, runs with it until intercepted by one of the other party, when
he throws it, if he can, to one of his friends further on. Should a
player pick up the ball with his hand, as sometimes happens in the
scramble, there at once arises all over the field a chorus of *Uwâ'yï
Gûtï! Uwâ'yï Gûtï!* "With the hand! With the hand!"--equivalent to our
own Foul! Foul! and that inning is declared a draw.

{p. 129}

While our men are awaiting the arrival of the other party their friends
crowd around them, and the women throw across their outstretched ball
sticks the pieces of calico, the small squares of sheeting used as
shawls, and the bright red handkerchiefs so dear to the heart of the
Cherokee, which they intend to stake upon the game. It may be as well to
state that these handkerchiefs take the place of hats, bonnets, and
scarfs, the women throwing them over their heads in shawl fashion and
the men twisting them like turbans about their hair, while both sexes
alike fasten them about their throats or use them as bags for carrying
small packages. Knives, trinkets, and sometimes small coins are also
wagered. But these Cherokee to-day are poor indeed. Hardly a man among
them owns a horse, and never again will a chief bet a thousand dollars
upon his favorites, as was done in Georgia in 1834. To-day, however, as
then, they will risk all they have.

Now a series of yells announces the near approach of the men from Raven
Town, and in a few minutes they come filing out from the
bushes-stripped,--scratched, and decorated like the others, carrying
their ball sticks in their hands and headed by a shaman. The two parties
come together in the center of the ground, and for a short time the
scene resembles an auction, as men and women move about, holding up the
articles they propose to wager on the game and bidding for stakes to be
matched against them. The betting being ended, the opposing players draw
Up in two lines facing each other, each man with his ball sticks laid
together upon the ground in front of him, with the heads pointing toward
the man facing him. This is for the purpose of matching the players so
as to get the same number on each side; and should it be found that a
player has no antagonist to face him, he must drop out of the game. Such
a result frequently happens, as both parties strive to keep their
arrangements secret up to the last moment. There is no fixed number on a
side, the common quota being from nine to twelve. Catlin, indeed,
speaking of the Choctaws, says that "it is no uncommon, occurrence for
six or eight hundred or a thousand of these young men to engage in a
game of ball, with five or six times that number of spectators;" but
this was just after the removal, while the entire nation was yet camped
upon the prairie in the Indian Territory. It would have been utterly
impossible for the shamans to prepare a thousand players, or even
one-fourth of that number, in the regular way, and in Catlin's spirited
description of the game the ceremonial

{p. 130}

part is chiefly conspicuous by its absence. The greatest number that I
ever heard of among the old Cherokee was twenty-two on a side. There is
another secret formula to be recited by the initiated at this juncture,
and addressed to the "Red Yahulu" or hickory, for the purpose of
destroying the efficiency of his enemy's ball sticks.

During the whole time that the game is in progress the shaman, concealed
in the bushes by the water side, is busy with his prayers and
incantations for the success of his clients and the defeat of their
rivals. Through his assistant, who acts as messenger, he is kept advised
of the movements of the players by seven men, known as counselors,
appointed to watch the game for that purpose. These seven counselors
also have a general oversight of the conjuring and other proceedings at
the ball-play dance. Every little incident is regarded as an omen, and
the shaman governs himself accordingly.

An old man now advances with the ball, and standing at one end of the
lines, delivers a final address to the players, telling them that
*Une'\`lanû'hï*, "the Apportioner"--the sun--is looking down upon them,
urging them to acquit themselves in the game as their fathers have done
before them; but above all to keep their tempers, so that none may have
it to say that they got angry or quarreled, and that after it is over
each one may return in peace along the white trail to rest in his white
house. White in these formulas is symbolic of peace and happiness and
all good things. He concludes with a loud "Ha! *Taldu-gwü'*! Now for the
twelve!" and throws the ball into the air.

Instantly twenty pairs of ball sticks clatter together in the air, as
their owners spring to catch the ball in its descent. In the scramble it
usually happens that the ball falls to the ground, when it is picked up
by one more active than the rest. Frequently, however, a man will
succeed in catching it between his ball sticks as it falls, and,
disengaging himself from the rest, starts to run with it to the goal;
but before he has gone a dozen yards they are upon him, and the whole
crowd goes down together, rolling and tumbling over each other in the
dust, straining and tugging for possession of the ball, until one of the
players manages to extricate himself from the struggling heap and starts
off with the ball. At once the others spring to their feet and, throwing
away their ball sticks, rush to intercept him or to prevent his capture,
their black hair streaming out behind and their naked bodies glistening
in the sun as they run. The scene is constantly changing. Now the
players are all together

{p. 131}

at the lower end of the field, when suddenly, with a powerful throw, a
player sends the ball high over the heads of the spectators and into the
bushes beyond. Before there is time to realize it, here they come with a
grand sweep and a burst of short, sharp Cherokee exclamations, charging
right into the crowd, knocking men and women to right and left and
stumbling over dogs and babies in their frantic efforts to get at the
ball.

It is a very exciting game as well as a very rough one, and in its
general features is a combination of base ball, {*sic*} football, and
the old-fashioned shinny. Almost everything short of murder is allowable
in the game, and both parties sometimes go into the contest with the
deliberate purpose of crippling or otherwise disabling the best players
on the opposing side. Serious accidents are common. In the last game
which I witnessed one man was seized around the waist by a powerfully
built adversary, raised up in the air and hurled down upon the ground
with such force as to break his collar-bone. His friends pulled him out
to one side and the game went on. Sometimes two men lie struggling on
the ground, clutching at each other's throats, long after the ball has
been carried to the other end of the field, until the "drivers," armed
with long, stout switches, come running up and belabor both over their
bare shoulders until they are forced to break their hold. It is also the
duty of these drivers to gather the ball sticks thrown away in the
excitement and restore them to their owners at the beginning of the next
inning.

When the ball has been carried through the goal, the players come back
to the center and take position in accordance with the previous
instructions of their shamans. The two captains stand facing each other
and the ball is then thrown up by the captain of the side which won the
last inning. Then the struggle begins again, and so the game goes on
until one party scores twelve runs and is declared the victor and the
winner of the stakes.

As soon as the game is over, usually about sundown, the winning players
immediately go to water again with their shamans and perform another
ceremony for the purpose of turning aside the revengeful incantations of
their defeated rivals. They then dress, and the crowd of hungry players,
who have eaten nothing since they started for the dance the night
before, make a combined attack on the provisions which the women now
produce from their shawls and baskets. It should be mentioned that, to
assuage thirst during the game, the players are allowed to drink a sour
preparation made from green grapes and wild crabapples.

{p. 132}

Although the contestants on both sides are picked men and strive to win,
straining every muscle to the utmost, the impression left upon my mind
after witnessing a number of games is that the same number of athletic
young white men would have infused more robust energy into the
play--that is, provided they could stand upon their feet after all the
preliminary fasting, bleeding, and loss of sleep. Before separating, the
defeated party usually challenges the victors to a second contest, and
in a few days preparations are actively under way for another game.

{p. 133}

# <span id="ojibwa">REMARKS ON OJIBWA BALL PLAY.</span>

##### American Anthropologist Vol. III. (Old Series) WASHINGTON, D. C., APRIL, 1890. No. 2. pp. 133-6.

#### BY W. J. HOFFMAN, M. D.

Thus far the greater number of Ojibwa Indians of northern Minnesota have
been slow to adopt the pursuits of their more civilized neighbors,
preferring to spend their time in fishing and hunting and in gathering
fruits and berries. In consequence of this mode of life the young men
generally possess great endurance and are in excellent physical
condition.

During the spring, summer, and autumn much of their time is spent in
athletic sports, not so much for pleasure as for the desire to win the
wagers of their opponents. The usual sports consist of horse racing,
running, and ball play. To become a good ball player one must
necessarily be possessed of speed and endurance.

Some of the local Indian runners have adopted an ingenious contrivance
to aid in strengthening the muscles of the legs. While at their ordinary
avocations, they wear about the ankles a thin bag of shot, sufficiently
long to reach around the leg and admit of being tied over the instep.
This is removed when occasion requires, and

 

<img src="13300.jpg" width="256" height="199" />

 

they claim that they feel very light-footed. Two years ago one of the
champion Ojibwa runners walked twenty-three miles after dinner, and next
morning ran one hundred yards in ten and one-quarter seconds, easily
beating his professional opponents.

The total number of Indians living in the vicinity of White Earth
agency, Minnesota, is about two thousand, and it is easy to muster

{p. 134}

from eighty to one hundred ball players, who are divided into sides of
equal number. If the condition of the ground permits, the two posts or
goals are planted about one-third of a mile apart. Thus one stake only
is used as a goal instead of two, as is the rule with the southern
tribes. The best players of either side gather at the center of the
ground. The poorer players arrange themselves around their respective
goals, while the heaviest in weight scatter across the field between the
starting point and the goals.

The ball is tossed into the air in the center of the field. As soon as
it descends it is caught with the ball stick by one of the players, when
he immediately sets out at full speed towards the opposite goal. If too
closely pursued, or if intercepted by an opponent, he throws the ball in
the direction of one of his own side, who takes up the race.

The usual method of depriving a player of the ball is to strike the
handle of the ball stick so as to dislodge the ball; but this is
frequently a difficult matter on account of a peculiar horizontal motion
of the ball stick maintained by the runner. Frequently the

 

<img src="13400.jpg" width="400" height="92" />

 

ball carrier is disabled by being struck across the arm or leg, thus
compelling his retirement. Severe injuries occur only when playing for
high stakes or when ill-feeling exists between some of the players.

Should the ball carrier of one side reach the opposite goal, it is
necessary for him to throw the ball so that it touches the post. This is
always a difficult matter, because, even if the ball be well directed,
one of the numerous players surrounding the post as guards may intercept
it and throw it back into the field. In this manner a single inning may
be continued for an hour or more. The game may come to a close at the
end of any inning by mutual agreement of the players, that side winning
the greater number of scores being declared the victor.

The ball used in this game is made by wrapping thin strands of

{p. 135}

buckskin and covering the whole with a piece of the same. It is about
the size of a base ball, though not so heavy.

The stick is of the same pattern as that used at the beginning of the
present century by the Missisaugas, the Ojibwa of the eagle totem of the
Province of Ontario. (See cut, p. 134.)

The game played by the Dakota Indians of the tipper Missouri was
probably learned from the Ojibwa, as these two tribes have been upon
amicable terms for many years; the ball sticks are identical in
construction and the game is played in the same manner. Sometimes,
however, the goals at either end of the ground consist of two heaps of
blankets about twenty feet apart, between which the ball is passed.

When the Dakota play a game the village is equally divided into sides. A
player offers as a wager some article of clothing, a robe, or a blanket,
when an opponent lays down an object of equal value. This parcel is laid
aside and the next two deposit their stakes, and so on until all have
concluded. The game then begins, two of the three innings deciding the
issue.

When the women play against the men, five of the women are matched
against one of the latter. A mixed game of this kind is very amusing.
The fact that among the Dakota women are allowed to participate in the
game is considered excellent evidence that the game is a borrowed one.
Among most other tribes women are not even allowed to touch a ball
stick.

The players frequently hang to the belt the tail of a deer, antelope, or
some other fleet animal, or the wings of swift-flying birds, with the
idea that through these they are endowed with the swiftness of the
animal. There are, however, no special preparations preceding a game, as
feasting or fasting, dancing, etc.--additional evidence that the game is
less regarded among this people.

The Chactas, Chickasaws, and allied tribes of Indian Territory
frequently perform acts of conjuring in the ball field to invoke the
assistance of their tutelary daimons. The games of these Indians are
much more brutal than those of the northern tribes. The game sticks are
longer, and made of hickory, and blows are frequently directed so as to
disable a runner.
