[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gto05)  [Next](gto07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# GISLI THE OUTLAW.

### CHAPTER 1.

### THE THRALL'S CURSE.

AT the end of the days of Harold Fairhair there was a mighty lord in
Norway whose name was Thorkel Goldhelm, and he dwelt in Surnadale in
North Mæren. He had a wedded wife, and three sons by her. The name of
the eldest was Ari, the second was called Gisli, and the third
Thorbjorn. They were all young men of promise. There was a man too,
named Isi, who ruled over the Fjardarfolk. His daughter's name was
Ingibjorga, and she was the fairest of women. Ari, Thorkel's son, asked
her to wife, and she was wedded to him. He got a great dower with her,
and amongst the rest that she brought with her from her home was a man
named Kol: he was of high degree, but he had been taken captive in war,
and was called a Thrall. So he came with Ingibjorga to Surnadale.
Thorkel gave over to his son Ari a rich farm up in the dale, and there
he set up his abode, and was looked on as a most rising man.

But now our story goes on to tell of a man named Bjorn, nicknamed Bjorn
the Black. He was a Bearsark, and much given to duels. Twelve men went
at his heel, and besides he

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

was skilled in the black art, and no steel could touch his skin. No
wonder he was unbeloved by the people, for he turned aside as he listed
into the houses of men, and took a way their wives and daughters, and
kept them with him as long as he liked. All raised an outcry when he
came, and all were fain when he went away. Well, as soon as this Bjorn
heard that Ari had brought home a fair wife with a rich dower, he
thought he would have a finger in that pie. So he turned his steps
thither with his crew, and reached the house at eventide. As soon as Ari
and Bjorn met, Bjorn told him that he wanted to play the master in that
house, and that Ingibjorga, the housewife, should be at his beck and
call whenever he chose. As for Ari, he said he might please himself, go
away or stay, so he let Bjorn have his will. But Ari said he would not
go away, nor would he let him play the master there.

"Very well!" says Bjorn, "thou shalt have another choice. I will
challenge thee to fight on the island, if thou darest, three days from
this, and then we will try whose Ingibjorga shall be; and he, too, shall
take all the other's goods who wins the day. Now, mind, I will neither
ransom myself with money, nor will I suffer any one else to ransom
himself. One shall conquer and the other die."

Ari said he was willing enough to fight; so the Bearsarks went their way
and busked them to battle. To make a long story short, they met on the
island, and the end of their struggle was, that Ari fell; but the
Bearsark was not wounded, for no steel would touch him.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Now Bjorn thought he had won wife, and land, and goods, and he gave out
that he meant to go at even to Ari's house to claim his own. Then Gisli,
Ari's brother, answered and said: "It will soon be all over with me and
mine if this disgrace comes to pass, that this ruffian tramples us under
foot. But this shall never be, for I will challenge thee at once to
battle to-morrow morning. I would far rather fall on the island than
bear this shame."

"Well and good," says Bjorn; "thou and thy kith and kin shall all fall
one after the other, if ye dare to fight with me."

After that they parted, and Gisli went home to the house that Ari had
owned. Now the tidings were told of what had happened on the island, and
of Ari's death, and all thought that a great blow to the house. But
Gisli goes to Ingibjorga, and tells her of Ari's fall, and how he had
challenged Bjorn to the island, and how they were to fight the very next
morning.

"That is a bootless undertaking," said Ingibjorga, "and I fear it will
not turn out well for thee, unless thou hast other help to lean on."

"Ah!" said Gisli, "then I beg that thou and all else who are likeliest
to yield help will do their best that victory may seem more hopeful than
it now looks."

"Know this," says Ingibjorga, "that I was not so very fond of Ari that I
would not rather have had thee. There is a man," She said, "who,
methinks, is likeliest to be able to help in this matter, so that it may
be well with thee."

"Who is that?" asks Gisli.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

"It is Kol, my foster-father," was the answer; "for I ween he has a
sword that is said to be better than most others, though he seems to set
little store by it, for he calls it his 'Chopper;' but whoever wields
that sword wins the day."

So they sent for Kol, and he came to meet Gisli and Ingibjorga.

"Hast thou ever a good sword?" asked Gisli.

"My sword is no great treasure," answers Kol; "but yet there are many
things in the churl's cot which are not in the king grange."

"Wilt thou not lend me the sword for my duel with Bjorn?" said Gisli.

"Ah!" said Kol, "then will happen what ever happens with those things
that are treasures--you will never wish to give it up. But for all that,
I tell thee now that this sword will bite whatever its blow falls on, be
it iron or aught else; nor can its edge be deadened by spells, for it
was forged by the Dwarves, and its name is 'Graysteel.' And now make up
thy mind that I shall take it very ill if I do not get the sword back.
when I claim it."

"It were most unfair," says Gisli, "that thou shouldst not get back the
sword after I have had the use of it in my need."

Now Gisli takes the sword, and the night glides away, Next morn, ere
they went from home to the duel, Thorbjorn called out to Gisli his
brother, and said: "Which of us twain now shall fight with the Bearsark
to-day, and which of us shall slaughter the calf?"

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

"My counsel," said Gisli, "is, that thou shalt slaughter the calf while
I and Bjorn try our strength." He did not choose the easiest task.

So they set off to the island, and Gisli and Bjorn stood face to face on
it. Then Gisli bade Bjorn strike the first blow. "No one has ever made
me that offer before," said Bjorn; "indeed no one has ever challenged me
before this day save thou." So Bjorn made a blow at Gisli, but Gisli
threw his shield before him, and the sword hewed off from the shield all
that it smote from below the handle. Then Gisli smote at Bjorn in his
turn, and the stroke fell on the tail of the shield and shore it right
off, and then passed on and struck off his leg below the knee. One other
stroke he dealt him and took off his head. Then he and his men turned on
Bjorn's followers, and some are slain and some chased away into the
woods.

After that Gisli goes home and got good fame for this feat, and then he
took the farm as his heritage after Ari his brother; and he got
Ingibjorga also to wife, for he would not let a good woman go out of the
family. And time rolls on, but he did not give up the good sword, nor
had Kol ever asked for it.

One day they two met out of doors, and Gisli had "Graysteel" in his
hand, and Kol had an axe. Kol asked whether he thought the sword had
stood him in good stead, and Gisli was fall of its praises. "Well now"
said Kol, "I should like to have it back if thou thinkest it has done
thee good service in thy need."

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

"Wilt thou sell it?" says Gisli.

"No," says Kol.

"I will give thee thy freedom and goods, so that thou mayest fare
whither thou wilt with other men."

"I will not sell it," says Kol.

"Then I will give thee thy freedom, and lease or give thee land, and
besides I will give thee sheep and cattle and goods as much as thou
needest."

"I will not sell it a whit more for that," says Kol.

"Indeed," says Gisli, "thou art too wilful to cling to it thus. Put
thine own price on it--any sum thou choosest in money--and be sure I
will not stand at trifles if thou wilt come to terms in some way.
Besides, I will give thee thy freedom and a becoming match if thou hast
any liking for any one."

"There is no use talking about it," says Kol; "I will not sell it
whatsoever thou offerest. But now it just comes to what I feared at
first, when I said it was not sure whether thou wouldest be ready to
give the sword up if thou knewest what virtue was in it."

"And I too;" says Gisli, "will say what will happen. Good will befall
neither of us, for I have not the heart to give up the sword, and it
shall never come into any other man's hand than mine if I may have my
will."

Then Kol lifts up his axe, while Gisli brandished "Graysteel;" and each
smote at the other. Kol's blow fell on Gisli's head, so that it sank
into the brain, but the sword fell on Kors head, and did not bite; but
still the blow was so stoutly dealt

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

that the skull was shattered and the sword broke asunder. Then Kol said:

"It had been better now that I had got back my sword when I asked for
it; and yet this is but the beginning of the ill-luck which it will
bring on thy kith and kin." Thus both of them lost their lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Kolbein's Killing](gto07)
