[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pbd05)  [Next](pbd07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pomo Bear Doctors*, by S.A. Barrett, \[1917\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HIDING PLACES

Since custom prescribed that every person leaving a village told where
he was going and the purpose of his mission, it was difficult for a bear
doctor to get away, undetected, for the pursuit of his nefarious
practices. All his preparations must, therefore, be made in perfect
secrecy. Very frequently he gave as an excuse for his absence that he
intended to go in search of manzanita berries or hunting in some distant
locality, sometimes announcing a stay of several days. Since he was
forbidden to partake of food or water on the morning of the

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

day he wore the bear costume, he usually ate and drank heartily the
night before, and repaired to his hiding place before daybreak. To lend
color to his excuses, he [usually](errata.htm#0) brought home some game
or berries. As a rule these were not handled at all while wearing the
bear suit, although apparently it was believed that no penalty was
attached to doing so.

Whenever possible a bear doctor found some natural cave or secluded spot
in a deep canon, or in the most rugged mountains. If necessary, he dug a
cavern, as related in the foregoing myth, taking care to scatter the
fresh earth about in such a manner that it would not be detected. Such a
place of seclusion was called *yēlimo*, *būrakal* *yēlīmo*, or *kabē*
*ga*.

Near by a level "practice" ground, called *cīyō* *xe gai*, literally
"bear dance place," was prepared, where, the weather permitting, the
bear doctor performed the ceremonies connected with donning his suit. In
bad weather these rites were performed in the sheltered cavern. This
practice ground was simply a level place in the bottom of a canon near
the cavern. It was an elliptical clearing about twenty feet long by ten
to fifteen feet wide. No trail led to it, the bear doctor and his
assistant exercising the greatest care to obscure as much as possible
every evidence of their movements, not even a broken twig being left
about as a clue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Magic Suit](pbd07)
