[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc22000)  [Next](cc22002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>An Interest of no ordinary kind is excited in
the mind of the Biblical Student by the mention of ”Calvin’s Lectures On
Ezekiel.” The last Work which a great man leaves unfinished, because
arrested by the hand of death, becomes at once an heirloom to posterity.
After the lapse of nearly three hundred years, we read this affecting
sentence with a tear and a sigh: “When this last Lecture was completed,
that most illustrious man John Calvin, who had previously been weakened
by sickness, then became so much worse that he was compelled to lie on
his couch, and could not proceed further in his explanation of Ezekiel:
This is the reason why he stopped at the end of the twentieth chapter,
and did not complete the work so happily begun.” Afflicted as Calvin was
for the last few years of his life, the wonder is that he accomplished
so much in preaching, lecturing, and dictating; and although we have
still to mourn over so much unfinished, we are filled with astonishment
at the labors he achieved.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The vigor of his mind and the stores of his
learning are amply displayed in his Commentary On Ezekiel. And that the
modern reader may enter fully into those valuable explanations of the
text which he will find in the ensuing pages, it will be desirable to
furnish him with a slight sketch of the times in which this Prophet
lived. We shall then add such critical remarks as may illustrate our
Author’s exposition of the Sacred Text.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>“Thy sons shall be eunuchs in the palace of the
king of Babylon,” were the ominous words of Isaiah to a king of Judah,
and after the lapse of a century they were fulfilled to the letter.
Kings, and priests, and nobles, and people were all swept away by the
remorseless monarch, and planted here and there along the lenny banks of
the river Chebar. There Ezekiel pined in misery among three thousand
captives of rank, who, according to Josephus, graced the triumph of
Nebuchadnezzar. Either a priest or the son of a priest, (for the sense
is doubtful, <span id="ii-p4.1"></span>[Eze
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)<span id="ii-p4.1"></span>,.md) here
he was compelled to linger during twenty-two years of his life, while he
was wrapt in prophetic vision, and carried on the wings of the soul to
the city of his fathers. Here he tarried in body, while his spirit was
at home with the Cherubim within the Temple, among their wings and
wheels, and burning movements, and mysterious brightness. Here he often
gazed upwards into the firmament above him, and in the clear azure of an
eastern sky beheld the sapphire throne, and the appearance of the glory
of Jehovah resting majestically upon it! Here he experienced the
prophetic inspiration, and was strengthened to proclaim in Jehovah’s
Name the mysteries of punishments and desolation. He was permitted to
enunciate the great truths of God’s moral government of his ancient ones
— to proclaim the eternal connection between obedience and happiness,
transgression and ruin. Nor was he alone in his declarations of
vengeance against every man “that setteth up his idols in his heart.”
When he entered on his office, Jeremiah had completed the thirty-fourth
year of his apostleship, and was contemporary with him for at least
eight years. Amidst insult, obloquy, and scorn, he proclaimed before the
faithless king the coming hosts of the Chaldeans; while Zephaniah was
still prophesying in Judaea, and Daniel proclaiming the power of
holiness in the land of Babylon.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>Ezekiel is remarkably silent as to his personal
history, so that we are unable to ascertain his age, at either the
commencement or the close of his mission. Josephus supposes him to have
been but a youth when hurried from the land of his fathers, but
Havernick remarks with justice, that he displays so fully the matured
character of a priest in his intimate acquaintance with the details of
the Temple service, that he may well be supposed to have attained the
age of thirty before his removal.  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) The
death of his wife is the only personal event to which he refers, in the
ninth year of the Captivity, (<span id="ii-p6.1"></span>[Eze
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#018)<span id="ii-p6.1"></span>,.md) and
it seems probable that he spent the whole of his remaining life on the
banks of the Chebar. He had evidently acquired a commanding influence
over his fellow-prisoners, as their elders frequently came to enquire
concerning God’s message at his lips. (<span
id="ii-p6.2"></span>[Ezekiel 8](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p6.2"></span>; <span id="ii-p6.3"></span>[Ezekiel
19](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p6.3"></span>; <span
id="ii-p6.4"></span>[Ezekiel 20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p6.4"></span>; <span id="ii-p6.5"></span>[Ezekiel
23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#000)<span id="ii-p6.5"></span>.md) The
traditions respecting his death are various, but as they rest on no
solid foundation, they may be permitted to die out in the obscurity of
intentional silence.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>Before we can enter with satisfaction into any
views of the style and interpretation of an ancient author, it is
desirable to ascertain the genuineness and authenticity of the writing
on which we are about to comment. And as Biblical Criticism has made
great pretensions to advancement since the time of Calvin, it becomes
necessary for his modern Editor to be in some degree acquainted with its
progress, to be prepared to state some definite conclusions for the
guidance of less instructed enquirers.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>As to the Genuineness Of Ezekiel’s Writings, it
has never been seriously called in question by the learned, either Jew
or Christian. Some self-sufficient Critics have impugned the last nine
chapters: Their valueless arguments will be found, by those who wish to
search for such unsatisfactory materials, in Rosenmuller, while their
refutation is completed by Jahn, in his Introduction to the Sacred Books
of the Old Testament, and is rendered accessible to the mere English
reader by Hartwell Horne  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) So little
weight, however, is attached to such opinions, that even Gesenius allows
a “oneness of tone” to be so conspicuous throughout Ezekiel’s
Prophecies, as to forbid the suspicion that any portions of them are not
genuine. This Book formed part of the Canon in the Catalogues of Melito
and Origen, of Jerome and of the Talmud. Josephus, indeed, refers to two
Books of Ezekiel, probably dividing his *prophecies* into two parts. His
language  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) has necessarily given rise
to some discussion, which Eichhorn has set at rest as satisfactorily as
the data will allow.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

<span id="ii-p12"></span>The Arrangement Of The Various Predictions has
been the subject of a variety of opinions. Some have supposed that
Chronological Order has been interfered with, and that different
collections of the separate Prophecies might be made with advantage. But
Havernick, in his valuable Commentary, published as late as 1843,
maintains that the present arrangement is correct. It proceeds, he
asserts, in the order of time, and connects, as it ought to do, the
Prophecies against foreign nations with those against Israel and Judah.
Hence he divides the Book into the following nine Sections: —

<span id="ii-p13"></span>**1.** The Call to the Prophetic Office. (<span
id="ii-p13.1"></span>[Ezekiel 1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p13.1"></span>-3:15.)

<span id="ii-p14"></span>**2.** The Symbolical Representations
foretelling the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem. (<span
id="ii-p14.1"></span>[Eze 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii-p14.1"></span> through <span id="ii-p14.2"></span>[Ezekiel
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#000)<span id="ii-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii-p15"></span>**3.** A Series of Visions, a year and two
months later than the former. In these he is shown the Temple polluted
by the worship of Adonis, the consequent vengeance on the priests and
people, and the prospect of happier times and a purer worship. (<span
id="ii-p15.1"></span>[Ezekiel 8](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p15.1"></span>-11.)

<span id="ii-p16"></span>**4.** A Series of Reproofs and Warnings
against the prevailing sins and prejudices of his day. (<span
id="ii-p16.1"></span>[Ezekiel 12](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p16.1"></span>-19.)

<span id="ii-p17"></span>**5.** Another Series of Warnings, one year
later, still announcing the coming judgments. (<span
id="ii-p17.1"></span>[Ezekiel 20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p17.1"></span>-23.)

<span id="ii-p18"></span>**6.** Predictions, two years and five months
later, announcing the very day of the Siege Of Jerusalem, and assuring
the captives of its complete overthrow. (<span
id="ii-p18.1"></span>[Ezekiel 24](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii-p19"></span>**7.** Predictions against Foreign Nations.
(<span id="ii-p19.1"></span>[Ezekiel
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#000)<span id="ii-p19.1"></span>-32..md)

<span id="ii-p20"></span>**8.** After the Destruction of the City, The
Future Triumph of The Kingdom of God on Earth. (<span
id="ii-p20.1"></span>[Ezekiel 33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p20.1"></span>-39.)

<span id="ii-p21"></span>**9.** Symbolic Representations of The Times Of
Messiah, and the prosperity of the Kingdom of God. (<span
id="ii-p21.1"></span>[Ezekiel 40](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii-p21.1"></span>-48.)

<span id="ii-p22"></span>There is a negative merit in Calvin’s Lectures,
which has not been imitated by some later Commentators. He never makes
those observations on Ezekiel’s Style And Diction which would reduce him
to the level of a merely human writer. Grotius and Eichhorn, Lowth and
Michaelis dwell on his erudition and genius, and assign him the same
rank among the Hebrews which Aeschylus holds among the Greeks. They
praise his knowledge of architecture, and his skill in oratory. They
call him bold, vehement, tragical; “in his sentiments elevated, warm,
bitter, indignant; in his images fertile, magnificent, harsh, and
sometimes almost deformed; in his diction grand, weighty, austere,
rough, and sometimes uncultivated; abounding in repetition, not for the
sake of ornament and gracefulness, but through indignation and
violence.”  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)

<span id="ii-p24"></span>Such language as this clearly implies a very
different view of the Prophet’s character and mission from that taken by
Calvin. He looked upon him as a grand instrument in the hands of The
Most High, and would have instinctively felt it to be profane thus to
reduce him to the level of the Poets and Seers of heathenism. In this
feeling we ought to concur. The modern method of criticizing the style
and matter of The Hebrew Prophets deserves our warmest reprobation. They
are too often treated as if their thoughts and their language were only
of human origin. Their visions, their metaphors, and their parables, are
submitted to the crucible of a worldly alchemy, in entire forgetfulness
that these men were the special messengers of God. To them it was
commanded — “The word that I shall say unto thee, that shalt thou
speak.” “Thou canst not go beyond the word of The Lord, to say less or
more.” It is not for us to speak, as Bishop Lowth does, of a “remarkable
instance of that exaggeration which is deservedly esteemed the
characteristic of this poet.” And again, of “an image, suggested by the
former part of this Prophecy, happily introduced and well pursued.” All
such language as this, whether in praise or blame of the imagery and
expressions of the Prophets of the Old Testament, is highly irreverent.
It is scarcely consistent with simple and confiding views of Divine
inspiration. They assume principles of interpretation, and of exegesis,
totally at variance with that implicit confidence in the plenary
inspiration of the Prophets, with which the early reformers were imbued.

<span id="ii-p25"></span>And what have we gained by listening to the
teachers of Modern Germany, and passing by as antiquated the giant
expounders of Geneva? The question is an important one, and the answer
to it implies much laborious reading and much patient thought. It
requires some acquaintance with the writers on Biblical hermeneutics
from Calvin’s time to our own — some symmetry of mind to pass a judicial
sentence with candor and precision. This, at least, the casual reader
may perceive, viz., a striking difference between the modern Neologian
and the ancient Genevan tone in treating these sublime subjects; and the
question will recur, what shall we gain by deserting Calvin and taking
up with Eichhorn? That we may present the readers with some data for
estimating fairly our defense of Calvin, we will make a few extracts
from this well-known writer, selecting him simply as an average specimen
from many others of even greater celebrity. In the 545th section of his
introduction to the Old Testament,  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) he
speaks of his “originality,” of “the lively fiction of his inexhaustible
imagination,” and of his “gathering materials for his poems.” In a few
sections afterwards he adds, that his poems are “inventions,” and “a
work” of art,  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) and “manifest the wild
shoots of a heated imagination.”  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md)

<span id="ii-p29"></span>If this be the result of the elaborate
researches of modern times, then we may surely throw ourselves back into
the arms of older and sounder Commentators. They never delight in
banishing The Almighty from his own Word: they never treat him as a
stranger in his own land. His agency is with them no intermitting tide,
carrying a shifting wave of glory from strand to strand, and leaving
only a dreary waste of centuries between, strewed only with the wrecks
of his broken workmanship. The long line of Hebrew Seers were either
inspired of God, or their writings are deceptions.

<span id="ii-p30"></span>Men of Calvin’s faith and devotion believed
that beneath the surface of their imagery, and parables, and oriental
diction, lay concealed a living power which energized all this glowing
machinery, which marshaled the thoughts within the speaker’s mind, and
then clothed them in the burning words and the glowing phrases which
spoke alternately either joy or sadness to the hearer’s soul. If the
proverb of the Royal Sage is true — “Death and life are in the power of
the tongue,” then the Master-mind of the Divine Artist touched Ezekiel’s
tongue with living flame, and gave his language more elevation, dignity,
and majesty, than the most exalted genius, or the richest imagination
could accomplish. And if these views be comforting and refreshing to the
soul, we “gain a loss” by passing away from Geneva, as it was to Neology
as it is. For where are we to stop in our downward course? When we allow
ourselves to speak of the traditional creation-week of Moses, or the
rocks on which Ezekiel stranded, we are hastening on the high road to
the myths of Strauss, or the pantheism of Emerson and Parker.

<span id="ii-p31"></span>The voice of an Apostle should still sound in
our ears.” Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy or vain
deceit,” when we find M. Comte, in his remarkable work *“*Cours de
Philosophic Positive,” speaking of a radical incompatibility between
Theology and positive Philosophy — treating as chimerical all attempts
to reconcile Modern *Science* with Divine Revelation, and in reliance on
the irresistible tendency of our present scientific speculations,
entertaining the hope of getting rid of the “Hypothesis of a God.” (Tome
4:51. Lecon.) Our wisdom lies in resisting the first temptation to this
downward progress. If we allow Exchhorn and Gesenius to lead us into
discussions about the Prophet’s “polite genius”  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) instead of his divine inspiration, and to
attribute his language to the temper and talent of the man instead of to
the guiding power of God’s Holy Spirit, then there is no step of
skepticism and infidelity which we may not ultimately reach.

<span id="ii-p33"></span>This warning proceeds from no blind admirer of
antiquated error, and from no thoughtless despiser of modern science.
Let us have the freest and fullest right of search into all the language
of Ancient Prophecy: we claim and we court the minutest investigations,
while an experience of no limited extent leads us to reject the haughty
boastings of the last new skeptics over the writings of men, within the
fringes of whose shadow the present generation are not worthy to tread.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>It may now fairly *be* enquired, how far
Calvin’s Interpretations Of The Visions Of Ezekiel have been superseded
by the *researches* of modern times? And it may also be asked, whether
the speculations of modern German divines — the children of the
Reformation — have set aside the Biblical hermeneutics of their great
forerunner? Those questions are worthy of our attentive replies.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>The general principle of Calvin’s
Interpretation of The Visions of Ezekiel is an immediate appeal to the
miraculous interposition of God. He saw in them God acting directly and
powerfully on the Prophet’s mind, and through him on the people. He did
not consider them as merely illustrating God’s general Providence and
government of the world, or as portraying any ordinary operations of his
grace in the souls of the people; he looked upon them as representing a
miraculous and visible *interference* with the ordinary laws of the
Nation’s discipline. His perception of the obstinacy, ingratitude and
perverseness of the *Jews* was so great, that he *considered* their
remarkable idolatry and profaneness justified any breach of the laws of
nature, with the view of restoring them to *obedience,* and securing
their salvation. The moral end to be attained always appeared to him to
justify the physical disturbance of the laws which regulate our outward
existence. The inestimable value of the soul, when compared with
anything earthly, rendered no miracle improbable to his mind, if it only
tended to that ultimate result.

<span id="ii-p36"></span>Comparing the Interpretations of Calvin with
those of modern Continental Divines, we have no reason to conclude that
the views of the great Reformer have been superseded. The progress of
Biblical Criticism during the last 800 years has indeed been accompanied
with some clearer views of the details, but the fundamental principles
of these Lectures On Ezekiel have never been successfully impugned. The
Miracles of the Old Testament have been boldly assailed, both at home
and abroad, and no slight outpouring of infidel wrath has fallen upon
the Calvin interpretation of those of Ezekiel. Germany, the birthplace
of the Reformation, has been also the seed-bed of spurious Rationalism.
The novelty of any opinion on Biblical subjects has now become a
sufficient atonement for its absurdity, and he receives the greatest
applause from the many, who casts farthest from him whatsoever has
commanded the veneration of ages. The direct interposition of Jehovah’s
power in the affairs of men, as related in the writings of the Hebrews,
has lately exercised the ingenuity of German skeptics to an almost
incredible extent. The mysticism of the School of Schelling has rivaled
the extravagancies of the theory of accommodation proposed by the
celebrated Semler.

<span id="ii-p37"></span>Professors of theology in various celebrated
Universities have arisen, who have rejected with contempt whatever
portion of the Old Testament they could not reconcile with their own
individual reason, and who have rested their instruct, ions on
gratuitous assertions and groundless hypotheses, which make a larger
demand on our credulity than the Miracles do on our faith. Eichhorn,
Bonsdorf, Rosenmuller, and Wegscheider, are names with which the reader
of Foreign Theology has become too familiar. Their theories have now
given place to many a later development, including the speculative
Christology of Schleiermacher, and the fanciful myths of Strauss. Highly
as we value some of the grammatical and philosophical labors of this
School of Hebraists, we cannot but deem them morally incompetent to be
our guides in Scriptural interpretation. Far from despising the showy
guesses of genius, or the solid treasures of learning, we would pause
before we tender the homage of our admiration to those who profess to
reconcile the study of Divinity with what they term The Enquiring Spirit
of the Age. Our reverence must not be withdrawn from the piety and
simplicity of a Calvin, to be prostituted to the praise of a paradoxical
erudition, or a perverted ingenuity.

<span id="ii-p38"></span>Nor is our view of Calvin as a Commentator
overstated, in the opinion of one of the giants of orthodoxy of modern
Germany. Hengstenberg, who has earned undying repute by parrying the
deadly thrusts of the heroes of Rationalism, Dr. Wette Von Bohlen, Vatke
and Hitzig, characterizes Calvin by saying — “This man stands still
farther above his followers than above his predecessors. One cannot
sufficiently wonder how such a leader could have had such followers.
\[...\] It is impossible for any man who had carefully studied the
Commentaries of Calvin to become so thoroughly and consistently
superficial, as all of them show themselves to be.” For instance both
Von Bohlen and Vatke have asserted that there is no trace of the
existence of the Pentateuch in the Older Prophets, and hence they have
invented an *argumentum a silentio,* on which they lay it down as an
axiom, that the Older Prophets knew nothing of the Pentateuch, and that
the Law was for the first time committed to writing about the times of
Ezekiel!

<span id="ii-p39"></span>Doctrines such as these have been industriously
propagated by three critics of great influence, viz., Spencer, Le Clerc,
and J. D. Michaelis. The labors of Spencer in his work *De* *Legibus
Hebraeorum Ritualibus,* have, in recent times, found a kindred spirit in
the virulent hostility of Strauss. In both there is the same icy
coldness, the same religious weakness, the same attempt to destroy that
sense of God’s presence, so conspicuously honored in Calvin’s Comments
on this Prophet and the others. Spencer denies all spiritual meaning to
the Visions of God’s agents, and to the appearances of the Cherubim,
allowing, indeed, at times, a *ratio mystica et typica,* but retracting
it immediately on spiritual meaning being alluded to. The grossness of
his idea of God, and the lowness of his views of symbolical
interpretation, may be judged of from the following passage: — “Deus
interim, ut superstirtoni quovis pacto irefur obviam, ritus non paneos,
mulforum annorum et gentiurn usu cohonestatos, quos ineptias norat esse
tolerabiles in sacrorum suorum numerum adoptavit.” This shallow and
shortsighted system spread rapidly among those who boasted themselves to
be disciples of the early Reformation, because they no longer
appreciated the spiritual nature of the Prophetic symbols, as so ably
explained by Calvin in his Lectures.

<span id="ii-p40"></span>After Spencer we have Le Clerc, who is as
superficial and as unsatisfying as most Arminians of his School.
Whatever indicates a living God — taking interest in the punishment or
the consolation of the Hebrews, sending them Prophets to warn and to
threaten — he calls anthropomorphism. He only plays with the husk, and
finds no kernel. He had a kind of horror of any superhuman
interposition: Miracle and Prophecy were alike rejected; everything
beyond the operation of merely natural causes was put out of sight and
artfully explained away.

<span id="ii-p41"></span>At length Michaelis, in his *Mosaisches Recht,*
Mosaic Jurisprudence, and in his Annotations for the Unlearned, labored
most assiduously to unsettle the foundations of the Biblical Writings as
inspired.

<span id="ii-p42"></span>The Modern School, who look down contemptuously
upon THE Credulity Of The Early Reformers, and fancy themselves
emancipated from the trammels of their narrow systems, boasts in its
skill of detecting truth by means of Internal Evidence. This is a weapon
of two-edged power; and if used in the spirit of an earnest and sober
criticism, may be used successfully in support, of the integrity of the
Ancient Scriptures. Let the reader, in turning over these Lectures on
Ezekiel, endeavor to discover traces of the previous existence of The
Pentateuch: let him do for this Prophet what Havernick has done with
reference to Hosea and Amos — scrutinizing their writings line by line,
and tracing such expressions and idioms as prove them to have been
familiar with The Mosaic Writings, and he will become familiar with the
true use of this important instrument of Biblical Exegesis. Let him
afterwards consult with diligence and apply with discretion the
principles of Hengstenberg’s *Christologie des Alter Testaments.* He
will find it profoundly learned and unweariedly laborious, illustrating
fully the intimations of Ancient Prophecy respecting Messiah’s Kingdom.
The reader, who has set himself at the feet of Calvin, will discover it
to be a most satisfactory exposition of these Predictions. Its candor,
and honesty, and accomplished philology, stand out in strong contrast
with the arrogance of the Rationalists, and rebukes by its enlightened
orthodoxy the reckless skepticism of their system.

<span id="ii-p43"></span>Nor are such cautions without their use among
ourselves. The inferences from supposed Internal Evidence have, even in
our own country, been most wild and baseless. What must be our own
danger, when an intimate friend of Southey, Coleridge, and Mackintosh,
whose writings produced some influence on the literature of the day,
could gravely put forward the following expose of his views: *“I* have
attained the inference that *the feast of Purlin* is the Magophonia of
Darius; the 31st Ezekiel an elegy on the death of Cyrus killed by the
Massagetae; and the 14th Isaiah an elegy on the death of Cambyses, both
by the same author; whom, on the ground of internal evidence, I am
venturing to separate from among the different Prophets, and to call
Daniel, and who is, I think, the finest ode writer in the world. Nay,
Daniel is to claim of <span id="ii-p43.1"></span>[Ezekiel
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p43.1"></span> to 32,
and <span id="ii-p43.2"></span>[Ezekiel
35](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p43.2"></span> to 39;
of <span id="ii-p43.3"></span>[Jeremiah
46](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p43.3"></span> to 51;
and of <span id="ii-p43.4"></span>[Isaiah
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p43.4"></span> to 23,
and <span id="ii-p43.5"></span>[Isaiah
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p43.5"></span> to 13;
but of this last allotment I am doubtful.” Here we have a fair specimen
of the manner in which every unsound opinion may be propagated under the
specious plea of respecting the Internal Evidence.

<span id="ii-p44"></span>Another extract from the correspondence of this
writer will fully justify the warning which we have sounded against the
influence of such sophistical comments. “I am busied now in Theology,
and have actually drawn up a paper, ‘Who wrote the Wisdom of Solomon?’
which has for its object to prove that Jesus Christ wrote it: partly
from the Internal Evidence of passages descriptive of him, partly from
the External Evidence of the extreme veneration in which the Book was
held by the Apostolic characters.” These verily are the men of our day —
the enlightened teachers of a liberal Theology — the despisers of
antiquated credulity — and the authors of a new and improved method of
interpreting the Oracles of our God!

<span id="ii-p45"></span>The charge of credulity may be answered by
showing that even some of the chiefs of the Rationalist School have not
been free From Its Influence. The Scholars Of Europe Have Not Yet
Forgotten That Gesenius was imposed upon by the clumsy forgery of
Wagenfeld, who pretended to have discovered a Oreck Translation of the
lost Books of Sanchuniatho in a Portuguese monastery.  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) Had he relied a little more on External
than Internal Evidence, had he demanded a sight of the Greek Manuscript,
and also of the alleged Phoenician stone, he would have saved the
discredit of the discovery that a *patois* of Arabic, Maltese, and
Italian was palmed upon him for Phoenician, and that the celebrated
*Lapis Lydius* of Volney will ever after serve as a landmark to indicate
the credulity of this self-satisfied septic.

<span id="ii-p47"></span>How painfully interesting it has become to the
reader of Calvin to be made acquainted with the manner in which his
views of Prophetic Interpretation have been received and adopted by
later Biblical Scholars of the Continent. Three hundred years have
allowed ample time for the refutation or elucidation of his Comments.
The Christian Scholar who still holds fast the form of sound words
received through the earliest Reformers, must grievously lament the sad
degeneracy of Continental Theology. And it may here be desirable to take
a slight review of the growth and progress of theories totally opposite
to those of Calvin, that, by comparison, the soundness of this
illustrious Expounder may become most conspicuous. For the opportunity
of doing so, concisely and accurately, we are indebted to a small
treatise of Dr. Tholuck’s, *Vermischte Schriften grosstentheils
Apologetischen Inhalts.* (Miscellaneous writings for the most part
Apologetical in their import.)

<span id="ii-p48"></span>After the more stirring times of The
Reformation had subsided into a peaceful calm, both the LUTHERANISM Of
GERMANY, and the CALVINISM Of SWITZERLAND and France, were subject to
gradual yet powerful changes. The pietism of Spener and Francke began to
lose its hold over the minds of succeeding generations of students. A
new race arose, who were destitute of their predecessors’ deep and
scriptural piety. Infidelity entered Germany through its learned
universities, not as it assailed France through wit and mockery. The
Sceptics soon rivaled the Pietists in the depth and variety of their
Hebrew scholarship, and in their anxiety to spread abroad their new
teaching. First came the philosophy of Wolf, who, after banishment from
Halle, by Frederick William 1st, returned again with renewed spirit to
his labors, and made many disciples. In Theology S. J. Baumgarten became
his most successful follower. “It is incredible,” says Tholuck, “with
what enthusiasm this teacher of the Theology of his time was listened
to. Above four hundred theologians, and seven jurists and physicians,
sat at the feet of the venerated man, and took down every, even the
minutest, word that fell from his lips. Scarcely another class could
meet when Baumgarten was holding his! And, now, let any one compare his
printed Prelections, as they have come down to us, what dead schematism?
what dry tablemaking! and the whole dictated in the most longwinded
style!” (P. 12.)

<span id="ii-p49"></span>Next came the great apostle of Rationalism in
Geneva. the well known Semler, a scholar of Baumgarten’s — “a man who,
without founding any school of his own, yet carried the torch from which
the sparks darted upon the tinder which, on every hand, was scattered
among his contemporaries, and kindled a blaze which continues to the
present moment. ” (P. 29.) His principle of criticism is thus stated by
himself: “The only proof of the Divine authority of a book arises from
the internal conviction produced by the truths therein contained; that
is, *the fides divina,* which people, for brevity’s sake, and also to
have the advantage of a biblical, though somewhat obscure mode of
speech, have called the Testimony of the Holy Spirit in the mind of the
reader.” Hence, with regard to The Pentateuch, he adopts the fragmentary
hypothesis of Simon and Vitringa, — dismisses from the Canon some of the
Historical Books, and throws doubts upon others, which are equally
destructive in their tendency. Having set up his own standard of moral
improvement to be derived from any book, he sets aside Daniel and The
Apocalypse, as peculiarly unsuited to his views; while The New Testament
is scarcely more acceptable to him in its integrity than the Old. He
treats both as merely temporary and local in their character, as filled
with accommodations and modes of speaking adapted to the times, but not
permanent for all time. His principles, then, robbed the Scriptures of
everything positive, and destroyed the very basis on which objective and
eternal truths must rest.

<span id="ii-p50"></span>The most surprising portion of the narrative is
the unhappy influence of such Biblical views over others. There must
have been a preparation in the German mind, as well as in that of
Switzerland, before such principles could be received. Had they been put
forth in England or in Scotland, they would have died an easy and a
hasty death. The spark would never have been raised to a flame, because
the touchwood was happily absent. But melancholy is the list., as given
by Tholuck, of the Universities and of eminent individuals who gave the
whole weight of their countenance to these pernicious doctrines. Happily
this learned writer, in companionship with Neander, Olshausen and
Hengstenberg, are permitted to witness the turn of the tide in favor of
the long despised Evangelism which so thoroughly pervades these Lectures
Of Calvin On Ezekiel.

<span id="ii-p51"></span>In reviewing the manner in which Calvin has
lectured on the single words and separate phrases of Ezekiel, the mind
is naturally led to contemplate his theory of the Theopneustia of the
Prophets. No question in Theology has been more fruitful in discussion
than that of The Inspiration Of The Hebrew Prophets: it could hardly be
otherwise, as their position, as the chief heralds of the future
Christianity, forms a preliminary part of The Evidences of The Christian
Faith. However lofty and sublime may be the Writings of the Prophets,
yet their Divine Authority cannot be fully impressed, without we are
persuaded that they are inspired. But a question has always arisen, what
is that supernatural and infallible guidance which we understand by
θεοπνευστια*,* or inspiration? Does it extend to every word that is
uttered by the Prophet, or simply to the material and spirit of his
message? Calvin, and The Early Reformers, from the very necessity of
their position, contended for the Verbal Inspiration of the entire
Scriptures. On these, and these alone, they took their stand against The
Corruptions of Rome, and they were necessarily compelled to strengthen
their position by every imaginable effort, to uphold the authority of
the Written Letter.

<span id="ii-p52"></span>In these days, this is too often called an
“antiquated hypothesis,” and treated as an “exploded theory;*”* but it
is important to observe that the wisest and most learned Christian
Commentators have adhered to it, though not, perhaps, with the
strictness of Calvin’s literal views. M. Twesten in Germany, and M.
Turretin, J. F. Stopfer, and B. Pictet of Switzerland, men eminent for
their piety and usefulness, have upheld the Existence, Universality, and
Plenitude of Inspiration, though their views involve a slight
modification of the sentiments of the Early Reformers. A few references
to their Works may here be appropriate, as they are not easily
accessible to the English reader. The writings of Henderson, PYE Smith,
Dick, and Wilson, are too accessible to need quotation here, but it may
be desirable to know what the Modern Pietists of the Continent, who are
foremost in the struggle with Neology, feel to be truth on these
important points.

<span id="ii-p53"></span>M. Twesten, in his *Vorlesung uber die
Dogmatik,* extends the idea of Inspiration to all parts of the Bible,
but not in an equal degree to every portion.  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) This inequality of Inspiration is held as
accompanied with the admission of verbal errors, which the lapse of time
now renders irremediable. But it is by no means unconnected with clear
views of evangelical truth, calmness of thought, and sagacity of
discrimination, though not altogether free from the speculative
tendencies of the German mind.

<span id="ii-p55"></span>M. Turretin, a well known divine of that land
which was formerly adorned with the graces and piety of the
masterspirits of the Swiss Reformation, in his *Institutio Theologiae
Elementicae,* shows how Scripture proves itself Divine, not only by an
authoritative appeal to testimony, but by undoubted proofs of its
Divinity. “But,” he afterwards adds, “it must not be supposed that these
tokens of Divinity shine forth alike and in the same degree in all the
Books of Scripture; for as one star differs from another star in
brightness, so some Books emit fuller and more dazzling rays of light,
and others fewer and feebler, according as they are more or less
necessary to the Church, and contain doctrines of more or less moment:
so that the Gospels and The Pauline Epistles glow with far richer
splendor than the Book of Ruth or Esther.”  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md)

<span id="ii-p57"></span>The language of John Frid. Stopfer is in some
degree similar. He distinguishes “The things written in Scripture by the
immediate Inspiration of the Holy Spirit from those which are committed
to writing only by the Direction of the Holy Spirit. To the former class
belong all The Peculiar Doctrines of Salvation, which as they could not
be discovered by the principles of reason, could not be made known but
by Revelation: to the latter class belong’ all those Truths which,
though previously known, required to be inculcated on man, both to
arouse him to a sense of his duty and to convince him of his need of a
Revealed Salvation. The same class also includes the Historical Facts
connected with the illustration and proof of Revealed Doctrines, and
pointing out the various steps of Revelation, in the bestowments of
grace and in the ministrations of the Church, all of which require to be
known, for the fuller explanation of Divine Truth.”  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)

<span id="ii-p59"></span>In the *Christian Theology* of M. B. Pictet we
find the following passage: — *“*I1 n’est pas necessaire de supposer que
l’Esprit de Dieu a toujours diete aux prophetes et aux apotres tousles
mots dont ils se sont servis, et qu’il leur a appris tout ce qu’ils
ecrivoient. Il suffit qu’ils n’ont rien ecrit, que par la direction
immediate do l’Esprit de Dieu en sorte que cot Esprit n’a jamais permis,
qu’ils aient erre dans ce qu’ils out ecrit. Agobard, auteur du 9 siecle,
dans sa reponse a Fredigise, dit, que c’est une absurdite de croire que
le Sainct Esprit ait inspire les termes et les mots... Cependant c’etoit
l’Esprit qui les empechoit de tomber dans aucune erreur, non pas meme
dans les moindres cheses.”  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)

<span id="ii-p61"></span>The Theopneustia of M. Gaussen is SO well
known, through the English Translation,  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) that it is only necessary to say, that
his view of the Plenary Inspiration of Scripture is more stringent than
that of our own Writers, Doddridge, Dick, Pye Smith, and Henderson. He
contends for “the existence, universality, and plenitude of
Theopneustia,” and condemns the theories of those English Divines who
“have gone so far as to specify four degrees of Divine Inspiration.” All
these distinctions are in his view “chimerical: The Bible itself does
not authorize them: the Church during the first eight centuries of the
Christian era knew nothing of them; and we believe them to be erroneous
and fraught with evil.”

<span id="ii-p63"></span>Having thus glanced at a few of the views of
the successors of Calvin among his own countrymen, it will not be
necessary to advert to the subject at greater length. It will be enough
to refer the reader of Calvin On Ezekiel to Dr. Henderson’s able work on
Divine Inspiration, being the fourth series of the Congregational
Lectures delivered during 1836. He will there find the difficult
questions connected with the subject ably, judiciously, and
satisfactorily discussed. It is only necessary to mention so accessible
a volume to induce the student of Calvin to apply to it for guidance and
instruction.

<span id="ii-p64"></span>Another boast in which the Rationalists indulge
over the early Reformers, consists in their more extensive use of
Rabbinical Literature. Hence it becomes necessary to investigate their
claim to superior talent and research in turning to account these stores
of Cabalistic tradition. We cannot thoroughly estimate the comparative
value of the Commentaries of the old and new Reformers, without being
well-versed in the contents of the Targums and the follies of the
Gemana. Pococke and LIGHTFOOT, GROTIUS And BOCHART, ERNESTI And KEIL
have all made Rabbinical and Oriental Learning subservient to the
interpretation of the Hebrew Prophets; and in doing so have thrown great
light upon modes of expression, grammatical usages, and peculiar customs
of the Jews. And thus far we are greatly indebted to them. They have
unlocked these precious treasures of Eastern tradition with a learned
and a liberal hand; they have solved philological difficulties which did
not yield to the perseverance and ingenuity of Calvin.

<span id="ii-p65"></span>But we are not to be led away by the abuse of
this species of learning, in which some of the depreciators of orthodoxy
have indulged. Let the reader, for instance, turn to the Christology of
the Jews, as illustrated by Bertholdt of Erlangen; let him observe how
he mingles the later Hebrew Prophets, the Apocryphal Books, and the
works of Philo and JOSEPHUS, and treats them as if on the same level of
authority and value. The baseless speculations of “The Book or Zohar,”
and the extravagant conceits of the “Nezach Israel,” are gravely used as
the basis of philosophical explanations, which are to supersede the
plain, spiritual, and literal interpretations of the holy men of old.
The progress of Sacred Criticism, they tell us, in the three centuries
which have elapsed since the Reformation, calls upon us to reject the
errors of the Schoolmen at Geneva, but still we hesitate to bow down to
the dicta of these visionary theorists. We protest against the improper
use which they make of the unauthorized comments of foolish and
infatuated Jews. These perverters of the sense of Holy Scripture were
utterly ignorant of its Spirit. They are the very blindest leaders of
the blind. They are the most unspiritual guides, the most puerile
corrupters of the Truth, the most contemptible inventors of falsehood.
And yet they are upheld as the very authorities on which we are to
receive philosophical novelties, and to throw away the joys, and
consolations, and blessings of the inspiration of Hebrew Prophecy.
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) Again and again must we repeat the
protest., and maintain the eternal principles of childlike faith, and
holy zeal, and persevering godliness which adorned and consecrated the
valuable labors of the calumniated Teacher Of Switzerland.

<span id="ii-p67"></span>In closing our notice of Foreign Theology, we
are by no means anxious to foster any undiscerning prejudice against
German divinity. We would discriminate between the tares and the wheat,
while we protest against the dreamy speculations, the unsound
principles, the shallow reasoning, the ostentatious and perverted
scholarship, and the irreverent levity with which the Neologians have
violated every law of literary evidence, and shocked every feeling of
serious piety. On the other hand, we by no means desire to uphold any
cramped or exploded interpretation, or to justify any details in
Calvin’s Comment On Ezekiel which are inconsistent with the real
improvements in Hebrew philology. Let but a spirit of disciplined
humility prevail, and then our later Churches may hope to rival the
elder ones in the wisdom which is from above. The patient and devout use
of these additional means which are now within our reach, will lead us
to comprehend “the mind of the Spirit,” and enable the Christian
Commentator to east the living seed into the stream of time, in the
fullest confidence that a fruitful harvest of believers shall spring up,
uniting the docility of children with the intelligence of men and. the
constancy of martyrs. But to this end, the spirit of the Early Reformers
must be cultivated: the spirit of skeptical criticism must be abhorred.
Lord Bacon’s adage is, alas, too often verified: “Certain there be that
delight in giddiness, and count it a bondage to fix a belief:” for in
the discursive reading? which we have found necessary for illustrating
Calvin’s Ezekiel, how often have we met with writings on the Old
Testament flippant and irreverent, oscillating’ for ever between fact
and falsehood.

<span id="ii-p68"></span>The Holy page is still undefaced — it is the
eye of the self-sufficient Commentator which willingly gathers over it
the misty film: the balance of truth remains what it ever was, accurate
and sensible: it is the palsied hand which agitates the scales in
ceaseless alternation.

<span id="ii-p69"></span>While, however, we thus strenuously uphold the
general principles of Prophetic Inspiration which Calvin taught, we are
willing to concede that many of his attempts to explain the text are
unsatisfactory. Thus, for instance, an exception may fairly be made
against the conclusiveness of his explanation of the appearance of the
cherubim in the tenth chapter of this Prophecy. He accounts for the
appearance of the heads of an ox and a man, a lion and an eagle on the
same living creature, by asserting that it represents the energizing
power of God throughout animated nature. Not content with this general
and probably correct exposition, he goes on to derive the motion of all
living creatures from that of angels. “Now, when the Lion either roars
or exercises his strength, he seems to move by his own inherent power,
and so it may be said of other living creatures: but God here says that
living beings are in some sense parts of Angels, although not of the
same substance.”

<span id="ii-p70"></span>Instead of explaining how Angels are the powers
*(virtutes)* of God*,* and how he proves any “inseparable connection”
between angelic and creative motion, he draws this conclusion from the
mysterious emblems of the Cherubim: “Let us understand, then, that while
men move about and apply themselves to their various pursuits, and when
even wild beasts do the same, yet Angelic motions are underneath, so
that neither men nor animals move themselves, but their whole rigor
depends on this secret inspiration.”

<span id="ii-p71"></span>One is surprised that the acute and welltrained
mind of Calvin did not perceive that this assertion only shifts the
difficulty one step farther back, and that it does not unfold one single
law of either the life or motion of animated nature.

<span id="ii-p72"></span>The student of Theology, however, must not
expect to find in Calvin the correct expositions of the laws of natural
phenomena, — the discoveries of the three last Centuries have thrown a
flood of light on physical and psychological science. Let the reader
distinguish between the theological and scientific explanations of these
Lectures; and while he allows the latter to be capable of improvement
through the gradual progress of human knowledge, he will value the
former as defending and upholding “the truth of God.”

<span id="ii-p73"></span>It becomes necessary also to caution the reader
that he will find these Lectures at times liable to the charge of
*overexplanation.* The Lecturer searches with microscopic scrutiny into
the hidden meaning of every minute portion of a sentence, and it
sometimes occurs in his explanation of Visions, Symbols, and Emblems,
that he carries out his method of minute subdivision and verbal comment
too far. This concession will readily be made by all who have perused
the valuable treatise of Gottlob Ch. Storr on Parabolic Illustration,
interspersed as it is with valuable References to Luther and Chrysostom,
Ernesti and Lessing, COCCEIUS and Pfaff, Wemyss and Beckhaus.

<span id="ii-p74"></span>It must not be considered that Calvin is
depreciated, because he is not idolized as infallible. It is now so
customary for an Editor to treat his author as a model of perfection,
that it requires some degree of moral courage to assert that Calvin
could possibly be indiscreet. The daily experience of life, however,
convinces us that the wisest, the holiest, and the best are always
fallible, and at times inconsiderate.

<span id="ii-p75"></span>It may now be desirable to furnish the general
reader with a few facts concerning the celebrated Gaspard De Coligny, to
whom Beza dedicates these Lectures of his Master. To have been Grand
Admiral of France gives him no title to admiration in the eyes of those
who seek for divine, and heavenly, and soulsatisfying truth — but to
have been a burning and shining light in Christ’s Holy Church in the
days of its struggles and persecution, this may afford us an apology for
introducing here a short account of his Christian life, and his awful
martyrdom.

<span id="ii-p76"></span>He was born of a noble family which had been
connected with the Government of France for about three hundred years,
and was the second of three brothers, all eminent for their devotion to
God’s saving truth. The eldest became a Cardinal, and Gaspard
consequently took possession of the paternal estate as Seigneur of
Chatillon. After serving his country both by land and sea., and arriving
at the high offices of both General and Admiral, he retired for a while
from the distractions of public life to his residence at Chatillon,
about the age of forty-three. Here both he and his excellent wife,
Charlotte De La Val, study together the Word of God, and grow gradually
stronger in the faith and hopes of the Gospel. Being’ fully aware of the
suffering’s they must undergo, and the sacrifices they must make, and in
defiance of all the edicts of persecution which they saw daily enforced
around them, they persevere in reading the Writings of the Reformers,
and opening’ their minds without reserve to the beams of the New Light,
they resolve both to do and to suffer God’s will, as soon as they shall
learn it. At length this Christian pair are joined by his brothers —
Odet, the Cardinal, and Francis, the Colonel — and thenceforth they
become a noble brotherhood of searchers for Divine guidance, of one mind
and of one spirit, each equally earnest to be found after the image of
their Redeemer.

<span id="ii-p77"></span>About five years before Beza addressed him in
the following dedication, the Queen Mother Of France had sent for
Coligny to give his advice respecting the proper remedies for the
discontent of the people. He boldly assigned Persecution for Religion as
its cause, and advised the passing of an Edict of Toleration, in
opposition to the arbitrary injustice of the House of Guise. He next
stands by the Prince. Or Code, who is seized, imprisoned, and. condemned
to death, but rescued from the scaffold by the decease of the king. But
in a short period the enmity of the Duke Of Guise against the Hugonots
became deadly, and 3000 Protestants, according to Beza, are “stabbed,
stoned, beheaded, strangled, burned, buried alive, starved, drowned,
suffocated.” Fearful wars and dreadful massacres arise, and after the
assassination of the Duke Of Guise, on the 18th February 1563, Coligny
retired to Chatillon, and was probably living in retirement there, when
Beza announced to him the decease of Calvin.

<span id="ii-p78"></span>The remainder of his history is most
melancholy. The Duke Of Alva, a most inveterate persecutor of the
Reformers, now gained an ascendancy over the mind of the Queen and her
Council. Civil war again rages between the Romish and the Protestant
parties. The Admiral is again forced into the field, the battle of
Moncontour is fought and lost on the 1st of October 1569, and Coligny is
wounded severely in the face. Massacre and murder rage more fiercely
than ever, till at length, in the very Palace of the King, at Paris,
Coligny is shot at, and seriously wounded in two places. His days are
now numbered. Although both the King and Queen pay him visits of
condolence, after the fingers of his right hand are cut off, he soon
falls a victim to the vengeance of his foes. The fatal ST. Bartholomew
Massacre is planned, and the Duke of Guise declares it to be the kings
pleasure that Coligny should be the first victim. The King relents, but
it is too late; the Duke is gone to the Admiral’s hotel. His
slaughterers stab their way to the Admiral’s presence, and find him
prepared to die. The sword is thrust through his body, and his corpse,
dishonored by the Duke, is given up to the insults of the mob. For seven
long’ days and nights the streets of Paris run with blood, and its river
is choked with corpses. The King and his family, and many of his nobles,
went to pray in public, and to offer thanksgiving to God for the success
of these measures, as if resulting in his glory. And after a while they
proceed to decree that the body of the Sieur De Coligny should be
dragged through the streets, and then hung’ up on Montfaucon, to the
execration of the people; that his Castle at Chatillon should be leveled
to the ground, and all his estate laid waste; that his children should
be unable to hold property; and that for all future time this infamous
transaction should be annually handed down to posterity by Public
Prayers and Processions throughout the capital of France.  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md)

<span id="ii-p80"></span>The blood of the faithful at Paris was not
sufficient: Throughout the cities of the provinces similar butcheries
took place. The head of the Romish Church exulted also: The Pope and the
Cardinals proceeded in solemn pomp to offer public thanksgiving before
the altar; the ramparts of St. Angelo resounded with the thundering of
artillery, while the Cardinal Lorraine celebrated solemn service in the
Church of St. Louis, and attributed the slaughter of the heretics to the
inspiration of God, in the presence of the sovereign Pontiff — an awful
leaf in the history of Europe, which must be turned over again and
again, that our children’s children may be familiar with these dreadful
deeds of Anti-christ.  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

<span id="ii-p82"></span>On one occasion, Beza, the writer of this
address to Coligny came in close contact with this Cardinal Lorraine;
for on the 9th of September 1561, a remarkable meeting was held at
Poissy, near Paris, called a Colloquy, for the public discussion of the
Reformed and the Unreformed doctrines. The Letter which the mother of
Charles IX. wrote to Pope Pius IV., with reference to this meeting, is
very characteristic of those times. It states that the Reformed had
become so powerful and so numerous, that the measure was both salutary
and needful. The Pope replies most mildly, and foreseeing that it. would
lead to the accomplishment of his long wished for desire — the
recognition of

<span id="ii-p83"></span>Legate in France — leaves all to his faithful
Cardinal of Lorraine. Safe-conduct was given to many leading Reformers,
among whom were Theodore Beza and Peter Martyr. Beza asked permission to
open the Conference by prayer, and obtained it; and such a prayer the
majority of the debaters had never heard before. He then spoke boldly,
ably, and like a thorough Christian. The Cardinal replied, with great
plausibility and policy; and, after many meetings, no practical objects
seemed to be gained. The Prince Of Conde, Coligny, and the Chancellor
L’hopital, were the leading Politicians; and in the following January
the Assembly of Notables was assembled at St. Germains. An Edict of
Toleration was passed, which it was hoped would prove the Magna Charta
of the spiritual liberties of France. But Providence ordered it
otherwise, and mysteriously allowed the sacred bands of Calvin, Beza,
and Martyr, to be laid low by the ax and the sword, and the progress of
the Reformation to be arrested, just as it was about to burst forth as a
Spiritual Reformation For Europe.

<span id="ii-p84"></span>It now only remains to observe, that this
Translation has been made by a careful comparison of the Latin with the
French Editions; that those of Geneva, published in 1617 and 1565, have
been adopted as the basis, while the reprints of 1563, 1565, 1583, and
that at Amsterdam in 1667, have been consulted. No license whatever has
been taken with the text, the Translation being’ uniformly as close and
literal as the English idiom will admit. The Translator has carefully
avoided all expression of private opinion on doctrinal and speculative
points; he has not softened off any of the occasional roughness of the
original views of his Author, nor has he encumbered his pages with long
footnotes, either to rectify or elucidate the criticisms of the text.
His object has been, not to present his readers with the views and
expositions of other Commentators, but to present Calvin, with all his
excellencies and defects, before the English reader, in language as
clear and simple as the various difficulties of the subject will allow,
tie has not introduced quotations from other Divines, who have ably and
impartially treated similar subjects, but, at certain intervals, (as for
instance at the close of <span id="ii-p84.1"></span>[Ezekiel
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#000)<span id="ii-p84.1"></span>,.md) he has
pointed out the Authors from whose Works much valuable information may
be obtained.

<span id="ii-p85"></span>The Translator may venture here to express his
opinion, once for all, that Calvin’s Hebrew philology is not always
correct: his critical exposition of the meaning and derivation of Hebrew
words should seldom be received as the best possible. The labors of
GESEnIUS and Rosenmuller have thrown great light upon this department of
Sacred scholarship, and the results of such modern labors will be found
ably condensed and adapted to the wants of the ordinary reader, in the
Notes to Bishop Newcome’s *“Literal Translation of the Prophets,”*
rendered very accessible in Tegg’s Edition of 1836. This work is very
valuable for conciseness, accuracy, and the intelligible application of
real learning.

<span id="ii-p86"></span>Instead of distracting the attention by a
variety of incoherent foot notes, it is intended to close the Second
Volume of this Translation with the following Addenda, as a contribution
towards a complete *Apparatus Criticus:* —

<span id="ii-p87"></span>**1.** A copious Index Of Words, Phrases, And
Things, occurring in these Lectures, on the basis of the original Latin
*Index Locupletissimus.*

<span id="ii-p88"></span>**2.** An Index Of The Places Of Scripture
illustrated in these Lectures.

<span id="ii-p89"></span>**3.** A List Of The Sacred And Profane Authors
quoted by Calvin, with references.

<span id="ii-p90"></span>**4.** A Complete Synopsis Of The Contents Of
The Whole Of Ezekiel’s Prophecies

<span id="ii-p91"></span>**5.** A Connected Translation Of Calvin’s
Version Of The First Twenty Chapters, With A New Translation Of The
Remaining Chapters

<span id="ii-p92"></span>**6.** A List Of The Chief Interpreters,
Ancient And Modern

<span id="ii-p93"></span>**7.** A Notice Of The Ancient Versions And
Codexes Which Contain Ezekiel’s Prophecies

<span id="ii-p94"></span>**8.** A few Dissertations on important
subjects illustrating these Lectures, with references to various modern
Treatises, philological, exegetical, and hermeneutical.

<span id="ii-p95"></span>There is prefixed to the present Volume a
faithful and *spirited facsimile* of a very rare Portrait Of Calvin,
which the monogram shows to have been engraved by Henry Hondius, or De
Hondt the elder, an artist of considerable eminence, who was born at
Duffel, in Brabant, about 1573, and died at La Haye in 1610. Among other
works, he engraved Portraits of John Wickliffe, Philip Melancthon, John
Bugenhagen, John Knox, and Jerome Savonarola.

<span id="ii-p96"></span>It may be worth noticing, that Jodocus Hondius,
or de Hondt, (who is also called Henry Hondius the younger,) was the son
of Jodocus Hondius, or de Hondt Jost, a Flemish engraver, born at Ghendt
in 1563, and probably a brother of Henry the elder, who fled to England
in consequence of the troubles in the Low Countries. He engraved maps
and portraits, constructed mathematical instruments, founded printing
types, etc. Henry the younger studied the art of engraving under his
uncle, Henry the elder, and finished many of his father’s plates after
his death. He engraved a number of portraits in a very neat style, which
are still highly esteemed.

<span id="ii-p97"></span>The old copies of the Latin and French Editions
of this valuable Commentary, having remarkable Title pages, copies *in
facsimile* follow this Introductory Notice.

<span id="ii-p98"></span>T. M.  
SHERIFFHUTTON VICARAGE,  
March 1849.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc22001.htm#fr_0.md) <span id="ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p6"></span> Havernick, Commentar uber Ezelkiel. Erlangen,
1843, See also Wielder Bibl. Relaworterbuch, art. Ezechiel. Leipsic,
1833.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc22001.htm#fr_1.md) <span id="ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p9"></span> Introduction, volume 4.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc22001.htm#fr_2.md) <span id="ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p10"></span> Antiq. 10:5, section 1.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc22001.htm#fr_3.md) <span id="ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p11"></span> <span id="ii-p11.1"></span>Einleitung, volume
3

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc22001.htm#fr_4.md) <span id="ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p23"></span> Lowth, Hebrews Prael., 21:279. 8vo, 2nd. ed.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc22001.htm#fr_5.md) <span id="ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p26"></span> Volume 3. 8vo, Leipsic, 1783.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc22001.htm#fr_6.md) <span id="ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p27"></span> Section 547.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc22001.htm#fr_7.md) <span id="ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p28"></span> Section 551.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc22001.htm#fr_8.md) <span id="ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p32"></span> <span id="ii-p32.1"></span>Einleitung in das
A. T., volume 3, and <span id="ii-p32.2"></span>Geschichte der Hebrews
Sprache u. Schrift, p. 35.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc22001.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p46"></span> See Foreign Quarterly Review, volume 19, and
volume 20.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc22001.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p54"></span> Nicht gleichmassig.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc22001.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p56"></span> Loc. 2. <span id="ii-p56.1"></span>quaest. 4.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc22001.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p58"></span> Institut. Theol. Polem., volume 2, and volume
3.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc22001.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p60"></span> Volume 1 50 1 100:16.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc22001.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p62"></span> S. Bagster, 1841.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc22001.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p66"></span> For an account of “the Book of Zohar” and the”
Nezach Israel,” see Wolf’s Bibliotheca Heb., volumes 2; and 4, also
volume 1. Consult also Burcker’s Historia Critic. Phil., and the
Prolegom. to Bertholdt’s Christol. Judoe. Various quotations are given
by Dr. M’Caul in “The Old Paths,” and the subject is treated pointedly
and intelligibly by Professor Lee of Cambridge in his University
Sermons, 1830.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc22001.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="ii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p79"></span> See Lansdowe MSS. in Brit. Museum. William
Cecil, grandson of Lord Burghley, was present at one anniversary. The
Duke of Sully was an eyewitness. His Remains, Book 1, contain much
information respecting Coligny and his contemporaries. Sec. Edit., Lond.
1756.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc22001.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="ii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p81"></span> See Villeroy’s Memoirs of State, volume 2.
Also Matttieu Hist. France, volume 1. book 6. De Thou, book 52 and 53.
And Sully’s Memoirs, book 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Beza's Dedication](cc22002.md)
