[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22013)  [Next](cc22015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Moreover, the Spirit lifted me up, and
brought me unto the east gate of the LORD’S house, which looketh
eastward: and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; among
whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah,
princes of the people.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et sustulit me Spiritus et introduxit
me ad portam domus Iehovae orientalera:  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) et ecce in limine portae
vigintiquinque viri: et aspexi in medio ipsorum  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) Iaazaniah filium Azur, et Pelthiah
filium Benaiah, principes populi.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**2.** Then said he unto me, Son of man, these
*are* the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this
city:

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**2.** Et dixit ad me, Fili hominis, isti
homines cogitant vanitatem, et consultant consilium perversum in urbe
hae.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span><span id="xv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>Here the Prophet admonishes the people that
perverse leaders would be the cause of their destruction. For if the
blind lead the blind both will fall into the ditch (<span
id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>[Mt 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span
id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>; <span id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>[Lu
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)<span id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>.)
Since, therefore, the elders of the city were such wicked apostates,
they drew with them the whole body of the people into the same ruin.
Now, therefore, the Prophet shows that the state of the city was so
corrupt that no hope of pardon remained, since those who ought to be the
eyes of the whole people were involved in darkness. But he names the
*five and twenty seniors* Whence it is probable, that this number was
chosen in the midst of confusion, or that a definite number is put for
an indefinite; and I rather embrace this second view. Whatever it is, it
implies that those who held the reins of government were impious
despisers of God, and hence it is not surprising that impiety and
defection from God and his law had begun to increase among the whole
people. But we must remark the Prophet’s intention. For common soldiers
are accustomed to consider their commanders as a shield, as we this day
see in the Papacy. For this is their last refuge, since they think
themselves guilty of no fault when they obey their holy Mother Church.
Such also formerly was the obstinacy of the people.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>Lastly, men always throw off all blame from
themselves, under pretense of error or ignorance. Hence the Prophet now
shows that the city was not free from God’s wrath, since it was
corrupted by its leaders and rulers; nay, that this was a cause of its
destruction, since the people were too easily led astray by perverse
examples. Meanwhile, we must notice the Prophet’s freedom, because he
here fearlessly attacks the most noble princes. He was, indeed, out of
danger, because he was an exile: but it seems that he was at Jerusalem
when he uttered this prophecy. He shows, therefore, his strength of
mind, since he does not spare the nobles. Hence this useful doctrine is
collected, that those who excel in reputation and rank are not free from
blame if they conduct themselves wickedly, as we see happens in the
Papacy. For, as to the Pope himself, it is in his power to condemn the
whole world, while he exempts himself from all blame. And as to the
Bishops, now twenty or thirty witnesses are required, and afterwards
even seventy: hence one of those horned beasts could not be convinced,
unless the whole people should rise up: so also it was formerly. But
here the Prophet shows, that however eminent are those who are endued
with power over the people, yet they are not sacred nor absolved from
all law by any peculiar privilege, since God freely judges them by his
Spirit, and reproves them by his Prophets. Lastly, if we wish to
discharge our duty rightly, especially when it consists of the office of
teaching, we should avoid all respect of persons, for those who boast
that they excel others are yet subject to the censures of God. For this
reason it follows —

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Which say, *It is* not near; let us
build houses: this *city is* the caldron, and we *be* the flesh.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Qui dicunt, non in propinquo:
aedificare domos  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) ipsa est olla
 <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) nos autem sumus caro.

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet explains what might be
obscure through their perverseness. He brings forward, therefore, what
the impious thought could be covered by many fallacies. For we know that
hypocrites endeavor to fix their eyes on God, and when they scatter
their own clouds before themselves, they think that he is blinded. For
this reason Isaiah says, that God also is wise, (<span
id="xv.ii-p8.1"></span>[Isa 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002)<span
id="xv.ii-p8.1"></span>,) and derides their cunning, since they think
that they blind God’s eyes whilst they conceal their sins with various
coverings. Since, therefore, the obstinacy of these men was so great.,
the Prophet here strips off their mask; for they could be turned aside
by perverse counsels to deny that they deserved anything of the kind.
But the Prophet here cuts away their pretenses, because, in truth, their
impiety was more than sufficiently evident, since they boast that the
time is not yet at hand, and, therefore, that they might build houses at
Jerusalem as in a time of ease and peace. As we saw in Jeremiah, the
time of the last destruction was approaching; everything remaining in
the city had now been destined to final ruin: and for this reason
Jeremiah advised houses to be built in Chaldea and in foreign lands,
since the captives must spend a long period there, even seventy years.
(<span id="xv.ii-p8.2"></span>[Jer
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#005)<span id="xv.ii-p8.2"></span>.)
Since then the predicted time was now drawing on, it became extreme
folly in the people to oppose themselves, and to treat God’s threats as
a laughing-stock, and to boast that it was a time for building. Now,
therefore, we see what the Prophet blames and condemns in the five and
twenty men who were princes of the people, namely, that they hardened
the people in obstinate wickedness, and encouraged torpor, so that the
Prophet’s threats were unheeded. Since, therefore, they so stupified the
people by their enticements, and took away all sense of repentance, they
also set aside all fear of God’s wrath which had been denounced against
them. The Prophet condemns this depravity in their counsels.

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>But, in the second clause, this contempt
appears more detestable when they say, that *Jerusalem is the caldron,
and they are the flesh* I do not doubt their allusion to Jeremiah; for
in the first chapter the pot was shown, but the fire was from the north,
(<span id="xv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013)<span id="xv.ii-p9.1"></span>;) so
then the Spirit wished to teach us, that the Chaldeans would come like a
fire to consume Jerusalem, as if a pot is placed on a large and constant
fire, even if it be full of water and flesh, yet its contents are
consumed, and the juice of the flesh is dried up by too long cooking.
God had demonstrated this by his servant Jeremiah: here the Jews deride
and factiously elude what ought to strike them with no light fear,
unless they had been too slothful: *behold,* say they, *we are the flesh
and Jerusalem is the caldron:* So they seem to rate the Prophet
Jeremiah, as if he were inconsistent, — “What? do you threaten us with
captivity? and meanwhile you say that this city will be the pot and the
Chaldeans the fire. If God wishes to consume us, therefore let us remain
within: thus we may build houses.” Now we understand how they sought
some appearance of inconsistency in the words of the Prophet: as
reprobate and profane men always take up arguments by which they may
diminish and extenuate all faith in heavenly doctrine, nay, even reduce
it to nothing if they could. The Prophet, therefore, provides a remedy
for this evil, as we have seen. But before he proceeds to it, he repeats
their impious saying, that *Jerusalem is a caldron, and the people
flesh* They turned what had been said to a meaning directly contrary,
for the Prophet said that they should burn since the Chaldeans would be
like fire’ but they said — well, we shall be scorched, but that will be
done lightly, so that we shall remain safe to a good old age. Hence we
understand how diabolical was their audacity, who were so blinded by the
just judgments of God, that they did not scruple petulantly to blame
even God himself, and to make a laughingstock of the authority of his
teaching. Thus we see in another way how faithfully Ezekiel had
discharged his duty: he had been created a Prophet: he had not to
discharge his office by himself, but was an assistant to Jeremiah. And
we cannot otherwise discharge our duty to God and his Church unless we
mutually extend our hands to each other, when ministers are mutually
united and one studies to assist the other. Ezekiel now signifies this
when he professes himself the ally and assistant of Jeremiah.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we know from
thine ancient people how great our hardness is, unless we are inclined
by thy Holy Spirit, nay, totally renewed into obedience to thy doctrine:
that as often as we hear thy threatening, we may be seriously
frightened, and that we may desire to return to true and perfect
obedience, not by momentary but by permanent repentance, till at length
we are gathered into that happy rest, which has been obtained for us
through the blood of thine only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty eighth.

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#004)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**4.** Therefore prophesy against them,
prophesy, O son of man.

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span>**4.** Propterea prophetiza contra cos,
prophetiza, fili hominis.

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span><span id="xv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span>Yesterday we saw that the Jews scurrilously
eluded the prophecies of Jeremiah, especially when he threatened them
with God’s wrath. For he had said, that a vision was offered to him, in
which Jerusalem was like a pot, and the fire lighted from the north. For
a laughing-stock they said that they could rest safely within the city,
because they were not yet cooked but raw, so that if that prophecy is
true, said they, we shall not so quickly depart from the city. For God
foretold that we should be the flesh which was about to be cooked: if
this city is a caldron, we ought to remain here till we are cooked: but
this has not happened. Hence what Jeremiah pronounces is vain, that we
shall be dragged into exile, because these two things disagree, viz.,
God wishing us to rest in the city, and yet dragging us into a distant
region. Since it is so, Jeremiah’s prophecy is vain; thus then they
deceived themselves. But God commands another Prophet of his to rise up
against them. And the repetition is emphatic, *prophesy, prophesy
against them* For nothing is less tolerable than that men should
petulantly spurn God’s anger, which ought to inspire all with fear. For
if the mountains melt before him, (<span id="xv.v-p6.1"></span>[Isa
64:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#003)<span id="xv.v-p6.1"></span>,) if
angels themselves tremble, (<span id="xv.v-p6.2"></span>[Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018)<span id="xv.v-p6.2"></span>,) how
comes it that the vessel of clay dares to conflict with its maker?
(<span id="xv.v-p6.3"></span>[Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009)<span id="xv.v-p6.3"></span>.) And
we see also how God grows angry against such perverseness; especially
when he denounces, by the mouth of Isaiah, that this sin would be
unpardonable. I have called you, said he, to ashes and mourning: but, on
the other hand, ye have said, Let us eat and drink, and ye have turned
my threats into a laughing-stock. For this was your proverb, to-morrow
we shall die: as I live, your iniquity shall not go unpunished. God
affirms by an oath, that he would never be appeased by the impious and
profane despisers of his judgments. For this reason also he now repeats
again, *prophesy, prophesy.* Let us go on —

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**5.** And the Spirit of the LORD fell upon
me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the LORD; Thus have ye said, O
house of Israel: for I know the things that come into your mind, *every
one of* them.

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et cecidit super me Spiritus Iehovae,
et dixit mihi, Die, sic dicit Iehovah, sic dixisti domus Israel: et
ascensiones spiritus vestri ego novi ipsam.  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span><span id="xv.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span>Here the Prophet turns the impious scurrility
of the people into another sense, for they had corrupted what Jeremiah
had said. They knew what he meant by the pot and the flesh, but they
thought they could avert God’s wrath by their cleverness. Here the
Prophet brings forward another sense, not that of Jeremiah, nor that of
the people, but a third. In the twenty-fourth chapter he will again
denounce them as like flesh, since God will cast them into a pot to be
cooked, so that even their bones should be consumed. But here the
Prophet only considers how he shall refute their wicked saying, by which
they think to catch Jeremiah in a snare, as they did not agree
sufficiently with his prophecy. What does he say, then? First, *that the
Spirit had fallen upon, him,* that he might gain a hearing for his
prophecy; for if he had spoken from his own mind he might be rejected
with impunity; for the speakers ought to utter God’s word, and to be the
organ of his Spirit. The Pope boasts this to his followers, but the true
and faithful servants of God ought to do this in reality, namely, not to
utter their own comments, but to receive from God’s hands what they
deliver to the people, and thus to discharge their duty faithfully. To
this end the Prophet says, that *the Spirit fell upon him.* For although
he had been previously endued with the gift of prophecy, yet as often as
he exercised it this grace ought, to be renewed; because it is not
sufficient for us to be imbued once with the illumination of the Holy
Spirit, unless God works in us daily. Since, therefore, he follows up
his gifts in his servants while he uses their assistance, hence it is
not in vain that Ezekiel says, *the Spirit was still given to him,*
because this gift was necessary for every act. Afterward she expresses
more dearly what he had said, namely, *that the Spirit had spoken;* for
it signifies that what he shortly subjoins had been dictated to him.

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span>Here, therefore, he admonishes the Jews that
they should not foolishly promise themselves impunity, when they
despised his prophecies, since he does not speak from himself, but only
relates what the Spirit suggested and dictated. *Thus have ye spoken, O
house of Israel,* said he, *and I have known the risings of your heart*
God here precisely urges the Jews that they should not hope to obtain
anything by turning their backs; for we know how carelessly and boldly
hypocrites reject all teaching, and do not hesitate to strive with God,
since they find many pretexts by which they excuse themselves. Hence
there would be no end, unless the Lord should racet them, and with the
supreme command and power of a judge, should show them that subterfuges
were vain, and make all their excuses idle, and of no moment. This then
is the Prophet’s meaning when he says, *that whatever rose up in their
heart was known to God* But by these words he implies, that they sought
in vain a theater in the world, as if they should succeed if they proved
their cause before men: he says that it is vain, because they must come
into the court of heaven, where God will be the only Judge. Now, when
our thoughts are known to God, in vain we take up with this or that;
because God will not admit our subterfuges, nor will he allow himself to
be deluded by our smartness and cunning. Now, therefore, we see what the
Prophet means by saying that *God knows what sprang up in the heart of
the Jews,* because, forsooth, they had never desisted from contending
and quarreling by their fallacies, so as to draw away all confidence
from his prophecies. Hence we see the utility of the doctrine, that we
deceive ourselves in vain by acuteness, so as to escape by our crooked
imaginations, because God sees men’s cunning, and while they desire to
be ingenious, he seizes them, and shows the vanity of what they think
the greatest wisdom. So let us desire to approve ourselves to God, and
not esteem our deeds and plans according to our own sense and judgment.
Now it follows —

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#006)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**6.** Ye have multiplied your slain in this
city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Multiplicasti interfectos vestres in
urbe hac, et implevistis compita ejus inteffectis.

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span>**7.** Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Your slain, whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they *are* the flesh,
and this *city is* the caldron: but I will bring you forth out of the
midst of it.

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span>**7.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Interfecti vestri quos posuistis in medio ejus, ipsi erunt
caro, et ipsa olla  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) et vos
ejiciam e medio eius.

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xv.vii-p8"></span><span id="xv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p9"></span>Now Ezekiel attacks, as it were, in close
combat, the buffoons who trifled with God by their jests, and brings
forward that; sense which I have just before touched on, and of which
the *prophecy* of Jeremiah was full, in a different manner to that.
which they imagined. *Ye,* says he, *have slain many;* the city was full
of many slaughters: therefore the pot was full of flesh; this flesh was
cooked: there is no longer any room in the vessel. You must therefore of
necessity be cast forth as froth, or as foul flesh, for which no vessel
is found for cooking it. We see, then, that the Prophet here treats them
wittily, and plays off jests in answer to them; meanwhile he strikes a
deadly wound, when he shows that they joked so petulantly to their own
destruction, and boasted that Jeremiah was their adversary. Hence he
confirms the prophecy of Jeremiah, and yet he does not interpret it,
because Jeremiah had spoken properly and clearly, when he said that they
were flesh. The meaning was the same as if God were to pronounce that he
would consume them in the midst of the city. It happened as we have
formerly seen; for he scattered some of the people, and slew some with
the sword, and some with hunger. Whatever it is, the prophecy of
Jeremiah will always be found true, namely, that God had cooked the Jews
with the fire of the Chaldees. (<span id="xv.vii-p9.1"></span>[Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013)<span id="xv.vii-p9.1"></span>.)
But since they had perverted that doctrine, the Prophet does not regard
the meaning of Jeremiah, but shows that they never profited while they
turned their backs on God. Ye shall not be flesh, says he, but your
slain were flesh: *ye have refilled the caldron,* that is the city with
the slain; now there is no room for you. What therefore remains, but
that God should cast you out as foul flesh? Neither will he cook you,
says he, nor will he consume you in a caldron, but where he has
stretched you at full length on the earth, there will he consume you.
Now, therefore, we see how great a destruction the Jews had brought upon
themselves, when they took the liberty of joking and jesting at the
Prophets. Hence he says, *they had filled the city with the slain* He
does not mean that men had been openly put to death in Jerusalem, but
this form of speech embraces all forms of injustice; for we know that
God esteems those homicides who oppress miserable men, overturn their
fortunes, and suck innocent blood. Since, then, God esteems all violence
as slaughter, he properly says, *that the city was filled with the
slain* The Jews might object that no one had brought violence upon them;
they could not be convicted in the sight of men; but when their
wickedness was so gross among themselves, that they did not spare the
wretched, but cruelly afflicted them, he says that *the city was filled
with the slain* He now adds, when the city was full of flesh there was
no more place for them, and he now shows that although Jeremiah had
predicted that they should be cooked with the fire of the Chaldeans, yet
they had advanced so far in wickedness, that they were unworthy of being
cooked within the city. Hence, says he, a greater vengeance from God
awaits you, since ye proceed to provoke his anger more and more. It
follows —

<span id="xv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#008)<span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p2"></span>**8.** Ye have feared the sword; and I will
bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="xv.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Gladium timuistis, et gladium
adducam super vos, dicit Dominator lehovah.

<span id="xv.viii-p4"></span>**9.** And I will bring you out of the
midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will
execute judgments among you.

<span id="xv.viii-p5"></span>**9.** Et ejiciam vos e medio ejus, et
tradam vos in manum extraneorum, et exercebo in vos judicia.

<span id="xv.viii-p6"></span>**10.** Ye shall fall by the sword; I will
judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shall know that I *am* the
LORD.

<span id="xv.viii-p7"></span>**10.** Et gladio cadetis: ad terminum
Israel judicabo vos, et scietis quod ego sim Iehovah.

<span id="xv.viii-p8"></span>**11.** This *city* shall not be your
caldron, neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; *but* I
will judge you in the border of Israel:

<span id="xv.viii-p9"></span>**11.** Ipsa non erit vobis in ollam: et
vos non eritis  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) in medio ejus in
carnem: in termino Israel judicabo vos.

<span id="xv.viii-p11"></span> 

<span id="xv.viii-p12"></span><span id="xv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p13"></span>We ought to join these verses together,
because the Prophet treats the same thing in many words. First *he
denounces that they should perish by the sword since they feared the
sword* By these words he admonishes them, that even if God should draw
them out of the city, yet Jeremiah’s prophecy would prove true, since
the Chaldeans would consume them as if the pot was boiling on the fire.
Lastly, he shows how frivolous was their cavil when they said, “if we
are flesh, we shall remain in the caldron.” But the Prophet shows that
they must not cavil like children with God, be*cause* when he showed the
caldron to his servant Jeremiah, he meant nothing else than that the
Jews should perish, since the Chaldeans would *come* to consume them.
But they had purposely perverted the Prophet’s sense, and thought
themselves clever and shrewd when they corrupted the heavenly doctrine.
First of all the Prophet says, *ye have feared the sword, and ye shall
fall by the sword: h*e afterwards adds the manner: *I,* says he, *will
bring the sword upon you, which ye feared:* he says, *I will draw you
out from the midst of it.* He declares the manner: namely, that he will
bring them into an open plain, that he may more easily slay them there.
If any should object, that this was not seething them in the city, the
answer is easy: that God did not restrict his wroth to one kind of
punishment, when he thus spoke by Jeremiah. For we know that the
Prophets set before us God’s judgments in various ways, and thus use
various figures. Since therefore the Prophets do not always teach in the
same manner, it is not surprising if, when he shortly shows that God’s
wrath was near the Jews, he used that simile: *ye shall fall,* says he,
*by the sword, and in the borders of Israel shall I judge you.*

<span id="xv.viii-p14"></span>Here he clearly expresses what I lately
touched upon. It was indeed God’s judgment, when the Jews were drawn
from the city in which they thought they had a quiet nest: for when they
were violently dragged into exile, God exercised his judgments upon
them: and from the time when he deprived them of their country, then he
already began to be their judge. But here he begins to treat of a
severer judgment. Although God had begun to chastise the Jews when he
expelled them from the city, yet he treated them more severely in the
boundaries of Israel; because when they came in sight of the king of
Babylon, then the king saw his slain: then he himself was rendered blind
and dragged into Chaldea, and all the nobles slain. (<span
id="xv.viii-p14.1"></span>[2Ki 25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#000)<span
id="xv.viii-p14.1"></span>; <span id="xv.viii-p14.2"></span>[Jer
39](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#000)<span id="xv.viii-p14.2"></span>.)
Hence we may gather that the people’s blood was poured out without
discrimination. Now therefore we understand what God means when he
threatens *to judge them in the borders of Israel,* that is without
their country. Lastly, he here denounces a double penalty, first because
God would east them out of Jerusalem in which they delighted, and in
which they said that they should dwell so long that exile would be their
first punishment: then he adds, that he was not content with exile, but
that a heavier punishment was at hand, when they should be cast out of
their country, and the land should cast; them forth as a stench which it
cannot bear. *I will judge you therefore in the borders of Israel:* that
is, beyond the holy land: for since one curse has already occurred in
exile, still a harder and more formidable revenge will await; you. Now
he adds, *ye shall know that I am Jehovah*

<span id="xv.viii-p15"></span>Doubtless Ezekiel reproves the sloth which
was the cause of such great contumacy: for they had never dared to
contend so perseveringly with God, unless their minds had been
stupified; for were we to reflect that we are striving with God, horror
would immediately seize upon us; for who labors under such madness as to
dare to contend with God his maker? This torpor, therefore, Ezekiel now
obliquely reproves, when he says that the Jews would know too late that
they were dealing with God. Although therefore they sinned through
ignorance, it does not follow that they were without, excuse, for whence
arose their ignorance except from being inattentive to God? It sprang
first from carelessness: then that carelessness and security produced
contempt, and contempt sprang from their depraved lust of sinning. Since
therefore they determined to give themselves up to all manner of
sinning, they put away as far as possible all teaching: nay they
willingly endeavored to stupify their own consciences, and thus we see
that depraved desire impelled them to contempt, and contempt begat in
them security, in which at length this ignorance plunged them. Since
therefore at the time it did not come into their mind to contend with
God, this does not extenuate their fault, because, as I have said, they
had stupified themselves with determined and spontaneous *wickedness.*

<span id="xv.viii-p16"></span>Meanwhile, it is by no means doubtful that
God always pricked them that they might feel themselves sinners, but the
Prophet here speaks of that knowledge which is called experimental. For
the impious are said to know God when, being struck by his hand, they
unwillingly *acknowledge* his power: because whether they will or not
they feel him to be their judge. But this *knowledge* does not profit
them; nay even increases their destruction. But we understand the
Prophet’s meaning, that the *Jews* were rebellious and despised God’s
servants: because they pretended that they had to do only with men, and
covered themselves with darkness, lest they should behold the light
which was offered to their eyes. God pronounces that they should know at
length with whom they contended, as Zechariah says, they shall see whom
they have pierced; (<span id="xv.viii-p16.1"></span>[Zec
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span
id="xv.viii-p16.1"></span>;) that is, they shall know that it is I whom
they have wounded, when they so proudly despised my servants, and
abjured all confidence in my teaching. Hence also we gather that the
minds of the impious were so confused, that seeing they did not see; for
when they experience God to be their judge, they are compelled in
reality to confess that they feel his hand: yet they remain stupid,
because they do not profit, as the Prophet had just now said, — ye
feared the sword. But they were careless, as we saw, and despised all
threats. Of what kind, then, is this fear which is remarked upon by the
Prophet? that of the impious forsooth, who while they make for
themselves blandishments, and fancy that they have made a covenant with
death, as is said in Isaiah, (<span id="xv.viii-p16.2"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="xv.viii-p16.2"></span>;
<span id="xv.viii-p16.3"></span>[Isa
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#022)<span id="xv.viii-p16.3"></span>;
and <span id="xv.viii-p16.4"></span>[Isa
57:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021)<span
id="xv.viii-p16.4"></span>,) and promise themselves freedom from
punishment, even when a scourge is passing through the land, yet tremble
and are always ill-at-ease, because they have no peace, as it is said
elsewhere. In fine, we see the impious always remaining careless and
stupid: though they are careless, yet they tremble and are tortured with
secret impiety, since the severity of God urges them on. At length he
concludes, *Jerusalem should not be their caldron,* but he would punish
them *in the border of Israel* But I have sufficiently explained this
clause. It follows —

<span id="xv.ix"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012)<span id="xv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p2"></span>**12.** And ye shall know that I *am* the
LORD: for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my
judgments, but have done after the manners of the heathen that *are*
round about you.

<span id="xv.ix-p3"></span>**12.** Et cognoscentis quod ego sim Iehovah;
quia in statutis meis non ambulastis, et judicia mea non fecistis: sed
secundum judicia gentium quae in circmitu vestro sunt, fecistis.

<span id="xv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.ix-p5"></span><span id="xv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p6"></span>He repeats what he had said, that they would
acknowledge too late how impiously and wickedly they had despised the
prophecies: because this was to draw down God himself from heaven; for
God wishes that reverence which he exacts from us to be given to his own
word. Therefore men rage in contempt of his teaching, as if after the
manner of giants they wished to draw God down from heaven. But he
expresses the cause more clearly: *because indeed they have not walked
in his law and his precepts; but have entangled themselves in the
superstitions of the nations* Here we see that God could not possibly be
accused of too much rigor, because he executed a judgment so heavy and
severe against the Jews. For he had given them the law. This was the
greatest ingratitude, to reject the teaching, which ought to be familiar
to them, and at the same time to add to it the impious rites of the
Gentiles: this was to prefer the devil to God himself with full
deliberation. Hence God shows that although he would treat the Jews
severely, yet that his wrath was moderate compared with their sins:
because nothing was wanting to complete their impiety when they so
rejected his law. When therefore he says that *they did not walk in the
law,* he takes this principle for granted, that the law was not given in
vain, but that in it the Jews were, faithfully and clearly taught the
right way, as also Moses says, “this is the way, walk ye in it.” There
is no doubt that Ezekiel referred to that sentence of Moses, when he
said,

<span id="xv.ix-p7"></span>that the Jews did not walk in the law, and
did not perform the judgments of God. (<span id="xv.ix-p7.1"></span>[De
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#033)<span id="xv.ix-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="xv.ix-p7.2"></span>[Isa
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021)<span id="xv.ix-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.ix-p8"></span>Since therefore God has shown the way, so
that they had no excuse for wandering, how great was their ingratitude
in leaving the way and willfully casting themselves into wanderings?

<span id="xv.ix-p9"></span>Now comparison aggravates their crime, when
he says, *that they preferred the judgments and rites of the Gentiles
which were around them* Because they had unbelieving neighbors, God had
opposed his law like a rampart to separate them from the profane
Gentiles. Since therefore they had so far approached these detestable
rites, and that too by rejecting utterly the law of God, do we not
perceive that they were worthy of severe punishment? Meanwhile let us
observe, when God has borne with us a long time, if we persist in our
obstinacy, that nothing else is left but the extinction of the light of
doctrine, and that God should show himself in some other manner. For the
Prophet’s discourse is like a glass, in which God represents himself.
But when we shut our eyes and throw down the glass and break it, then
God shows himself in some other manner; that is, he no longer thinks it
right to show us his face, but teaches us by his hand, and convinces us
of our impious obstinacy by a proof of his power, because we were
unwilling to submit to his teaching. It follows —

<span id="xv.x"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p1"></span><span id="xv.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013)<span id="xv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p2"></span>**13.** And it came to pass, when I
prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon
my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou
make a full end of the remnant of Israel?

<span id="xv.x-p3"></span>**13.** Et fuit cum prophetarem, tunc
Phalatias filius Benaim mortuus est: et cecidi super faciem meam, et
clamavi voce magna, et dixi, Heus Dominator Iehovah, tu consumptionem
facies residui Israel?

<span id="xv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.x-p5"></span><span id="xv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p6"></span>It is by no means doubtful that this Phalatias
died at the same time at which the vision was offered to God’s servant.
We shall see at the end of the chapter that the Prophet was always in
exile; but then he seemed to himself caught up into the temple, and
seemed also to himself to behold Phalatias dead. And yet it is possible
that he died at his own home, and not in the entrance or threshold of
the temple. But we know that the vision was not limited to places. As,
therefore, Ezekiel was only by vision in the temple, so also he saw the
death of Phalatias; and in this way God began by a kind of prelude to
show that the slaughter of the city was at hand. For Phalatias was one
of the chief rulers, as was said in the first verse of this chapter, and
was doubtless a man of good reputation: hence his death was a presage of
a general destruction. Hence this exclamation of the Prophet, *Ah Lord
God, wilt thou utterly consume the remnant of Israel?* for now only a
small number out of an immense multitude remained. Phalatias is seized,
and in this way he shows that destruction hangs over the whole people.
Hence it came to pass that the Prophet fell upon the earth astonished,
and exclaimed that it was by no means agreeable to God’s promises to
destroy the remnant of Israel. For some remnant ought to remain, as we
often see in other places: even in the general slaughter of the whole
people, God always gave some hope that he would not abolish his
covenant. For this reason the Prophet now exclaims.

<span id="xv.xi"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xv.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we cease not to
provoke thine anger every day, that at least being admonished by the
prophecies which thine ancient people did not despise with impunity, we
may be touched with a true sense of penitence, and may we so submit
ourselves to thee, that we may willingly humble and renounce ourselves;
and not only do thou mitigate the punishments which otherwise hang over
us, but also show thyself a merciful and gracious Father towards us,
until at length we enjoy the fullness of thy fatherly love in thy
heavenly kingdom, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.xii"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-ninth

<span id="xv.xii-p2"></span>IN the last Lecture the Prophet’s complaint
and lamentation on account of the death of Phalatias, was described to
us. He had heard indeed by the Spirit that Phalatias and others like him
were impious despisers of God, and corrupters of his whole worship: yet
he exclaims when he sees him dead, as if all things were lost. But we
must remember that the Prophet did not speak in his own senses.  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) He regards also the reputation and
dignity of Phalatias, for there is no doubt that he excelled the other
elders, as the greater of the people thought their own stability
depended on his counsel and prudence. Since, therefore, almost all
thought Phalatias to be the support of the city and kingdom, it is not
surprising that the Prophet, according to the common opinion, asks with
wonder whether God is about to consume every remnant of the people. And
he alludes to the man’s name, For <span id="xv.xii-p3.2"></span>פלט,
*phelet,* is to escape; whence <span id="xv.xii-p3.3"></span>פליטים
*(phelitim)* is the name for survivors, and those who escape from any
danger or slaughter. Since, therefore, Phalatias carried in his very
name something of this kind, viz., if there was any hope of safety for
them, it resided in his person: for this reason the Prophet asks whether
God will destroy the remnant of his people. Now it follows —

<span id="xv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014)<span
id="xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p2"></span>**14.** Again the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying,

<span id="xv.xiii-p3"></span>**14.** Et fuit sermo Iehovah ad me,
dicendo,

<span id="xv.xiii-p4"></span>**15.** Son of man, thy brethren, *even*
thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel
wholly, *are* they unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get
you far from the LORD: unto us is this land given in possession.

<span id="xv.xiii-p5"></span>**15.** Fili hominis, fratres tui, fratres
tui, viri propinquitatis tuae, et omnis domus Israel tota ipsa: quibus
dixerunt ipsis incolae Ierusalem, Procul discedite a Iehovah, nobis data
est terra in haereditatem.

<span id="xv.xiii-p6"></span>**16.** Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I
have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a
little sanctuary in the countries where they shall come.

<span id="xv.xiii-p7"></span>**16.** Propterea dic, Sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, Quia procul ejecti estis inter gentes, et quia dispersi estis
per tetras: ideo  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) ero ipsis in
sanctuarium parrum  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) in terris ad
quas venerunt.

<span id="xv.xiii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xv.xiii-p11"></span><span id="xv.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p12"></span>Here God seems to rebuke the
thoughtlessness of his servant, or rather the error of the people,
because we said that the Prophet announced not what he privately
thought, but what was commonly received. Whatever it is, God answers his
complaint as we saw, and shows that even if he takes away from the midst
the eminent and conspicuous, and those who seem to be the supports of a
city and kingdom, yet the Church does not perish on that account,
because he has hidden reasons why he preserves it, not in splendid and
magnificent pomp, as men call it, but that its safety may at length
excite admiration. The sum of the matter is, therefore, although not
only Phalatias, but all the councillors of the king, and all the leaders
of the people should perish, yet that God can work in weakness, so that
the Church shall nevertheless remain safe: and so he teaches that the
remnant must not be sought in that rank which was then conspicuous, but
rather among men ordinary and despised. Now we understand the intention
of God in this answer.

<span id="xv.xiii-p13"></span>He says therefore, *thy brethren, thy
brethren, and the men of thy relationship. H*e here recalls his servant
to the exiles and the captives, of whom he himself was one, as if he
would say that they were not cast out of the Church, as they were still
in some estimation. For God seemed to east them off when he banished
them from the promised land; but he now shows that they were reckoned
among his sons although disinherited from the land of Canaan. Hence he
twice repeats the name of brethren, and adds, *men of thy relationship,*
that the Prophet might rather reckon himself also to be among the
number. Those who refer this to the three exiles, weaken the vehemence
of the passage, whilst they obtrude an inappropriate comment, and turn
away the reader from the genuine sense of the Prophet. But rather, as I
lately hinted,. God here chastises the Prophet because he perversely
restricts the body of the Church to the citizens at Jerusalem; as if he
said, although the Israelites are captives, yet do they seem to you
foreigners? and so will you not leave them a place in the Church? *They
are,* therefore, *thy brethren, thy brethren,* says he, and *the men of
thy relationship* Hence the repetition is emphatic, and tends to this
purpose, that the Prophet may cease to measure God’s grace by the safety
of the city alone, as he had done. Because one man had suddenly died, he
thought that all must perish. Meanwhile he did not *perceive* how he
injured the miserable exiles, whom God had so expelled from the land of
Canaan, that yet some hope of pity remained, as all the Prophets show,
and as we shall soon see. This passage then is worthy of observation,
that we may learn not to estimate the state of the Church by the common
opinion of mankind. And so with respect to the splendor which too often
blinds the eyes of the simple. For it will so happen, that we think we
have found the Church where there is none, and we despair if it does not
offer itself to our eyes; as we see at this day that many are astonished
by those magnificent pomps which are conspicuous in the Papacy. There
the name of “The Church” keeps flying bravely in the face of all: there
also its marks are brought forward: the simple are attracted to the
empty spectacle: so under the name of the Church they are drawn to
destruction; because they determine that the Church is there where that
splendor which deceives them is seen. On the other hand, many who cannot
discern the Church with their eyes and point to it with the finger,
accuse God of deceiving them, as if all the faithful in the world were
extinct. We must hold, therefore, that the Church is often wonderfully
preserved in its hiding — places: for its members are not luxurious men,
or such as win the veneration of the foolish by vain ostentation; but
rather ordinary men, of no estimation in the world. We have a memorable
example of this, when God recalls his own Prophet from the chief leaders
at Jerusalem, not to other leaders, who should attract men to wonder at
themselves, but to miserable exiles, whose dispersion rendered them
despicable. He shows therefore that some remnants were left even in
Chaldea.

<span id="xv.xiii-p14"></span>Now it follows, *to whom the inhabitants
of Jerusalem said, depart, ye far from the sanctuary of Jehovah, the
land is given to us* Here God inveighs against the arrogance of the
people, which remained at home quiet and careless. For he here relates
the words of the citizens of Jerusalem, because, forsooth, they
preferred themselves to the exiles, nay boasted that they were alienated
from the holy people because they had been dragged into exile, or had
left the city of their own accord. As to their saying, *depart afar
off,* it ought not to be taken strictly in the imperative mood; but the
speech ought so to be understood, that while they depart far from the
sanctuary, the land will remain as an inheritance for us. We see,
therefore, that the citizens of Jerusalem pleased themselves, and were
satisfied with their own ease, since they still enjoyed their country,
worshipped God in the temple, and the name of a kingdom was still
standing. Since therefore they so enjoyed themselves, God shows that on
the contrary they were blinded with pride, since he had not entirely
cast away his captives, although he afflicted them with temporal
punishment. But this their boasting was *very* foolish, in
congratulating themselves on their escape from exile. For meanwhile what
was their state? In truth their king’ was treated with ignominy, and we
know what happened to themselves afterwards; for they were reduced to
such straits, that mothers devoured their children, and those nourished
in great, luxury consumed their dung. Nay even before the city was
besieged, what reason was left them for boasting in themselves! but we
here perceive how great was their obstinacy in which they hardened
themselves against the scourge of God. Hence they stupidly supposed that
God could not subdue them. Now what is their ferocity, that they insult
over the miserable exiles as if they were cast away far from God? since
Ezekiel and Daniel and their companions were among these exiles. We know
that Daniel’s piety was so celebrated at Jerusalem, that they all
acknowledged him as the peculiar gift and ornament of his age. When,
therefore, Daniel was in such estimation for superior piety, how could
they erect their crests against him — since they were Conscious of many
crimes, profane, full of all defilements, addicted to cruelty, fraud,
and perjury, being foul in their abominations, and infamous in their
intemperance?

<span id="xv.xiii-p15"></span>Since therefore we see that they so boldly
insulted their brethren, can we wonder that at this day the Papists also
are fierce, because they retain the ordinary succession and the title of
the Church, and that they say that we are cast away and cut off from the
Church, and so are unworthy of enjoying either a name or a place among
Christians? If, therefore, at this day the Papists are so hot against
us, there is no reason why their haughtiness should disturb us; but in
this mirror we may learn that it always was so. But there was another
reason why the citizens of Jerusalem said that their captives were cast
far away. For it was clear that their exile was the just penalty for
their crimes; but meanwhile how did they dare separate themselves from
others, when their life was more wicked? Lastly, since God had already
passed sentence upon them, their condition could not be really different
from theirs, concerning whom the judge had pronounced his opinion, but
they were deaf to all the Prophets’ threats, so that they despised God,
and hence that boasting which treated all as foreigners who did not
remain in the land of Canaan. This passage also teaches us, that if God
at any time chastises those who profess the same religion with us, yet
there is no reason why we should entirely condemn them, as if they were
desperate; for opportunity must be given for the mercy of God. And we
must diligently mark what follows. For after the Prophet has related
that the citizens of Jerusalem boasted when they thought themselves the
sole survivors, God answers on the contrary, *because they were cast
away far among the nations, and dispersed among the lands, or through
the lands, therefore I shall be to them as a small sanctuary*

<span id="xv.xiii-p16"></span>We see that God even here claims some
place for sinners in the Church, against whom he had exercised the rigor
of his judgment. He says, by way of concession, *that they were cast
away and dispersed,* but he adds, *that he was still with them for a
sanctuary;* nay, because they bore their exile calmly and with
equanimity, they pronounce this to be a reason why he should pity them.
For neither is their sentence so general that God overlooked his own
elect. This promise then ought not to be extended to all the captives
without discrimination, because we shall see that God included only a
few. Without doubt then, this was a peculiar promise which God wished to
be a consolation to his elect. He says, *because they bore exile* and
dispersion with calmness and composure, *therefore God would be a
sanctuary to them* But this was a gracious approval of their modesty and
subjection, because they not only suffered exile but also dispersion,
which was more severe. For if they had all been drawn into a distant
region this had been a severe trial, but still they might have united
more easily, had they not been dispersed. This second punishment was the
sadder to them, because they perceived in it the material for despair,
as if they could never be collected together again in one body.

<span id="xv.xiii-p17"></span>thus their wrestling with these
temptations was a sign of no little piety; and as some of the faithful
did not demonstrate their obedience at once, yet because God knows his
own, (<span id="xv.xiii-p17.1"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="xv.xiii-p17.1"></span>,)
and watches for their safety, hence he here opposes to all their
miseries that protection on which their safety was founded. Because,
therefore, *they were dispersed through the lands, hence,* says he, *I
will be to them a small sanctuary*

<span id="xv.xiii-p18"></span>The third person is here used.
Interpreters make <span id="xv.xiii-p18.1"></span>מעט*, megnet,* mean
the noun *toar,* and understand it as “a small sanctuary,” although it
may be taken for a paucity of men, and we may, therefore, fairly
translate it “a sanctuary of security.” Although the other sense suits
the passage best, that God would be a small sanctuary to the captives,
so there will be an antithesis between the splendor of the visible
temple and the hidden grace of God, which so escaped the notice of the
Chaldeans that they rather trod it under foot, and even the Jews who
still remained at Jerusalem despised it. The sanctuary, therefore, which
God had chosen for himself on Mount Zion, because it deservedly
attracted all eyes towards it, and the Israelites were always gazing at
it, since it revealed the majesty of God, might be called the
magnificent sanctuary of God: nothing of the sort was seen in the
Babylonish exile: but God says, *that he was to the captives as a small*
or contracted *sanctuary* This place answers to the 90th Psalm, where
Moses says, Thou, O God, hast always been a tabernacle to us, (<span
id="xv.xiii-p18.2"></span>[Ps
90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="xv.xiii-p18.2"></span>,)
and yet God had not always either a temple or a tabernacle from which he
entered into a covenant with the fathers. But Moses there *teaches* what
God afterwards represented by a visible symbol, that the fathers really
thought that they truly lay hid under the shadow of God’s wings, and
were not otherwise safe and sheltered unless God protected them. Moses,
therefore, in the name of the fathers, celebrates the grace of God which
was continual even before the sanctuary was built. So also in this place
God says by a figure, *that he was their sanctuary,* not that he had
erected an altar there, but because the Israelites were destitute of any
external pledge and symbol, he reminds them that the thing itself was
not entirely taken away, since God had his wings outstretched to cherish
and defend them. This passage is also worthy of notice, lest the
faithful should despond where God has no standard erected: although he
does not openly go before them with royal ensigns to preserve them, yet
they need not conclude themselves altogether deserted; but they should
recall to remembrance what is here said of a *small sanctuary.* God,
therefore, although he does not openly exhibit his influence, yet he
does not cease to preserve them by a secret power, of which in this our
age we have a very remarkable proof. The world indeed thinks us lost as
often as the Church is materially injured, and the greater part become
very anxious, as if God had deserted them. Then let this promise be
remembered as a remedy, *God is to the dispersed and cast away a small
sanctuary;* so that although his hand is hidden, yet our safety proves
that he has worked powerfully in our weakness. We see then that this
sense is most suitable, and contains very useful doctrine. Yet the other
sense will suit, that God is “the sanctuary of a few,” because in that
great multitude but few remain who are really the people of God, for the
greater part was ignorant of him; since then God does not regard that
multitude of the impious which was already within the Church, but only
here directs his discourse towards his own elect, it is not surprising
that he asserts them to be but few in number. Now it follows —

<span id="xv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017)<span id="xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p2"></span>**17.** Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord
GOD, I will even gather you from among the people, and assemble you out
of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the
land of Israel.

<span id="xv.xiv-p3"></span>**17.** Propterea dices, Sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah, congregabo vos e populis, et colligam vos et terris, ad quas
expulsi estis, et dabo vobis terrain Israel.

<span id="xv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p6"></span>Now God expresses the effect of his grace.
In the last verse he had said that he would be a sanctuary. I have
reminded you that these words ought not to be understood of a visible
place in which God was worshipped, but of that hidden influence by which
he cherishes his people. But if the exile had been perpetual, that
promise might seem vain. Why then did God protect his people in exile,
if he wished them to be consumed there? because otherwise his covenant
would have been in vain. Therefore lest any one should object that God
deceives his faithful ones, when he pronounces that he would be their
sanctuary, he now points out its result, viz., that he would restore
them to their country. *Therefore,* says he, *I will collect you from
the people, and gather you from the nations to which ye have been,
driven, and I will give you the land of Israel* Since therefore a return
to their country was a certain pledge of God’s love, hence he announces
that they should at length return On the whole the restitution of the
Church is promised, which should confirm God’s covenant. In it had been
said to Abraham, I will give this land to thee and to thy seed for ever.
(<span id="xv.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Ge
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015)<span id="xv.xiv-p6.1"></span>;
and <span id="xv.xiv-p6.2"></span>[Ge
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008)<span id="xv.xiv-p6.2"></span>.)
God, therefore, to show his covenant still remaining entire and secure,
which he had interrupted for a short time, here speaks concerning this
restoration. And as to the Prophet so often inculcating the name of God,
and relating his orders in God’s name, and directing his discourse to
the captives, this tends to confirm his message, because in such a
desperate state of things it was difficult to wait patiently for what
the Prophet taught, viz., that a time would come when God would collect
them again, and recall them home. Hence the faithful were admonished
that they must consider God’s power, and put their trust in this
prophecy. It follows —

<span id="xv.xv"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#018)<span id="xv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p2"></span>**18.** And they shall come thither, and they
shall take away all the detestable things thereof and all the
abominations thereof from thence.

<span id="xv.xv-p3"></span>**18.** Et venient illuc, et tollent omnia
idola ejus, et omnes abominationes ejus ex ea.

<span id="xv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p6"></span>Here he adds something more important — that
when the Israelites had returned to their country they would be sincere
worshippers of God, and not only offer sacrifices in the temple, but
purge the land of all its pollutions. Here also the Prophet admonishes
them how great and detestable was the impiety of the ten tribes, because
they had contaminated the land with idols. He does not here allude to
the idols of the Gentiles, but rather reproves the Israelites because
they had contaminated with their defilements the land which had been
dedicated to God. Hence the Prophet exhorted his countrymen to
repentance, when he shows that they were not cast out of the land before
it was polluted; and therefore that they were justly punished for their
sacrilege. This is one point. Afterwards we must remark, that we then
truly and purely enjoy God’s blessings, when we direct their use to that
end which is here set before us, namely, pure and proper worship.
Nothing more frequently meets us than this teaching — that we have been
redeemed by God that we may celebrate his glory; that the Church was
planted that in it he may be glorified, and we may make known his
attributes. Hence let us learn that God’s benefits then issue in our
safety, and are testimonies of his paternal favor when they excite us to
worship him. Thirdly, we must remark, that we do not rightly discharge
our duty towards God, unless when we purge his worship from all stain
and defilement. Many so worship God, that they corrupt with vicious
mixtures whatever obedience they seem to render. And to this day even,
those who seem to themselves very wise, are shamefully divided between
God and the devil, as if they could satisfy God with half their
allegiance. Hence let us learn from this passage, that God abhors such
deceivers; for when he says that the Israelites after their return
should be devoted to piety, he indicates it by this mark — *that they
shall take away all their abominations, and all their idols from the
land* It afterwards follows —

<span id="xv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)<span id="xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p2"></span>**19.** And I will give them one heart, and
I will put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out
of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh:

<span id="xv.xvi-p3"></span>**19.** Et dabo illis cor unum, et spiritum
novurn ponam in visceribus eorum, et tollam cor lapideum e carne
ipsorum, et dabo ipsis cor carneum.

<span id="xv.xvi-p4"></span>**20.** That they may walk in my statutes,
and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and
I will be their God.

<span id="xv.xvi-p5"></span>**20.** Ut in statutis meis ambulent, et
jndicia mea custodiant, et faciant ea: et erunt mihi in populum, et ego
ero ipsis in Deum.

<span id="xv.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.xvi-p7"></span><span id="xv.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p8"></span>As God had already spoken concerning the
piety of the Israelites, he shows that they could not forsake their sins
until they were renewed, and so born again by his Spirit. Therefore he
seemed in the last verse to praise the Israelites; but because men too
eagerly claim as their own what has been given them from above, now God
claims to himself glow of their virtues, of which he had formerly
spoken. Their zeal in purging the land of all abominations was worthy of
praise; hence the survivors of the people of Israel are deservedly
celebrated, because they were impelled by the fervor of zeal to free the
worship of God from all corruptions; but lest they should boast, that
they had done it in their own strength, and from the impulse of their
own hearts, God now modifies his former assertions, and shows that such
pursuit of piety would exist among the Israelites, after he had
regenerated them by his Spirit. And this plea alone may suffice to
refute the Papists, as often as they seize upon such passages from the
Scriptures, where God either exacts something from his people, or
proclaims their virtues. David does this; hence he does it of his own
free will: God requires this; hence it is in the will of men that they
are equal to the performance of all things. Thus they trifle. But we see
that the Prophet unites two things together, namely, the faithful elect
of God strenuously attending to their duty, and intent on promoting his
glory, even with ardor in the pursuit of his worship; and yet they were
nothing by themselves. Hence it is added immediately afterwards — I will
*give them one heart, and will put a new spirit in their breasts* But we
must defer the rest to the next lecture.

<span id="xv.xvii"></span>

<span id="xv.xvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xv.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, O Almighty God, that we may learn to
cast our eyes upon the state of thine ancient Church, since at the
present day the sorrowful and manifest dispersion of thy Church seems to
threaten its complete destruction: Grant also, that we may look upon
those promises which are common to us also, that we may wait till thy
Church emerges again from the darkness of death. Meanwhile, may we be
content with thy help, however weak as to outward appearance, till at
length it shall appear that our patience was not delusive, when we enjoy
the reward of our faith and patience in thy heavenly kingdom, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.xviii"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirtieth.

<span id="xv.xviii-p2"></span>In the last lecture, after Ezekiel had
announced the conversion of the people, at the same time he taught that
the singular gift of repentance would be bestowed: because when any one
has turned aside from the right way, unless God extends his hand, he
will plunge himself even into the deep abyss. Hence after a man has once
left God, he cannot return to him by himself. We then touched shortly on
this doctrine: now a fuller explanation must be added. As soon as we
consider the Prophet’s words, we shall at once understand the matter.
God promises *to give the people one heart* Some explain this of mutual
consent, but it does not suit in my opinion. In the third chapter of
Zephaniah, at verse 9, (<span id="xv.xviii-p2.1"></span>[Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)<span id="xv.xviii-p2.1"></span>)
“one shoulder” is taken in this sense. For when the Prophet says, that
God would make all call upon him purely and worship with one shoulder,
he seems to mean that all should be unanimous, and that each would
excite, his neighbor. But in this place one heart is rather opposed to a
divided one; for the Israelites were distracted after vague errors. They
ought to listen to God’s precepts, and subject themselves to his law:
thus they had been content with him alone, and had addicted themselves
entirely to true piety. But their heart was distracted: as when a woman
does not preserve her fidelity to her husband, but is led away by her
lusts, nothing is at rest in her. So also when the people revolted from
the law of God, it was like a wandering harlot. We see, therefore, that
the hearts of all the impious were divided and distracted, and that
nothing in them was simple or sincere. Now God promises that he would
take care that the people were not drawn aside after their
superstitions, but remained in pure and simple obedience to the law. If
any one objects, that the faithful endure a perpetual contest with the
lusts of the flesh, and hence their heart is divided, the answer is
easy, that one heart is understood in the sense of regeneration. For
although the faithful feel a great contest within them, and their heart
is by no means whole, since it is agitated by many temptations, yet as
in the meantime they seriously aspire to God, their heart is said to be
entire, because it is not double or feigned. We understand then what the
Prophet means, and at chapter 36, (<span
id="xv.xviii-p2.2"></span>[Jeremiah
36](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#000)<span id="xv.xviii-p2.2"></span>)
where he repeats the same sentiment, for one heart he puts a new spirit,
as also he says a little afterwards, *I will put a new spirit in their
bowels,* or *inward parts.* As by the word heart he means affections, so
also by the spirit he signifies the mind itself and all its thoughts.
the spirit of a man is often taken for the whole soul, and then it
comprehends also all the affections. But where the two are joined
together, as the heart and spirit, the heart is called the seat of all
the affections, it is in truth the very will of man, while the spirit is
the faculty of intelligence. For we know that there are two special
endowments of the mind: the first is its power of reasoning, and the
next its being endued with judgment and choice: afterwards we shall say
how men have the faculty of choosing and yet want free will. But this
principle must be held, that the soul of man excels first in
intelligence or reason, then in judgment, on which choice and will
depend. We see, therefore, that by these words the Prophet testifies
that men have need of a complete renovation that they may return into
the way from which they once began to wander.

<span id="xv.xviii-p3"></span>Afterwards he adds, *I will take away the
heart of stone, or the stony heart, from their flesh, and will give them
a heart of flesh.* The word flesh is here received in a different sense;
for the Prophet alludes to the heart, which we know to be part of the
human body, when he *says, I will take away the heart of stone from
their flesh.* When God regenerates his elect, he does not change either
their flesh, or skin, or blood; the spiritual and interior grace has no
relation to their body: but the Prophet speaks rather grossly, that he
may conform his discourse to the state of a rude and gross people. For
flesh in the former clause meant the same as body: but at the end of the
‘verse a fleshy heart is put for a flexible heart: an opposition also
must. be marked between the flesh and a stone: a stone by its own
hardness repels even the strongest blows of the hammers, and nothing can
be inscribed on it; but the fleshy heart by its softness admits whatever
is inscribed or engraven on it. The Prophet speaks grossly, as I have
said, yet the sense is by no means ambiguous: namely, since the
Israelites were full of obstinacy, God afterwards changed their heart,
so that they became flexible and obedient that is, by correcting their
hardness he rendered their heart soft.

<span id="xv.xviii-p4"></span><span id="xv.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p5"></span>He adds afterwards, *that they may walk in
my statutes,* and *keep my judgments,* and *do them,* and *they shall be
my people,* and *I will be their God* Now the Prophet more clearly
expresses how God would give his elect hearts of flesh instead of those
of stone, when he regenerates them by his Spirit, and when he forms them
to obey his law, so that they may willingly observe his commands, and
efficiently accomplish what he causes them to will. Now let us consider
more attentively the whole matter of which the Prophet treats. When God
speaks of a stony heart, he doubtless condemns all mortals of obstinacy.
For the Prophet is not here treating of a few whose nature differs from
others, but as in a glass he puts the Israelites before us, that we know
what our condition is, when being deserted by God we follow our natural
inclinations. We collect, therefore, from this place, that all have a
heart of stone, that is, that all are so corrupt that they cannot bear
to obey God, since they are entirely carried away to obstinacy.
Meanwhile it is certain that this fault is adventitious: for when God
created man he did not bestow upon him a heart of stone, and as long as
Adam stood sinless, doubtless his will was upright and well disposed,
and it was also inclined to obedience to God. When therefore we say that
our heart is of stone, this takes its origin from the fall of Adam, and
from the corruption of our nature; for if Adam had been created with a
hard and obstinate heart, that would have been a reproach to God. But as
we have said, the will of Adam was upright from the beginning, and
flexible to follow the righteousness of God; but when Adam corrupted
himself, we perished with him. Hence, therefore, the stony heart,
because we have put off that integrity of nature which God had conferred
upon us at the beginning. For whatever Adam lost we also lost by the
fall: because he was not created for his own self alone, but in his
person God showed what would be the condition of the human race. Hence
after he had been spoiled of the excellent gifts by which he was
adorned, all his posterity were reduced to the same want and misery.
Hence our heart is stony; but through original depravity, because we
ought to attribute this to our father Adam, and not to throw the fault
of our sin and corruption on God. Finally, we see what the beginning of
regeneration is, namely, when God takes away that depravity by which we
are bound down. But two parts of regeneration must be marked, of which
also the Prophet treats.

<span id="xv.xviii-p6"></span>God pronounces *that he gives to his elect
one heart and new spirit* It follows, therefore, that the whole soul is
vitiated, from reason even to the affections. The sophists in the Papacy
confess that man’s soul is vitiated, but only in part. They are also
compelled to subscribe to the ancients, that Adam lost supernatural
gifts, and that natural ones were corrupted, but afterwards they involve
the light in darkness, and feign that some part of the reason remains
sound and entire, then that the will is vitiated only in part: hence it
is a common saying of theirs, that man’s free will was wounded and
injured, but that it did not perish. Now they define free will, the free
faculty of choice, which is joined with reason and also depends upon it.
For the will by itself, without the judgment, does not contain full and
solid liberty, but when reason governs and holds the chief power in the
soul of man, then the will obeys and forms itself after the *prescribed*
rule: that is free will. The Papists do not deny that free will is
injured and wounded, but as I have already said, they hold back
something, as if men were partly right by their own proper motion, and
some inclination or flexible motion of the will remained as well towards
good as evil. Thus indeed they prate in the schools: but we see what the
Holy Spirit pronounces. For if there is need of a new spirit and a new
heart, it follows that the soul of man is not only injured in each part,
but so corrupt that its depravity may be called death and destruction,
as far as rectitude is concerned. But here a question is objected,
whether men differ at all from brute beasts? But experience proves that
men are endued with some reason. I answer, as it is said in the first
chapter of John, (<span id="xv.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Joh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="xv.xviii-p6.1"></span>,)
that light shines in darkness; that is, that some sparks of intelligence
remain, but so far from leading any man into the way, they do not enable
him to see it. Hence whatever reason and intelligence there is in us, it
does not bring us into the path of obedience to God, and much less leads
by continual perseverance to the goal.

<span id="xv.xviii-p7"></span>What then? These very sparks shine in the
darkness to render men without excuse. Behold, therefore, how far man’s
reason prevails, that he may feel self-convinced that no pretext for
ignorance or error remains to him. Therefore man’s intelligence is
altogether useless towards guiding his life aright. Perverseness more
clearly appears in his heart. For man’s will boils over to obstinacy,
and when anything right and what God approves is put before us, our
affections immediately become restive and ferocious; like a refractory
horse when he feels the spur leaps up and strikes his rider, so our will
betrays its obstinacy when it admits nothing but what reason and a sound
intelligence dictates. I have already taught that man’s reason is blind,
but that blindness is not so perspicuous in us, because, as I have said,
God has left in us some light, that no excuse for error should remain.
It is not surprising, then, if God here promises *that he would give a
new heart,* because if we examine all the affections of men, we shall
find them hostile to God. For that passage of St. Paul (<span
id="xv.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Ro 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span
id="xv.xviii-p7.1"></span>) is true, that all the thoughts of the flesh
are hostile to God. Doubtless he \],ere takes the flesh after his own
manner, namely, as signifying’ the whole man as he is by nature and is
born into the world. Since, therefore, all our affections are hostile
and repugnant to God, we see how foolishly the schoolmen trifle, who
feign that the will is injured, and so this weakness is to them in the
place of death. Paul says that he was sold under sin, that is, as far as
he was one of the sons of Adam: The law, he says, works in us sin,
(<span id="xv.xviii-p7.2"></span>[Ro
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span id="xv.xviii-p7.2"></span>,)
I am sold and enslaved to sin. But what do they say? That sin indeed
reigns in us, but only in part, for there is some integrity which
resists it. How far they differ from St. Paul! But this passage also
with sufficient clearness refutes comments of this kind, where God
pronounces *that newness of heart and spirit is his own free gift*
Therefore Scripture uses the name of creation elsewhere, which is worthy
of notice. For as often as the Papists boast that they have even the
least particle of rectitude, they reckon themselves creators: since when
Paul says that we are born again by God’s Spirit, he calls us <span
id="xv.xviii-p7.3"></span>τὸ ποίημα*,* his fashioning or workmanship,
and explains that we are created unto good works. (<span
id="xv.xviii-p7.4"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="xv.xviii-p7.4"></span>.)
To the same purpose is the language of the Psalm, (<span
id="xv.xviii-p7.5"></span>[Ps
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span
id="xv.xviii-p7.5"></span>,) he made us, not we ourselves. For he is not
treating here of that first creation by which we became men, but of that
special grace by which we are born again by the Spirit of God. If
therefore regeneration is a creation of man, whoever arrogates to
himself even the least share in the matter, seizes so much from God, as
if he were his own creator, which is detestable to be heard of. And yet
this is easily elicited from the common teaching of Scripture.

<span id="xv.xviii-p8"></span>Now it follows, *that they shall walk in
my statutes, and keep my precepts and do them* Here the Prophet removes
other doubts, by which Satan has endeavored to obscure the grace of God,
because he could not entirely destroy it. We have already seen that the
Papists do not entirely take away the grace of God; for they are
compelled to confess that man can do nothing except he is assisted by
God’s grace: that free will lies without vigor and efficacy until it
revives by the assistance of grace. Hence they have that in common with
us, that man, as he is corrupt, cannot even move a finger so as to
discharge any duty towards God. But here they err in two ways, because,
as I have already said, they feign that some-right motion remains in
man’s will, besides that there is sound reason in the mind; and they
afterwards add that the grace of the Holy Spirit is not efficacious
without the concurrence or co-operation of our free will. And here their
gross impiety is detected. Hence they confess that we are regenerated by
the Spirit of God, because we should otherwise be useless to think
anything aright, namely, because weakness hinders us from willing
efficaciously. But, on the contrary, they imagine God’s grace to be
mutilated, but how? because God’s grace stirs us up towards ourselves,
so that we become able to wish well, and also to follow out and perfect
what we have willed.

<span id="xv.xviii-p9"></span>We see, therefore, that when they treat of
the grace of the Holy Spirit, they leave man suspended in the midst. How
far then does the Spirit of God work within us? They say, that we may be
able to will rightly and to act rightly. Hence nothing else is given us
by the Holy Spirit but the ability: but it is ours to co-operate, and to
strengthen and to establish what otherwise would be of no avail. For
what advantage is there in the ability without the addition of the
upright will? Our condemnation would only be increased. But here is
their ridiculous ignorance, for how could any one stand even for a
single moment, if God conferred on us only the ability. Adam had that
ability in his first creation, and. then he was as yet perfect, but we
are depraved; so that as far as the remains of the flesh abide in us
which we carry about in this life, we must strive with great
difficulties. If therefore Adam by and bye fell, although endued with
rectitude of nature and with the faculty of willing and of acting
uprightly, what will become of us? for we have need not only of Adam’s
uprightness, and of his faculty of both willing and acting uprightly,
but we have need of unconquered fortitude, that we may not yield to
temptations, but be superior to the devil, and subdue all depraved and
vicious affections of the flesh, and persevere unto the end in this
wrestling or warfare. We see, therefore, how childishly they trifle who
ascribe nothing else to the grace of the Holy Spirit unless the gift of
ability. And Augustine expounds this wisely, and treats it at sufficient
length in his book “Concerning the gift of perseverance, and the
predestination of the saints;” for he compares us with the first Adam,
and shows that God’s grace would not be efficacious, except in the case
of a single individual, unless he granted us more than the ability. But
what need have we of human testimonies, when the Holy Spirit clearly
pronounces by the mouth of his Prophet what we here read? Ezekiel does
not say: I will give them a. new spirit or a new heart, that they may
walk and be endued with that moderate faculty: what then? *that they may
walk in my precepts, that they may keep my statutes, and perform, my
commands* We see therefore that regeneration extends so far that the
effect follows, as also Paul teaches: Complete, says he, your salvation
with fear and trembling, (<span id="xv.xviii-p9.1"></span>[Php
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)<span id="xv.xviii-p9.1"></span>;)
here he exhorts the faithful to the attempt. And truly God does not wish
us to be like stones. Let us strive therefore and stretch all our
nerves, and do our utmost towards acting uprightly: but Paul advises
that to be done with fear and trembling; that is, by casting away all
confidence in one’s own strength, because if we are intoxicated with
that diabolical pretense that we are fellow-workers with God, and that
his grace is assisted by the motion of our free will, we shall break
down, and at length God will show how great our blindness was. Paul
gives the reason, because, says he, it is God who works both to will and
to accomplish. (<span id="xv.xviii-p9.2"></span>[Php
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="xv.xviii-p9.2"></span>.)
He does not say there that it is God who works the ability, and who
excites in us the power of willing, but he says that God is the author
of that upright will, and then he adds also the effect; because it is
not sufficient to will unless we are able to execute. As to the word
“power,” Paul does not use it, for it would occasion dispute, but he
says that God works in all of us to accomplish.

<span id="xv.xviii-p10"></span>If any one object, that men naturally
will and act naturally by their own proper judgment and motion, I
answer, that the will is naturally implanted in man, whence this faculty
belongs equally to the elect and the reprobate. All therefore will, but
through Adam’s fall it happens that our will is depraved and rebellious
against God: will, I say, remains in us, but it is enslaved and bound by
sin. Whence then comes an upright will? Even from regeneration by the
Spirit. Hence the Spirit does not confer on us the faculty of willing:
for it is inherent to us from our birth, that is, it is hereditary, and
a part of the creation which could not be blotted out by Adam’s fall;
but when the will is in us, God gives us to will rightly, and this is
his work. Besides, when it is said that he gives us the power of
willing, this is not understood generally, because it ought not to be
extended to the bad as well as to the good; but when Paul is treating of
the salvation of men, he deservedly assigns to God our willing
uprightly. We now understand what the Prophet’s words signify, and it
seems that he denotes perseverance when he says, *that they may walk in
my precepts, and keep my judgments and do them. the* whole matter had
been explained in one word, *that they may walk in my statutes:* but
because men always sinfully consider how they may lessen the grace of
God, and by sacrilegious boldness endeavor to draw to themselves what
belongs to him; therefore that. the Prophet may better exclude all
pride, he says that we must attribute to God the walking in his
precepts, preserving his statutes, and obeying his whole law. Hence let
us leave entirely his own praise to God, and thus acknowledge that in
our good works nothing is our own; and especially in perseverance, let
us reckon it God’s singular gift: and this is surely necessary, if we
consider how very weak we are, and with how many and what violent
attacks Satan continually urges us. First of all, we may easily fall
every moment, unless God sustain us: and then the thrusts of Satan by
far exceed our strength. If therefore we consider our condition without
the grace of God, we shall confess that in our good works the only part
which is ours is the fault, as also Augustine wisely makes this
exception: for it is sufficiently known that no work is so praiseworthy
as not to be sprinkled with some fault. Neither do the duties which we
discharge proceed from a perfect love of God, but we have always to
wrestle that we may obey him. We seem then to contaminate our deeds by
this defect. There is then in our good works that very thing which
vitiates them, so that they are deservedly rejected before God. But when
we treat of uprightness and praise, we must learn to leave to God what
is his own, lest we wish to be partakers in sacrilege.

<span id="xv.xviii-p11"></span>Now it follows, *and they shall be my
people, and I will be their God* Under these words the Prophet doubtless
includes that gratuitous pardon by which God reconciles sinners to
himself. And truly, it would not be sufficient for us to be renewed in
obedience to God’s righteousness unless his paternal indulgence, by
which he pardons our infirmities, is added. This is expressed more
clearly by Jeremiah, (<span id="xv.xviii-p11.1"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span
id="xv.xviii-p11.1"></span>,) and by our Prophet, (<span
id="xv.xviii-p11.2"></span>[Jer
36:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025)<span
id="xv.xviii-p11.2"></span>,) but it is the mark of a Scripture phrase.
For as often as God promises the sons of Abraham that they should be his
people, that promise has no other foundation than in his gratuitous
covenant which contains the forgiveness of sins. Hence it is as if the
Prophet had added, that God would expiate all the faults of his people.
For our safety is contained in these two members, that God follows us
with his paternal favor, while he bears with us, and does not call us up
for judgment, but buries our sins, as is said in <span
id="xv.xviii-p11.3"></span>[Ps. 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="xv.xviii-p11.3"></span>,
Blessed is the man to whom God does not impute his iniquities.

<span id="xv.xviii-p12"></span>It follows, on the other side, that all
are wretched and accursed to whom he does impute them. If any one
object, that we have no need of pardon when we do not sin, the answer is
easy, that the faithful are never so regenerated as to fulfill the law
of God. They aspire to keep his commands, and that too with a serious
and sincere affection; but because some defects always remain, therefore
they are guilty, and their guilt cannot be blotted out otherwise than by
expiation when God pardons them. But we know that there were under the
law rites prescribed for expiating their sins: this was the meaning of
sprinkling by water and the pouring out of blood; but we know that these
ceremonies were of no value in themselves, except as far as they
directed the people’s faith to Christ. Hence, whenever our salvation is;
treated of, let these two things be remembered, that we cannot be
reckoned God’s sons unless he freely expiate our sins, and thus
reconcile himself to us: and then not unless he also rule us by his
Spirit. Now we must hold, that what God hath joined man ought not to
separate. Those, therefore, who through relying on the indulgence of God
permit themselves to give way to sin, rend his covenant and impiously
sever it. Why so? because God has joined these two things together,
viz., that he will be propitious to his sons, and will also renew their
hearts, Hence those who lay hold of only one member of the sentence,
namely, the pardon, because God bears with them, and omit the other, are
as false and sacrilegious as if they abolished half of God’s covenant.
Therefore we must hold what I have said, namely, that under these words
reconciliation is pointed out, by which it happens that God does not
impute their sins to his own. Lastly, let us remark that the whole
perfection of our salvation has been placed in this, if God reckons us
among his people. As it is said in <span id="xv.xviii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)<span
id="xv.xviii-p12.1"></span>,

<span id="xv.xviii-p13"></span>“Happy is the people to whom Jehovah is
their God.”

<span id="xv.xviii-p14"></span>There solid happiness is described,
namely, when God deems any people worthy of this honor of belonging
peculiarly to himself. Only let him be propitious to us, and then we
shall not be anxious, because our salvation is secure. It follows —

<span id="xv.xix"></span>

<span id="xv.xix-p1"></span><span id="xv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021)<span id="xv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xix-p2"></span>**21.** But *as for them* whose heart
walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their
abominations, I will recompense their way upon their own heads, saith
the Lord GOD.

<span id="xv.xix-p3"></span>**21.** Et quorum cor pergit  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) ad cor abominationurn  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) et spurcitiarum ipserum, viam corum in
caput ipsorum rependam, dicit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="xv.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.xix-p7"></span><span id="xv.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xix-p8"></span>The phrase which the Prophet uses is indeed
harsh: he says, *their heart* *goes after heart,* so that some interpret
this of imitation: namely, since God promises that he will be an avenger
if any of the people conduct themselves after bad examples and unite in
alliance with the wicked, just as if they glued together their hearts
and affections, but that is harsh. The repetition is therefore
superfluous, and the Prophet means nothing else than that God will be
avenged if the Israelites follow their own heart, so as to walk in their
own foulness and abominations. First of all we must understand the
reason why the Prophet uses this sentiment. God had liberally poured out
the treasures of his mercy, but since, hypocrites have always been mixed
with the good, at the same time that they confidently boast themselves
members of the Church, and use the name of God with great audacity; so
that the Prophet uses this threat that they may not think all the
promises which we hear of to belong to themselves promiscuously. For
there were always many reprobate among the elect people, because not all
who sprang from father Abraham were true Israelites. (<span
id="xv.xix-p8.1"></span>[Rom. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span id="xv.xix-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.xix-p9"></span>Since therefore it was so, the Prophet
properly shows here that what he had previously promised was peculiar to
God’s elect, and to the true and lawful members of the Church, but not
to the spurious, nor to the degenerate, nor to those who are
unregenerated by the true and incorruptible seed. This is the Prophet’s
intention. But lest there might seem to be too much rigor when God, as
it were, armed comes down into the midst to destroy all who do not
repent, the Prophet here declares their crime — namely, because *their
heart walks after their heart,* that is, thine heart draws itself, and
so the word heart is twice repeated. It is indeed a superfluous
repetition but emphatic, when he says, that the heart of those who so
pertinaciously adhere to their own superstitions is then impelled by its
own self to new motions, so that by its continual tenor it goes always
towards superstitions. Hence I will be an avenger, says God. Hence as
often as God proposes to us testimonies of his favor, let each descend
into himself and examine all his affections. But when any one lays hold
of his own vices let him not please himself in them, but rather groan
over them, and strive to renounce his own affections that he may follow
God: neither let him harden himself in obstinacy, so that his heart may
not proceed and rush continually towards evil, as is here said.

<span id="xv.xx"></span>

<span id="xv.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xv.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we have utterly
perished in our father Adam, and there remains in us no single part
which is not corrupt, whilst we carry material for wrath, and cursing,
and death, as well in the soul as in the body, that being regenerated by
the Spirit, we may more and more withdraw ourselves from our own will
and our own spirit, and so submit ourselves to thee, that thy Spirit may
truly reign within us: And afterwards, grant that we may not be
ungrateful, but considering how inestimable is this benefit, may we
dedicate our whole life and apply ourselves to glorify thy name, in
Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.xxi"></span>

<span id="xv.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty First,

<span id="xv.xxii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)<span
id="xv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p2"></span>**22.** Then did the cherubims lift up
their wings, and the wheels beside them; and the glory of the God of
Israel *was* over them above.

<span id="xv.xxii-p3"></span>**22.** Et sustulerunt cherubim alas suas,
et rotae e regione ipsorum: et gloria Dei Israel super ipsos sursum.

<span id="xv.xxii-p4"></span>**23.** And the glory of the LORD went up
from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which *is* on
the east side of the city.

<span id="xv.xxii-p5"></span>**23.** Et ascendit gloria Iehovae e medio
urbis, et stetit super montem qui est ab oriente urbis.

<span id="xv.xxii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxii-p7"></span><span id="xv.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxii-p8"></span>Here Ezekiel repeats what we saw before,
namely, that God as he had chosen Mount Zion had at length rejected it,
because that place had been polluted by the many wickednesses of the
people. The Jews fancied that God was, as it were, held captive among
them, and in this confidence they gave themselves up to licentiousness.
Hence the Prophet shows them that God was not so bound to them as not to
go wherever he pleased, and what is more, he announces that he has
migrated, and that the temple is deprived of his glory. This indeed was
almost incredible. For since God had pro-raised to dwell there
perpetually, (<span id="xv.xxii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span
id="xv.xxii-p8.1"></span>,) his faithful ones could scarcely suppose
that he would neglect his promise, and desert the temple which he had
chosen. But this interruption does not interfere with his promise, which
was always true and firm. God, therefore, did not entirely desert Mount
Zion, because the opposite promise concerning his return must be kept.
Since then the exile was temporary, and the temple was to be restored
after seventy years, these points may be reconciled: namely, that God
departed from it and yet the place remained sacred, so that after the
lapse of that time which God had previously determined, his worship
should be restored again in the temple and on Mount Zion. But he says,
that God *had visibly gone out of the city and the cherubim also:* that
is, that God was borne above the wings of the cherubim, as also the
scripture elsewhere says: and he does this, because the Jews were
governed by external symbols, and when the ark of the covenant was shut
up in the sanctuary, no one could be persuaded that God could be torn
away from it. With this view the Prophet says, *The cherubim had flown
away elsewhere, and that at the same time God was carried upon their
wings* Now he adds —

<span id="xv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#024)<span id="xv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p2"></span>**24.** Afterwards the spirit took me up,
and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of
the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.

<span id="xv.xxiii-p3"></span>**24.** Et Spiritus sustulit me, et
reduxit me in Chaldaeam ad captivitatem, in *visione,* in Spiritu Dei.
Et ascendit desuper me  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) visio
quam videram.

<span id="xv.xxiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxiii-p6"></span>Let us add also the next verse —

<span id="xv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#025)<span id="xv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p2"></span>**25.** Then I spake unto them of the
captivity all the things that the LORD had shewed me.

<span id="xv.xxiv-p3"></span>**25.** Et locutus sum captivitati cunctos
sermones Iehovae, quos mihi ostenderat.  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241)

<span id="xv.xxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xv.xxiv-p6"></span><span id="xv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p7"></span>The Prophet here confirms what he had said
at the beginning, viz., that this vision was divinely presented and was
not an empty and deceptive specter. This prophecy was difficult of
belief, so that all doubt ought to be removed, lest any one should
object that God was not the author of the vision. He says, therefore,
*that he was raised up by the Spirit of God and brought into Chaldea.*
We have already asserted, that the Prophet did not change his place,
though I am unwilling to contend for this, if any one think otherwise.
But still it appears to me, that when the Prophet remained in exile he
saw Jerusalem and the other places about which he discourses, not
humanly but by a prophetic spirit. As then he had been carried to
Jerusalem by the Spirit, so was he brought back into exile. But Spirit
is here opposed to nature, since we know that our prospect is limited
within a definite space. Now if the least obstacle occur our sight will
not pass over five or six paces. But when God’s Spirit illuminates us, a
new faculty begins to flourish in us, which is by no means to be
estimated naturally. We now see in what sense Ezekiel says, *that he was
brought back into Chaldea by the Spirit of God,* because he was in truth
like a man in an ecstasy. For he had been carried out of himself, but
now he is left in his ordinary state. And this is the meaning of these
words, *in a vision in the Spirit of God* For a vision is opposed to a
reality. For if the Prophet had been brought back by a vision, it
follows that he had not really been at Jerusalem so as to be brought
back into Chaldea. Now he meets the question which may be moved, viz.:
“What was the efficacy of the vision?*”* For the Prophet recalls us to
the power of the Spirit which we must not measure by our rule. Since,
therefore, the operation of the Spirit is incomprehensible, we need not
wonder that the Prophet was carried to Jerusalem in a vision, and
afterwards brought back into captivity. He adds *that the vision
departed from him,* by which words he commends his own doctrine, and
extols it beyond all mortal speeches, because he separates between what
was human in himself and what was divine when he says, *the vision
departed from me.* Hence the Prophet wishes himself to be considered as
twofold: that is, as a private man, and but one of many, for in this
capacity he had no authority as if he was to be heard in God’s stead.
But when the Spirit acted upon him, he wished to withdraw himself from
the number of men, because he did not speak of himself, nor treat of
anything human, or in a human manner, but the Spirit of God so
flourished in him that he uttered nothing but what was celestial and
divine.

<span id="xv.xxiv-p8"></span><span id="xv.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p9"></span>Afterwards he says, *that he spoke all
those words to the captives,* or exiles. This passage seems superfluous.
For to what purpose had the Prophet been taught concerning the
destruction of the city, the overthrow of the kingdom, and the ruin of
the temple, unless to induce the Jews who still remained in the country
to desist from their superstition? But we must remember that the Prophet
had a hard contest with those exiles among whom he dwelt, as will more
clearly appear in the next chapter. For as the Jews boasted that they
remained safe, and laughed at the captives who had suffered themselves
to be drawn away into a distant land, so the exiles were weary of their
miseries. For their condition was very sorrowful when they saw
themselves exposed to every reproach, and treated by the Chaldeans
servilely and insultingly. Since, then, this was their condition, they
roared among themselves and were indignant, since they had to bear the
manners of the Prophets, and especially Jeremiah. Since, therefore, the
captives repented of their lot, it was needful for the Prophet to
restrain their contumely. And this is the meaning of the words *that he
related the words of Jehovah to the captives.* Nor was this admonition
less needful for the exiles, than for the Jews who as yet remained safe
in the city. He says, *the words which God caused him to see,*
improperly, but very appositely to the sense; for not only had God
spoken, but he had placed the thing itself before the eyes of the
Prophet. Hence we see why he says, *that words had been shown to him
that he might behold them* I have already said that this language is
improper for words, because it applies to the sight, for eyes do not
receive words, but cars. But here the Prophet signifies that it was not
the naked and simple word of God, but clothed in an external symbol.
Augustine says that a sacrament is a word made visible, and he speaks
correctly; because in baptism God addresses our eyes, when he brings
forward water as a symbol of our ablution and regeneration. In the
Supper also he directs his speech to our eyes, since Christ shows his
flesh to us as truly food, and his blood as truly drink, when bread and
wine are set before us. For this reason also the Prophet now *says, that
he saw the word of God,* because it was clothed in outward symbols. For
God appeared to his Prophet, as I have said, and showed him the temple,
and there erected a theater, as it were, in which he beheld the whole
state of the city Jerusalem.  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)
Let us go on —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc22014.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span> “Which looks towards the cast.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc22014.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span> That is, “between themselves.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc22014.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span> That is,” Let us build.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc22014.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span> Or, “caldron.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc22014.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span> There is a change of number. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc22014.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span> Or, “caldron.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc22014.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xv.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p10"></span> The negative must be understood. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc22014.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xv.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.xii-p3.1"></span>Ex proprio
sensu:” — in contrast to prophetic inspiration.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc22014.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xv.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p8"></span> “Therefore” — the copula ought to be
resolved into the causative. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc22014.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xv.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p9"></span> Or, “of fewness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc22014.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xv.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xix-p4"></span> Or, “walks.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc22014.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xv.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xix-p5"></span> “Foulness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc22014.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xv.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiii-p4"></span> That is, “left me.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc22014.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xv.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p4"></span> “Which he had made me see.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc22014.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xv.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xxiv-p10"></span>See Augustine’s Homily on John, 89, bk.
19, *com. Faust.* Calvin, as well as other Commentators, often felt
great difficulty in separating the human element from the divine, while
interpreting the Prophets. He has expressed it feelingly while
interpreting this last verse of the eleventh chapter. It is confessedly
most difficult to draw the line rigidly between the direct agency of God
and the subservient instrumentality of man. The spiritual teaching
delivered by the Prophets evidently needed some visible and tangible
means of conveyance to the outward senses of the recipients; but who
shall mark off any palpable boundary between spirit and grace — the mind
of God, and the regenerated mind of the Prophet? If there are no harsh
transitions and sudden breaks in the natural world, so in the spiritual
and moral, the limits between the essentially divine and the clearly
human are at present untraceable by mortal vision. As the revelations to
Ezekiel were progressive, differing in immediate character and object,
so together with them something extrinsic was needed, to become a
suitable vehicle for the majesty and purity of the truth conveyed.
Neither the Prophet nor his countrymen could bear the naked effulgence
of the divine messages; they were too luminous and dazzling for their
sin-burdened souls, and thus they needed a condescending adaptation to
their many infirmities. The pure and colorless water of life, instinct
though it be with the spirit of Deity, comes to us tinctured with the
peculiarity of the earthen vessel through which it flows. Our attention
ought often to be dragon to this while reading Ezekiel. The Almighty not
only condescends to his infirmities, but to those of the captives among
whom he dwelt, so that the pure light of prophetic manifestation becomes
tinged in passing through a two-fold medium, before it reaches us, among
“the isles of the Gentiles.” And while we cannot give the reader any
formal rules for testing the soundness of Calvin’s interpretations, we
must appeal to that sound mind, that cultivated scholarship, and that
Christian tact, which is the result of experience, in discriminating
between the chaff and the wheat. Ordinary faculties, chastened by severe
and patient study, combined with holy and Christian views of Divine
truth as a whole, will suffice for deciding on such abstruse questions
with a sufficient degree of precision and correctness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc22015)
