[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc22006)  [Next](cc22008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001.md)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thou also, son of man, take thee a
tile, and lay it before thee, and pourtray upon it the city, *even*
Jerusalem:

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et tu, Fili hominis, sume tibi
laterem, et pone ipsum coram facie tua, et pinge super ipsum urbem,
nempe Hierosolymam:

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And lay siege against it, and build a
fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against
it, and set *battering* rams against it round about.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et pone contra eam obsidionem, et
extrue contra eam turrim, et funde adversus eam aggerem, et pone
adversus eam castra, et statue contra eam arietes in circuitu.

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Moreover take thou unto thee an iron
pan, and set it *for* a wall of iron between thee and the city: and set
thy face against it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege
against it. This *shall be* a sign to the house of Israel.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et tu sume tibi patenam vel
sartaginem ferream, et pone illam murum ferreum inter to et inter urbem:
et obfirma faciem tuam adversus eam vel contra ex opposito, et sit in
obsidionem, et obsidebis eam. Hoe signum domui Israel.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span><span id="viii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>Here God begins to speak more openly by
means of his servant, and not to speak only, but to signify by an
outward symbol what he wishes to be uttered by his mouth. Hence he
orders the Prophet *to* paint Jerusalem on a brick Take therefore, he
says*, a brick, and place it in thy sight: then paint on it a city, even
Jerusalem* This is one command: then *erect a tower against it.* He
describes the form of ancient warfare; for then when they wished to
besiege cities, they erected mounds from which they filled up trenches:
then they moved about wooden towers, so that they might collect the
soldiers into close bands, and they had other machines which are not now
in use. For fire-arms took away that ancient art of warfare. But God
here Simply wishes the picture of a city to be besieged by Ezekiel. Then
he orders him to *set up a pan or iron plate, like a wall of iron* This
had been a childish spectacle, unless God had commanded the Prophet to
act so. And hence we infer, that sacraments cannot be distinguished from
empty shows, unless by the word of God. The authority of God therefore
is the mark of distinction, by which sacraments excel, and have their
weight and dignity, and whatever men mingle with them is frivolous. For
this reason we say that all the pomps of which the Papal religion is
full are mere trifles. Why so? because men have thought out whatever
dazzles the eyes of the simple, without any command of God.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>But if any one now objects, that the water
in baptism cannot penetrate as far as the soul, so as to purge it of
inward and hidden filth, we have this ready answer: baptism ought not to
be considered in its external aspect only, but its author must be
considered. Thus the whole worship under the law had nothing very
different from the ceremonies of the Gentiles. Thus the profane Gentiles
also slew their victims, and had whatever outward splendor could be
desired: but that was entirely futile, because God had not commanded it.
On the other hand, nothing was useless among the Jews. When they brought
their victims, when the blood was sprinkled, when they performed
ablutions, God’s command was added, and afterwards a promise: and so
these ceremonies were not without their use. We must therefore hold,
that sacraments at first sight appear trifling and of no moment, but
their efficacy consists in the command and promise of God. For if any
one reads what Ezekiel here relates, he would say that it, was child’s
play. He took a brick, he painted a city on it: it was only a figment:
then he had imaginary machines by which he besieged the city: why boys
do better than this: next he set up a plate of iron like a wall: this
action is not a whit more serious than the former. Thus profane men
would not only despise, but even carp at this symbol. But when God sends
his Prophet, his authority should be sufficient for us, which is a
certain test for our decision, and cannot fail, as I have said. First,
he says, *paint a city, namely Jerusalem:* then *lay siege to it,* and
*move towards it all warlike instruments: place even* <span
id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>כרים, *kerim,* which some interpret
*“leaders,”* but they are *“lambs,”* or *“rams,”* for the Hebrews
metaphorically name those iron machines by which walls are thrown down
*“rams,”* as the Latins do. Some indeed prefer the rendering
*“*leaders,” but I do not approve of their opinion. At length he says,
*this shall be a sign* and on this clause we must dwell: for, as I
already said, the whole description may be thought useless, unless this
testimony be added: indeed the whole vision would be insipid by itself,
unless the savor arose from this seasoning, since God says, *this should
be a sign to the Israelites.*

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>When God pronounces that the Prophet should
do nothing in vain, this ought to be sufficient to lead us to acquiesce
in his word. If we then dispute according to our sense, he will show
that what seems foolish overcomes all the wisdom of the world, as Paul
says. (<span id="viii.i-p12.1"></span>[1Co
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="viii.i-p12.1"></span>..md)
For God sometimes works as if by means of folly: that is, he has methods
of action which are extraordinary, and by no means in accordance with
human judgment. But that this folly of God may excel all the wisdom of
the world, let this sentence occur to our minds, when it is here said,
*Let this be for a sign to the house of Israel.* For although the
Israelites could shake their heads, and put out their tongues, and treat
the Prophet with unbridled *insolence,* yet this alone prevailed
sufficiently for confounding them, that God said, *this shall be for a
sign* And we know of what event it was a sign, because the Israelites
who had been drawn into captivity thought they had been too easy, and
grieved at their obedience: then also envy crept in when they saw the
rest of the people remaining in the city. Therefore God meets them and
shows them that exile is more tolerable than to endure a siege in the
city if they were enclosed in it. Besides, there is little doubt that
this prophecy was directed against the Jews who pleased themselves,
because they were yet at ease in their rest. For this reason, therefore,
God orders the Prophet to *erect towers,* then *to pitch a camp,* and to
*prepare whatever belongs to the siege of a city,* because very soon
afterwards the Chaldeans would arrive, who had not yet oppressed the
city, but are just about to besiege it, as we shall afterwards see at
length.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou so
graciously invitest us to thee, and ceasest not, even if we are deaf, to
continue towards us the same goodness — that at length we may be
disciplined to obedience and permit ourselves to be ruled by thy word:
grant also that we may obey not only for a single day or a short period,
but perseveringly, until at the final close of life’s journey we may be
gathered at length to thy celestial repose, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture twelfth

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#004.md)<span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Lie thou also upon thy left side,
and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: *according* to the
number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their
iniquity.

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Et tu cuba super latus tuum
sinistrum, et pone iniquitatem domus Israel super illud; pro numero
dierum quibus eubabis super illud, portabis iniquitatem ipsorum

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span>**5.** For I have laid upon thee the years
of their iniquity, according to the number of the days, three hundred
and ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span>**5.** Et (pro nam) ego dedi tibi  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) annos iniquitatis ipsorum ad numerum
dierum, trecenti et nonaginta dies,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) et portabis iniquitatem domus Israel.

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span>**6.** And when thou hast accomplished
them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of
the house of Judah forty days: I have appointed thee each day for a
year.

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span>**6.** Et cum finieris eos dies, tune
eubabis super latus tuum dextrum secundo: et portabis iniquitatem domus
Iehudah quadraginta diebus, diem pro anno, diem pro anno constitui tibi.
 <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md)

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span>**7.** Therefore thou shalt set thy face
toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm *shall be* uncovered, and
thou shalt prophesy against it.

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span>**7.** Et ad obsidionem Ierusalem diriges
 <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) faciem: et brachium tuum nudatum
(erit), et prophetabis contra eam.

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span>**8.** And, behold, I will lay bands upon
thee, and thou shalt not turn thee from one side to another, till thou
hast ended the days of thy siege.

<span id="viii.iv-p15"></span>**8.** Et ecce posui super to funes, et
non vertes to a latere tuo ad latus tuum, usque dum compleveris dies
obsidionum tuarum.

<span id="viii.iv-p16"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p17"></span><span id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p18"></span>We must first consider the scope of this
prophecy, and we shall then discuss more conveniently its separate
parts. It is not doubtful that God wished to oppose the pride of the
people, for they thought themselves punished more severely than they
deserved. And this is customary with hypocrites, because while they dare
not acquit themselves altogether, they yet murmur as if God afflicted
them too severely, then they willingly offer something in compensation
that they may free themselves from punishment. For although they confess
themselves guilty, yet they do not cease to turn aside, and think if God
descends to equity with them, that either they will escape, or at least
be less miserable. Such was the disposition of the ancient people, as is
well known. We now only need to repeat what we have said before: that
the Jews were more obstinate because God had spared them. Nor did they
think this only temporary, but they exulted with great freedom, as if
they had settled all their business with God. Meanwhile the exiles were
constantly complaining, first, that God had treated them so severely,
and yet had in clemency pardoned the Jews: then they thought that they
had been deceived, and that if they had prudently attended to their own
affairs they could have escaped the miseries by which they were
oppressed. Now, therefore, Ezekiel is ordered to come forward into the
midst of them, and shortly to show that no other result is possible but
that the whole people should receive the reward of their wickedness. But
because simple teaching was not sufficient to stir them up, a vision is
added, and to this end the Prophet is ordered *to lie on one side for
three hundred and ninety days, and on the other side forty days.* Now
the interpretation is added, *that days are taken for so many years* But
the meaning is, that the people through three hundred and ninety years
carried on war with God, because they had never ceased from sin. Hence
the Prophet is ordered *to take upon him the iniquity of so many years:*
but God appointed him days for years, then forty years are added which
belong to the people of Judah.

<span id="viii.iv-p19"></span>This place is variously twisted by
interpreters. I will not refer to all their comments, for they have
fatigued themselves in vain by inventing arguments which vanish of their
own accord: I will not spend the time in refuting them, but will only
endeavor to elicit the genuine sense. Some extend the name of Israel to
the whole body of the people, but this must be rejected; for they begin
the three hundred and ninety years from the first revolt, of which
mention is made in the Book of Judges, (<span
id="viii.iv-p19.1"></span>[Jud
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#002)<span id="viii.iv-p19.1"></span>,.md)
and they gather together those years during which the Israelites often
fell into impiety: hence they reckon the three hundred and ninety years,
and subtract those periods in which religion and the pure worship of God
flourished, as under Gideon, under Samson for some time, and under David
and Solomon. They subtract then those years in which piety flourished
among the people, and the remainder reaches about three hundred and
ninety years. But it would be absurd to include the tribe of Judah under
the name of Israel, when a comparison between each kingdom is made. We
know, indeed, that all the posterity of Abraham were so named by their
father Jacob, when, therefore, the name of Israel is put, the twelve or
thirteen tribes are comprehended without exception; but when there is
comparison, Israel signifies only the ten tribes, or that adulterous
kingdom which set up Jeroboam as king after the death of Solomon. (<span
id="viii.iv-p19.2"></span>[1Ki
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020.md)<span
id="viii.iv-p19.2"></span>.) Since, then, both Israel and Judah are
treated of here, it is by no means suitable that the prophecy should
speak of the whole people, and mix the tribe of Judah with the rest.
Then the event itself dispels many clouds and takes away all room for
controversy: for if we number the years from the revolt in Rehoboam’s
time, we shall find three hundred and ninety years till the siege of
Jerusalem. What then can be easier, and what room is there for
conjectures? I wonder that Jerome, since he relates nothing but mere
trifles, yet boasts of some wonderful wisdom; for he says, he did not do
it for the *sake* of boasting, and truly he has little cause for it; for
if any one will read his Commentary, he will find nothing but what is
puerile. (<span id="viii.iv-p19.3"></span>[1Ki
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028.md)<span
id="viii.iv-p19.3"></span>.) But, as I have already said, since the name
of Israel everywhere signifies the ten tribes, this interpretation is
best here: namely, that the obstinacy of the ten tribes was continued
through three hundred and ninety years. For, as is sufficiently, known,
Jeroboam erected two altars, that he might turn away the people from the
worship of God: for he thought himself not sufficiently established in
his kingdom, so as to retain the obedience of the people, unless he
turned them away from the house of David. Therefore he used that
artifice — thus the worship of God was corrupted among the Israelites.
Now by idolatry the Prophet here points out the other sins of the
people; for from this fountain flowed all other iniquities. After they
had once cut themselves off from God, they became forgetful of the whole
law. The Prophet therefore includes all their corruptions under this one
expression, since by the edict of their king this people had shaken off
the yoke of God, for which Hosea reproaches them. (<span
id="viii.iv-p19.4"></span>[Ho
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011)<span id="viii.iv-p19.4"></span>..md)
We now understand the three hundred and ninety years of Israel’s
iniquity, because the people then rejected the law, and followed foreign
superstitions, which Jeroboam fabricated with no other intention than
That; of strengthening the power of his kingdom, just as earthly kings
are influenced by no other desire, although they pretend, and even
magnificently boast, that they seek God’s glory with the utmost
devotion, yet their religion is only a delusion; provided only that they
retain the people in obedience and duty, any kind of worship, and any
mode of worshipping God, is the same to them. Such, therefore, was the
cunning of Jeroboam: but his posterity greatly deteriorated, so that the
worship of God could never be restored among the Israelites.
Circumcision, indeed, remained, in which they imitated what Moses had
commanded in the law, but at the same time they had two altars, and
those profane ones, instead of one only. At length they did not hesitate
openly to adopt the idolatries of the Gentiles: hence they so mixed up
God with their inventions, that what even they valued under the pretense
of piety, was an abomination to him. This is the reason why God says
*that the iniquity of the people of Israel has endured for three hundred
and ninety years*

<span id="viii.iv-p20"></span>The difficulty in the second clause is
greater, because the computation does not agree exactly. After the death
of Josiah we shall only find twenty-two years to the destruction of the
city. But we know that this king, of his eminent piety, took care that
God should be sincerely worshipped; for he purged the whole land of all
its defilements. Where, then, will be those forty years? Hence it is
necessary to take a part of the reign of Manasseh, because then
Jerusalem not only revolted from the teaching of the law, but that
tyrant cruelly raged against all the Prophets, and the city was defiled
by innocent blood. Hence it will be necessary to omit the reign of
Josiah, then a part of the reign of Manasseh must be cut off, because he
did not immediately relapse into idolatry; but after he grew up, then
the worship of God and the examples of his fathers being despised, he
turned aside to strange and fictitious worship, though he did not
persist in his impiety to the end of his life. Eighteen years, then,
must be taken and joined to the two-and-twenty, that the number which
the Prophet uses may be made up, unless, perhaps, any one would rather
take a part of the reign of Josiah. (<span
id="viii.iv-p20.1"></span>[2Ki 22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#000.md)<span
id="viii.iv-p20.1"></span>) For although that pious king did his utmost
to uphold the worship of God, yet we know that the people of very
wickedness strove with the goodness of God. For when the law was found
no amendment followed, for the memory of all its doctrine had grown
obsolete; but when it was placed before the people they ought to have
become new. But so far from those who had been previously alienated from
God becoming wise again, they betrayed their obstinacy more and more.
Since then, the impiety of the people had been detected, it is not
surprising that the people of Judah is said to have sinned for forty
years. Certainly this latter explanation pleases me most, because the
Prophet refers to continuous years, which followed the captivity of the
ten tribes; although I do not reject the other interpretation, because
it reckons those years during which Manasseh exercised his tyranny
against God’s servants, and endeavored as much as he could to abolish
his pure worship, and to pollute it with the filth of all the nations.
Now, therefore, we understand the forty years of the iniquity of the
tribe of Judah.

<span id="viii.iv-p21"></span>As to those interpreters who refer the
four hundred and thirty years to the siege of the city, as if God’s
vengeance was thus satisfied, I fear it will not hold good; it seems to
me not a suitable explanation; it only signifies that it is not
surprising if their enemies besiege the city so long, since they did not
cease to provoke God for as many years as the siege continued days. The
city was besieged a whole year and two or three months. The beginning of
the siege continues to the end of the half year, but it was finished in
three or four months, when Pharaoh endeavored to free the *Jews,* who
were then his allies and confederates, by bringing up his army. Then
Nebuchadnezzar went forth to meet him, and the city was relieved for a
short time. Now if we take three hundred and ninety days, we shall find
a whole year at first, that is three hundred and sixty-five years,
although then there was an intercalary month, and they had not their
year defined as we now have; but yet there will be three hundred and
sixty-five days, which make a complete year. The two months will make
sixty days, so we shall have four hundred and twenty days. Now a month
and a half elapsed before the return of Nebuchadnezzar. Then the
computation will amount to four hundred and thirty years. But
interpreters are satisfied, because the siege of the city endured to a
time which answers to that prescribed to Abraham. For God entered into
covenant with Abraham four hundred and thirty years before the
promulgation of the law. But I do not see why they are so satisfied with
this resemblance. Nor is this the meaning of our Prophet. When he speaks
of a siege he certainly regards especially the destruction of the city.
Therefore I do not think that the days of the siege are here enumerated
as a just punishment, but only that years are compared with days, that
they may determine how long the siege should be, and that the end was
not to be, expected until the whole people perished.

<span id="viii.iv-p22"></span>Besides, we see as we go on that the
Prophet lay on his side three hundred and ninety days; where there is no
mention of forty days, and that part seems to be omitted. Yet this
remains fixed, because Israel and Judah had been obstinate in their
wickedness; hence the city was besieged until it was utterly taken. Now
surely the punishment of Israel cannot be considered as consisting in
the overthrow of the holy city; for already the ten tribes had migrated
from their country, and did not know what was doing at Jerusalem, except
by report. Whatever happened their condition was altogether separate
from all the miseries of the people, for they were then quiet in exile.
As then the Prophet is ordered *to bear the iniquity of Israel for three
hundred and ninety days,* this ought not to be restricted to the siege.
God simply means, since so many years had elapsed during which both
Israelites and Jews had not ceased to sin, their final destruction was
already at hand. But we know that then the kingdom of Judah was
extinguished, and exile was to the ten tribes like death. On this
account they had perished; nor did the Prophet bear their iniquity as if
they were then paying the penalty of their sins. But we know that this
is the customary manner of Scripture, because God reckons sins to the
third and fourth generation. (<span id="viii.iv-p22.1"></span>[Ex
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.iv-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.iv-p22.2"></span>[De
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009)<span id="viii.iv-p22.2"></span>..md)
When, therefore, God wished the ten tribes to be dragged into exile,
then he punished them for their wickedness three hundred and ninety
years. Afterwards he bore with the city of Jerusalem for a certain time,
and endured a similar impiety in that tribe, that he should not utterly
blot out the memory of the people. But the Jews did not repent, since we
also see by Isaiah comparing them with the Israelites, that they became
worse. (<span id="viii.iv-p22.3"></span>[Isa.
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#007.md)<span id="viii.iv-p22.3"></span>, 8
\[*sic*\].) Micah reproves them for following the statutes of Omri;
(<span id="viii.iv-p22.4"></span>[Mic
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016)<span id="viii.iv-p22.4"></span>,.md)
whence it is not surprising if the punishment which they endure should
answer to the wickedness in which they had involved themselves. We shall
see also that the same subject is repeated by our Prophet in <span
id="viii.iv-p22.5"></span>[Ezekiel
16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#000.md)<span id="viii.iv-p22.5"></span>.

<span id="viii.iv-p23"></span>On the whole then, God wished to show the
people that they had abused his forbearance too much and too long, since
they did not desist from sinning even to the four hundred and thirtieth
year. The Israelites indeed began to turn aside from the true worship of
God while the Temple still remained pure, but at length the tribe of
Judah, by degenerating, became guilty of the same impiety. Now we
understand the intention of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="viii.iv-p24"></span>I pass on to the words. *Thou,* says he,
*shalt lie upon thy left side* We must remark that this was not in
reality completed, because Ezekiel did not lie for three hundred and
ninety days upon his side, but only by a vision, that he might
afterwards relate to the people what God had made manifest. As to the
opinion of those commentators who think the ten tribes are meant by the
left side, because Samaria was situated to the left hand, I do not think
it applicable. I do not doubt that God wished to prefer the tribe of
Judah to the kingdom of Israel; for although the ten tribes excelled in
the number, opulence, and strength of men, yet God always made more, of
the kingdom of Judah. For here was the seat of David; and the ten tribes
were the posterity of Abraham only after the flesh, the promise remained
to Jerusalem, and there also the lamp of God shone, as we have said in
many places. Hence the right side signifies that dignity with which God
wished always to adorn the kingdom of Judah: but the ten tribes are
marked by the left side; because, as I have said, they did not enjoy
equal glory with the kingdom of Judah, although they are more numerous,
more courageous, and more abundant in all good things. It must now be
observed that the burden of bearing their iniquity was imposed on the
Prophet: not because God transferred to him the iniquity of the people,
as some here invent an allegory, and say that the Prophet was a type of
Christ, who bore on himself the iniquity of the people. But an expiation
is not here described: but we know that God uses his servants for
different purposes. So therefore the Prophet on one side is ordered to
oppose Jerusalem, as if he were the king of Babylon; hence he sustains
the character of king Nebuchadnezzar when he opposes the city of brick,
of which we spoke yesterday. Now he sustains other characters, as of the
ten tribes and the kingdom of Judah, *when he lies upon his left side*
*three hundred and ninety days, and on his right side forty days* For
this reason also it is said, *I have appointed to thee the years of this
iniquity, according to then number, of the days, etc*; that is, when I
order thee to lie on thy right side so many days, I represent to thee
years. For it would have been absurd to demand of the Prophet to lie
upon one side four centuries, so God accommodates himself in these
figures to our standard; and it is contrary to nature that a man should
lie for four centuries, and because that is absurd, God changes years
into days; and this is the reason why days are said to be substituted
for years. Afterwards it is added, *when thou shalt have fulfilled those
years, then thou shalt afterwards lie upon thy right side, and shalt
bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days* Here God shows the
tribe of Judah, that when it ought to be frightened by the punishment of
the kingdom of Israel, it still persisted in its wickedness hence the
Jews could not possibly escape the punishment of the Israelites.

<span id="viii.iv-p25"></span><span id="viii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p26"></span>It is added, *and towards the siege of
Jerusalem thou shalt set or establish thy face* Either meaning may be
received; either directing and ordering, or establishing and
strengthening; although the word directing or ordering pleases me better
in this place. He had said, indeed, before, thou shalt direct thy face
until Jerusalem shall be besieged; but in my opinion God simply here
orders his Prophet to be intent on the overthrow of the city. *And thine
arm shall be made bare;* that is, for expedition: for we know that
orientals use flowing tunics and long robes, so that they cannot execute
any business without putting off their garments. Hence the Prophet is
here ordered *to make bare his arm,* just as if any one should take his
coat half off, and throw it over the other side, that he might have one
arm free. Such was the dress of the Prophet, but by a vision, as I have
said. Afterwards it is added, *that thou, shalt prophesy against it*
Again God repeats what we saw yesterday: for nothing had been colder
than that the Prophet should make bare his arm, and direct his face
against towards the siege of a painted city. Had the picture been only
an empty one, the spectacle might be justly condemned; but God adds the
meaning to the figures, that the prophecy may have more force: as if he
had said, I see that these signs are not of themselves of much moment,
and you may object to me, why do you concern yourself with these
trifles? But whatever you do shall be a certain seal of prophecy. Now we
see why God joins the word “prophecy.” Then he adds, *Behold I will
place upon thee ropes, so that thou canst not turn from, side to side,
until thou hast completed the days of thy siege* God here signifies that
his decree concerning the siege of Jerusalem was inviolable: for as he
held his servant so bound down, by this the firmness of his decree was
designated, because the Jews thought that they could extricate
themselves by their deceits. For we know that they always flattered
themselves when the Prophets threatened them. Therefore God signifies
that the siege of the city was certain until it was taken; because the
Prophet should be bound with cords, and should not move himself, nor
turn from one side to the other. And hence we understand, from the
figure here used, that the Jews should suffer the same punishments as
the ten tribes. Just as if God should say that the time determined for
the destruction of the kingdom of Israel had come, and that the same end
would happen to the Jews; for ill whatever direction they might escape,
yet the same execution of God’s judgment would arrive, as if the matter
had been already determined. Now it follows:

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span><span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p2"></span>**9.** Take thou also unto thee wheat, and
barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them
in one vessel, and make thee bread thereof, *according* to the number of
the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety
days shalt thou eat thereof.

<span id="viii.v-p3"></span>**9.** Et tu sume tibi triticum, et hordeum,
et fabam, et lentem, et millium, zeam,  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) et pones ea in vase uno, et facies ea
tibi in panem  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) pro numero dierum,
quibus jacebis super latus tuum, trecentis et nonaginta diebus comedes
illum.

<span id="viii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="viii.v-p7"></span><span id="viii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p8"></span>It is by no means doubtful, that this verse
applies to the siege, because God signifies that the city would then
suffer famine, but a little afterwards he adds another vision, from
which we gather, that the subject is not only the siege of Jerusalem,
but the general vengeance of God against all the tribes, which had
fallen on the Jews through their alliance with them, and which ended at
length in the siege. But here God shows the future condition of the city
Jerusalem. For this various kind of bread is a sign of want, for we make
bread of wheat, and if any region is barren there barley is eaten or’
vetches, and if we have but a moderate supply, still wheaten bread is
used, but when lentils and beans, and millet and spelt are used, a
severer penury is portrayed. In the time of Jerome the name of spelt was
in use for “zea,” since he says, it was “gentile” among the Italians. I
know not how it agrees with what Jerome calls “vetches;” in his
Commentaries he says it is “zea,” and uses that name for spelt, which
was then wheat: whatever it is, when leguminous plants are mixed with
wheat, and when barley and spelt are used, it shows a deficiency in
ordinary food. It is just as if the Prophet Ezekiel were to denounce
against the Jews a deficiency in the harvest which they were then
reaping while they were free, for this vision was offered to the Prophet
before the city was besieged. Hence he threatened want and famine at a
time when they were still eating bread made of pure wheat. For he orders
*all these things to be put in one vessel* Hence we gather, that this
mixture would be by no means acceptable to delicate palates: for we know
that beans and lentils are grosser than wheat, and cannot be kneaded
into a dough of the right kind, since the wheat and pulse are
dissimilar. For this reason, then, God *places them in one vessel* Then
it is added — *thou shalt make bread for thee according to the number of
the days* The days here numbered are the three hundred and ninety: there
is no mention of the forty days, but it may be a part put for the whole.
Now it follows:

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#010.md)<span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>**10.** And thy meat which thou shalt eat
*shall be* by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou
eat it.

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span>**10.** Et cibus quem comedes in pondere,
erit viginti siclorum pro die  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) a
tempore usque ad tempus comedes.  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md)

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span>**11.** Thou shalt drink also water by
measure, the sixth part of an hin: from time to time shalt thou drink.

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span>**11.** Et aquas in mensuram bibes in
sextam partem hin: a tempore usque ad tempus bibes.

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span><span id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span>This confirms what I have said, namely,
that the want should be such, that the Prophet dared not eat even that
bread to satiety: *you shall eat,* says he, *bread by weight,* viz,
*twenty shekels.* These are not complete rounds, so that the sense is,
that God commanded his Prophet to live sparingly. When the city was
besieged, bread was distributed in pieces to each person. God then here
says, that the Jews should be almost famished during the siege, so that
they should not have bread except by fixed weight, and that a small one.
What follows is more miserable, namely, the want of water; for this is
the last stage of calamity when thirst oppresses us. it seems hard,
indeed, to want wine, but when water is deficient, this, as I have said,
is the last stage of famine, and this the Prophet denounces against the
Jews when he says, *water was not given to him during the time of the
siege unless by measure.* I shall leave the rest till to-morrow.

<span id="viii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="viii.vii-p2"></span>Almighty God, since thou hast thus far
sustained us by thy inestimable clemency, grant that we may not abuse
thy goodness, and by our perverseness provoke thy vengeance against us,
but may we prevent thy judgment, and so submit ourselves to thee that
thou mayest take us into thy confidence and protect us against all our
enemies: then supply us bountifully with whatever is needful for us, and
since thou wishest us to restrain our natural desires, may we never be
deficient in spiritual food, but be continually refreshed with it, until
at length we enjoy that fullness which is promised us and laid up for us
in heaven by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="viii.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirteen

<span id="viii.viii-p2"></span>WE saw in yesterday’s lecture that as
many days were assigned to the siege of the city Jerusalem as years in
which they had provoked God’s wrath. For, as I have said, God did not
punish them for their wickedness by a long siege, because in this way
Israel had been free from punishment. But the meaning is, that as during
four hundred and thirty years they did not cease adding to themselves
the vengeance of God, so now the end had come for paying them their
wages which they had earned. Now it follows —

<span id="viii.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p1"></span><span id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012.md)<span id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p2"></span>**12.** And thou shalt eat it *as* barley
cakes, and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of man, in their
sight.

<span id="viii.ix-p3"></span>**12.** Et placentam  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) hordeorum comedes, et ipsam in
stercoribus humanam excrementi coques coram oculis ipsorum.

<span id="viii.ix-p5"></span>**13.** And the LORD said, Even thus shall
the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles,
whither I will drive them.

<span id="viii.ix-p6"></span>**13.** Et dixit Iehovah: sic comedent
filii Israel panem suum pollutum in gentibus ad quas expulero eos.

<span id="viii.ix-p7"></span> 

<span id="viii.ix-p8"></span><span id="viii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p9"></span>This vision properly belongs to the ten
tribes, and, for this reason, I have said that God’s vengeance is not to
be considered as to the siege of the city alone, but to be extended
longer. After the Prophet had spoken of the siege of Jerusalem, he adds,
that their reward was prepared for the children of Israel, because a
just God was the avenger of each people. As, therefore, he punished the
remnant who as yet remained at Jerusalem, so he avenged the wickedness
of the ten tribes in exile at Babylon. For this reason the Prophet is
ordered to *cook a cake with dung:* that is, he is commanded to take
human dung instead of fuel: nor does he simply say dung, but *the dung
of men.* By and bye the application follows. *Thus the children of
Israel shall eat their polluted bread among the Gentiles* Now,
therefore, we see that the Jews are at length drawn to judgment, because
they had not been so touched with the slaughter of their brethren as to
repent, but, in the meantime, the wrath of God was conspicuous against
the ten tribes, because among the Gentiles those miserable exiles were
compelled to eat their bread polluted. We know that cakes are made of
the finest flour, for the purer the flour the more delicate is the
bread, but the Prophet is ordered *to make cakes of barley,* and then
*to cook them in dung,* for that uncleanness was forbidden by the law.
(<span id="viii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Le
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.ix-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.ix-p9.2"></span>[Le
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#021)<span id="viii.ix-p9.2"></span>..md)
Therefore God signifies, that the Israelites were so rejected that they
differed in nothing from polluted nations; for the Lord had separated
them as we know from the rest of the world: but from the time of their
mingling themselves with the filth of the impious, at length, after long
forbearance, they were altogether rejected as it is here said. For under
this figure a universal pollution is signified, as if he had said,
nothing is any longer holy or sacred in Israel, because they are mixed
up with the pollutions of all nations: finally, the impure bread
embraces within itself all kinds of impiety. Now when he says *among the
Gentiles,* it means, that they would be such inhabitants of the lands
among which they were driven, that they should be not only exiles but
banished from the land of Canaan, which was their inheritance. In fine,
a disinheriting is here marked, when the Jews are said to be driven
about hither and thither, so as not to, dwell in the promised land. It
follows —

<span id="viii.x"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p1"></span><span id="viii.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#014.md)<span id="viii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p2"></span>**14.** Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my
soul hath not been polluted: for from my youth up even till now have I
not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither
came there abominable flesh into my mouth.

<span id="viii.x-p3"></span>**14.** Et dixi, Ahah,  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) Dominator Iehovah, ecce, anima mea non
fuit polluta, et cadaver et discerptum non comedi a pueritia mea huc
usque, et non intravit in os meum caro putrefacta.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md)

<span id="viii.x-p6"></span>**15.** Then he said unto me, Lo, I have
given thee cow’s dung for man’s dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread
therewith.

<span id="viii.x-p7"></span>**15.** Et dixit mihi, Vide, dedi tibi
stercori bovis pro stercoribus hominis, et facies panem tuum super illa.
 <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md)

<span id="viii.x-p9"></span> 

<span id="viii.x-p10"></span><span id="viii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p11"></span>The Prophet here inserts the answer which
he received to his request that God would relax his severe command: for
it was abominable to eat flesh cooked with human dung, not only on
account of the stench, but because religion forbade it: though the
Prophet did not regard the taste of his palate, but objects that it was
not lawful for him, and relates how anxiously he had abstained during
his whole life from all polluted food. For if he had formerly dared to
feed promiscuously on all sorts of food, he could not pray against it as
he now does, that he should not be compelled to eat polluted bread: but
he shows here that he had abstained throughout his whole life from all
polluted food. *My soul,* says he, *never was polluted:* for soul is
often put for the belly: then *never have I tasted of a carcass, or of
what has been torn in pieces* By the figure a part put for the whole, he
intends all unclean meats, which were unlawful food, according to the
commandments of the law. (<span id="viii.x-p11.1"></span>[Le
9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#000)<span id="viii.x-p11.1"></span>..md) For
because a carcass is mixed with blood, God forbade them to touch the
flesh of an animal which died by itself, because it had not been
strangled, then if a wild beast should tear a sheep or an ox, that
cruelty ought to be detestable to men. Since, therefore, both a carcass
and torn and lacerated flesh are unclean food, the Prophet here says,
that from his childhood even to that time he had kept the commands of
God with his utmost endeavors: hence he obtains, as I have said, some
mitigation. Yet he is compelled to eat his flesh cooked with the dung of
oxen. This was done by vision, as I said yesterday: but meanwhile God
did not change what he had determined concerning the people: viz. *that
they should eat their bread polluted among the Gentiles.* For a cake
*cooked* in the dung of oxen was unclean according to the Law. Hence God
shows his own *decree* was fixed that the Israelites should be mingled
among the Gentiles, so that they should contract pollution from their
filth. It follows —

<span id="viii.xi"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p1"></span><span id="viii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
4:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016.md)<span id="viii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p2"></span>**16.** Moreover he said unto me, Son of
man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they
shall eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shall drink water by
measure, and with astonishment:

<span id="viii.xi-p3"></span>**16.** Et dixit mihi, Fili heminis, ecce
ego frango  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) baculum panis in
Hierusalem:  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) et comedent panem in
pondere et metu,  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) et aquas in
mensura, et in stupore bibent.

<span id="viii.xi-p7"></span>**17.** That they may want bread and water,
and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.

<span id="viii.xi-p8"></span>**17.** Ut indigeant pane et aquis  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) et obstupeant,  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) vir et frater ejus, et liquefiant
 <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) in iniquitate sua.

<span id="viii.xi-p12"></span> 

<span id="viii.xi-p13"></span><span id="viii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p14"></span>God returns again to the citizens of
Jerusalem, and announces that they should be so destroyed by famine,
that they should be reduced to the last extremity, and all but consumed
by want. But he places here two forms of punishment: he says, *that he
should break the staff of bread:* then, that their *abundance of bread
should be small,* because they would be compelled to eat their morsels
*by weight and fear, and to drink water by measure and astonishment*. I
said they were different forms, because even if bread was sufficient,
God often breaks its staff, as he calls it. And this clearly appears
from <span id="viii.xi-p14.1"></span>[Le
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026.md)<span id="viii.xi-p14.1"></span>,
whence our Prophet has adopted this expression. For here Moses explains
what it is to break the staff of bread; because, he says, ten women
shall cook their bread in one dish, and then they must *bona fide*
restore the quantity of meal given them; for the bread shall be weighed,
and thou shalt eat and not be satisfied. There God had said, I will
break the staff of bread: but a clearer explanation follows — namely,
although wheat for cooking the bread should be sufficient, and the women
should mutually observe each other that no theft should take place, but
should return in weight what had been given out to them, yet its
nourishment should be deficient. We see then that God breaks the staff
of bread, when a sufficiently plentiful supply exists, but those who eat
are not satisfied.

<span id="viii.xi-p15"></span>That this may appear more clearly, we muse
assume the principle that men do not live by bread only, but by every
word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God, (<span
id="viii.xi-p15.1"></span>[De 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003.md)<span
id="viii.xi-p15.1"></span>,) for here God signifies that we are not
nourished by virtue of the bread, properly speaking: for how can bread
be life-giving when it wants both sense and vigor? We see then that
there is no force in bread to nourish us which excludes the hidden grace
of God, for we live by the word of God. The subject here is not the word
of doctrine nor yet spiritual life; but Moses understands that we are
sustained not by bread and wine and other food, or by any kind of drink,
but by the secret virtue Of God whilst he inspires the bread with rigor
for our nourishment. Bread then is our nourishment, but not by any
peculiar or intrinsic virtue: this it has from another source, namely,
the favor and ordination of God. As, therefore, a small portion of bread
is sufficient; for us, so if any one gorge himself he will cry out
sooner than be satisfied, unless God inspires the virtue. And for this
reason Christ uses that passage against Satan: Man lives not by bread
alone, (<span id="viii.xi-p15.2"></span>[Mt
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md)<span id="viii.xi-p15.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.xi-p15.3"></span>[Lu
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#004)<span id="viii.xi-p15.3"></span>,.md)
because he shows that the life of man was propped up by the secret
virtue of God, and that God, whenever it pleases him, does not need
these foreign assistances. God then can sustain us by himself: sometimes
he uses bread, but only as an adventitious instrument; in the meantime
he derogates nothing from his own virtue: hence a staff is taken
metaphorically for a prop. For as old men already totter on their legs,
and all their limbs being broken down by weakness, support themselves
with a staff, so also bread is said to have a staff, because we are
propped up by the nourishment. Our strength also becomes deficient, and
hence he who takes nourishment is said to refresh himself with food.
God, therefore, breaks the staff of bread when he renders men famished,
even when they have a sufficient abundance of bread. Neither are *they*
satisfied, how much soever they may gorge themselves, because the food
loads instead of refreshes them.

<span id="viii.xi-p16"></span>This is the first punishment with which
God threatens the Jews. Another also is added, namely, *that they shall
be destitute of bread. We* see then that there is a double mode by which
God punishes us by hunger. For although bread is sufficient, yet he
breaks and destroys its staff, so that it cannot prop us up nor recall
our lost vigor. At length he takes away our bread, because he either
strikes our fruits with blight or hail, or makes us suffer under other
calamities. Hence barrenness brings want, so that God will affect us
with hunger both ways: for he says, *behold! I will break the staff of
bread in Jerusalem,* and then he adds, *they shall eat their bread by
weight and in fear, they shall drink their water by measure and in
astonishment,* because in truth they shall be reduced to such straits
that they shall *scarcely* dare to touch their bread, because while they
look forward to the morrow they shall fear and be astonished. And he
confirms this opinion in the next verse, *that they shall be destitute
of bread and water, and shall be astonished:* for this explanation
agrees better; therefore *a man and his brother shall be astonished,*
that is, they shall look mutually on each other as if astonished. Thus
those who are without wisdom and discern nothing but despair are
accustomed to act: at length *they shall pine away in their iniquity.*
Again God repeats that the Jews could not complain when he so grievously
afflicts them, because they shall receive the reward of their own
iniquity. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc22007.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span> Or, “I have appointed *thee.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc22007.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span> “They shall be” is *understood.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc22007.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span> “I shall now go on with the whole
*context.*” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc22007.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="viii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span> Or, “station,” for <span
id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span> כן*ken,* signifies *either.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc22007.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="viii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p4"></span> The word for “fitches” is in the plural: so
the word for “*barley:*” there is an enallage of the *number.* —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc22007.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="viii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p5"></span> That is, thou shalt make bread for thyself
out of *them.* — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc22007.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span> That is, in or for each *day.--Calvin.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc22007.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="viii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span> That is, from the beginning to the end:
viz., from the first day to the 390th. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc22007.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="viii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p4"></span> That is, “*made* of *barley.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc22007.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="viii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p4"></span> “Or, *alas.*” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc22007.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="viii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p5"></span> Or abominable, <span
id="viii.x-p5.1"></span>פגול, *pigol,* is their word for corrupt or
rancid, or putrefied, and hence by translation animal flesh is called
detestable, that is, of an unclean animal.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc22007.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="viii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p8"></span> That is, “thou shalt cook.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc22007.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="viii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p4"></span> Or, “destroy.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc22007.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="viii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p5"></span> Or, “at *Jerusalem.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc22007.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="viii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p6"></span> Or, “with fear and *trembling.*” —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc22007.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="viii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p9"></span> That is, “bread and water shall fail
*them.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc22007.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="viii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p10"></span> “Others, they shall be desolate, <span
id="viii.xi-p10.1"></span>שמם, *shemem,* signifies both.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc22007.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="viii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p11"></span> Or, “consume away.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc22008.md)
