[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc22008)  [Next](cc22010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#001.md)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying,

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehovæ ad me dicendo,

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** Son of man, set thy face toward the
mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fili hominis, pone faciem tuam ad  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) montes Israel, et prophetiza ad eos,

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear
the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and
to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I *even* I,
will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**3.** Et dic, Montes Israel audite sermonem
Dominatoris Iehovæ: sic dicit Dominator Iehovah montibus et collibus,
rivis  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) et vallibus: ecce ego
adducem contra vos gladium, et perdam excelsa vestra.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p11"></span><span id="x.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>The Prophet now turns himself to the kingdom
of Israel, since he had formerly spoken concerning the Jews alone. He
says that he was *divinely sent to the mountains of Israel.* The first
question may arise about the time; for the kingdom of Israel had been
cut off, and the ten tribes dragged into exile- and the kingdom had come
to an end in Ezekiel’s time. The time, therefore, does not seem to
accord with the denunciation of the Prophet as to what had happened many
years previously. But nothing will appear out of place, if we say that
it was partly prophecy and partly doctrine, so that the Israelites might
understand why they were driven out of their country, and dispersed
among the nations. I say that God’s plans were partly explained to the
exiles, that they might know why God had driven them to distant lands:
for this punishment would not have been useful had not God convinced
them of its cause. But although the kingdom had fallen, it is probable
that some of the people were remaining: for the Assyrian did not carry
off so many thousand men, and his kingdom would have been burdened by
such a multitude. Doubtless he collected the flower of the people, and
permitted the commonalty to remain there: for he sent from his own
kingdom inhabitants for the deserted soil. But the change was great and
ruinous to the king himself, and vexatious to all alike. Although,
therefore, the kingdom did not exist any longer — nay, even the name of
Israel was almost extinct, because there was no mass of people, and they
dwelt in their country like foreigners and guests, yet there was still
some portion of them left. Now, we collect from the words of the Prophet
that they were obstinate, because they were not induced by either the
exile of their brethren, or their own calamity, to leave their own
superstitions, and embrace the true and pure worship of God.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>Since, therefore, this chastisement did not
profit them, hence the Prophet is ordered to preach *against them* It is
ascertained from the first chapter that Ezekiel received this command
after the destruction of the kingdom of Israel, (<span
id="x.i-p13.1"></span>[Ezek. 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002)<span id="x.i-p13.1"></span>.md) for he
said that he was divinely stirred up in the thirtieth year after the
jubilee, and in the fifth year of the captivity of Jechoniah or Joachim.
It is evident, therefore, that the Prophet spake against the land of
Israel after the ten tribes had been dispersed. Hence we may elicit that
there were still many people there, because it would have been difficult
for the Assyrians to receive all the people, and those who remained
alive in the country went on in their own abominations, so that it
became necessary for some other judgment to be denounced against them,
on which we are about to enter. Now, therefore, this principle is
established, that the Prophet so treats the slaughter of the kingdom of
Israel, that he predicts as about to come to pass what those left in the
country by no means feared; for they were persuaded that. they were free
from all dangers. But the Prophet shows that God’s wrath was not yet
complete, but that their former calamities were only a prelude, and that
heavier woes were at hand, because they had so hardened themselves
against the power of God. The prophecy, too, has greater weight when the
Prophet addressed the mountains than when his discourse was directed to
men. So that Ezekiel is not ordered to exhort the Israelites to
penitence, and to threaten them with the punishment which still
remained, but he is ordered to turn his discourse *to hills, and
mountains, and valleys* Thus God obliquely signifies, first, that the
Israelites were deaf, and then unworthy of the trouble which Ezekiel
would spend in teaching them. Thus the Prophet sent to Jeroboam did not
design to address him, but turning to the altar —

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>“O altar, altar,” says he, “thus saith
Jehovah, Behold a son shall be born to the family of David, by name
Josiah, and he shall slay upon thee the priests of the high places, and
shall burn upon thee the bones of the dead.” (<span
id="x.i-p14.1"></span>[1Ki 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002.md)<span
id="x.i-p14.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>The king was burning incense on the altar, the
prophet does not regard him, but as I have just said, directs his
discourse to the altar: that was far more vehement than if he had
reproved the king sharply. For that was no common reproof, to pass by
the king as if he had been only the shadow of a man, and to admonish the
dead altar concerning a future event: so also in this place: *Son of
man, set thy face against the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against
them* The Prophet might object that the mountains had no ears, and hence
that it was only child’s play. But he understood God’s intention, and so
obeyed cheerfully, because he saw the people despised and rejected by
God because they were deaf and incurable, and meanwhile he knew that his
labor would not be lost although he addressed the mountains. For we know
that the earth was created for the use of man, and hence God proposes to
us examples of his wrath in brutes, trees, the atmosphere, and the
heavens, that we may know that admonitions belonging to us are engraven
there, although in every other way God turns away his eyes and his face.
This, therefore, is a sign of his wrath, when God shows his judgments on
all sides, and yet is silent towards us, because we gather from this
that we are unworthy of any trouble for our improvement, and this was
doubtless the Prophet’s conclusion.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span><span id="x.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>Now a clearer expression follows in the third
verse: *Thou shalt say, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the
Lord.* Here an audience is required of the mountains which they could
not give, but that has respect to mankind, as I have just said. God,
therefore, requires the mountains to listen, so that men may understand
that an inanimate thing may be endued with sense, if their stupidity is
considered. For at length God enforced his judgments against the
mountains of Israel. Although, therefore, they could not hear the
Prophet speaking, yet they took up his instruction, because it was
efficacious in them, and God at length in reality proved that he had not
spoken in vain. The event, therefore, openly made the mountains in some
way attentive. Neither could they escape the judgment which had been
openly denounced. Now he adds, *Thus saith Jehovah to the mountains and
the hills* Ezekiel now addresses not mountains only, as he had been
commanded: hence he seems to exceed the prescribed command, for he had
been sent to mountains and hills only, but now he says*, hear ye
mountains, hear ye hills, hear ye valleys.* But we said yesterday that
prophets sometimes speak briefly, and sometimes explain more fully what
they had uttered but shortly. God, therefore, at the beginning spoke
only of mountains, but he doubtless comprehended valleys, and the
flowing down of rivers, because the Prophet only explains what he had
said in one word: hence he speaks to *mountains and hills,* and then to
*the pouring down of waters or torrents* Jerome translates it rocks, and
the Hebrews call whatever is violent <span id="x.i-p17.1"></span>אפיק,
*aphik,* hence when there is any violent course they use this word; and
so we may understand in this place either rocks or flowing down of
waters or torrents, no matter which. But since he afterwards adds
valleys, this explanation is to me probable, that the Prophet indeed
understands either torrents or the rushing down of waters. Here we must
also remark, that those parts are marked out where the Israelites had
*erected* perverse and adulterous worship: for we know that mountains
were filled with superstitions, and so also valleys, though the reason
was different: for when they erected their altars on the mountains they
thought themselves near God, but when they descended into the valleys,
their rites were thus performed in shade and obscurity, and thus they
thought themselves in this way hidden as it were in a sanctuary. It is
sufficiently known that they exercised their idolatries in the mountains
as well as the valleys. This, therefore, is the reason why the Prophet
here shows that the whole land of Israel was polluted with defilement.
*Behold,* says he, *I bring a sword against you.* Hence we infer that
when the Prophet addresses the mountains, yet he speaks for the sake of
man. For the sword could not injure the mountains: for one stone would
break a hundred, nay a thousand swords, and yet remain entire. God,
therefore, had threatened the mountains with slaughter in vain, nay,
when mention is made of the sword, we know that death is understood: for
the cause is put for the effect. *Hence* God addresses men indirectly,
but when he directs his discourse to the mountains he shows that men
themselves are deaf, and therefore turns away his face from them, and
addresses mute elements and inanimate things: *and I will destroy,* says
he, *your lofty things* He now explains what I have taught before, that
mountains, and hills, and valleys, and descending waters are named,
because perverse and impure worship flourished there. For by *“lofty*
things,” the Spirit doubtless intends whatever the Israelites had mixed
of their own imaginations to corrupt the worship of God. They properly
call altars *lofty,* because they were erected in high and conspicuous
places. But the species is here put for the genus. Meanwhile, God
signifies that he so abominates all fictitious worship that he cannot
bear the sight of the places. The stones indeed of which the altars were
built we know to be harmless: for places are not polluted by idolatry of
their own will; for as far as the world was created by God it always
retains its own nature, but as far as man is *concerned,* the places
themselves were polluted, and the contagion renders them hateful to God.
Hence this is put for the detestation of idolatry. He continues the same
sentiment, and first denounces that altars should be laid waste. Now it
follows —

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#004.md)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**4.** And your altars shall be desolate, and
your images shall be broken: and I will cast down your slain *men*
before your idols.

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Et desolabuntur altaria vestra, et
conterentur idola vestra, et cadere faciam  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) occisos coram idolis vestris.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span><span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>Hence it appears how greatly obedience pleases
God, and how true it is that it is better than sacrifices. (<span
id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>[1Sa 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>; <span id="x.ii-p7.2"></span>[I Kings
12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#000)<span id="x.ii-p7.2"></span>..md) For
it is certain that the *Israelites* extolled their own fictions
exorbitantly, as if they were worshipping God *correctly* In the
beginning, indeed, Jeroboam cunningly devised those new rites, that he
might alienate the ten tribes from the family of David, and at length
the error spread, so that they thought that God approved that impious
worship. But we see that God abominates them. We should always hold this
principle, that although men think that they obey God when they thrust
in their own fictions, yet they produce no other effect than to provoke
the wrath of God against them. This vengeance, therefore, had not been
taken against altars, unless God had been greatly offended with the
impious mixture. *Your altars, therefore, shall come to ruin and
destruction,* and then *your idols shall be destroyed.* Here some
understand the idols of the sun, as the noun is taken from heat, which
is afterwards repeated: but this divination seems to be too contracted
Hence I do not doubt that the idols are so called on account of the mad
love with which the worshippers were seized: for throughout the Prophets
they are said to be like adulterers, and our Prophet also uses the same
language. Idols therefore may very properly derive their name from heat,
because their superstitious worshippers inflame themselves with love,
and like adulterers run after harlots, as we shall again see. He
afterwards uses another word, when he says, *I will lay prostrate your
slain before your idols*: for they call idols <span
id="x.ii-p7.3"></span>גלולים, *gelolim,* on account of their foulness,
nay even filth. We see then in the first place that the fury with which
the Israelites were inflamed is condemned by the Prophet, since they
perverted the pure and lawful worship of God: then he reproves their
enormity because they willingly remained in filth and defilement. But
here also we are taught how mightily God is angry with all
superstitions, when he not only cites mankind to his tribunal because
they profane true piety, but is angry with external instruments — as
stones and wood, and, as it were, involves these instruments of idolatry
with their authors. It follows —

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#005.md)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**5.** And I will lay the dead carcases of
the children of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones
round about your altars.

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Et ponam cadavera filiorum Israel
coram idolis vestris, et spargam coram idolis suis:  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) spargam ossa vestra  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) In circuitu altarium vestrorum

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span><span id="x.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>By these words the Prophet signifies that
God’s wrath would be manifest, because he impresses certain marks by
which it may be judged that the Israelites had provoked his anger;
because they had departed from the pure and genuine order of the law. He
says, therefore, *I will place the carcases of the sons of Israel before
their idols,* when the carcases were so mingled with the idols, hence it
appeared that God was greatly offended. For we know that it was
detestable in all sacrifices that either human bones or carcases should
be joined with the victims: so that the religion of the Israelites was
openly condemned by this sign, so that unless they had been utterly
blind, they would acknowledge all their worship to have been abominable.
We understand, therefore, the design of God when he says, *that he would
cast the carcases of the sons of Israel before their idols:* as if he
had said, I will defile all your rites which seem to you sacred, and I
will make them stink even before the unbelievers. But how? for the altar
is polluted by contact with a carcase; but the carcases shall be cast
there, that the contagion may spread to the altars. *And I will
sprinkle,* says he, *your bones around your altars* Lastly, he signifies
that he would profane those sacred rites which the Israelites had
fabricated for themselves with their carcases: by which he understands
that they would be doubly disgraced whilst they defiled by their
pollutions what they had thought beautiful. The Prophets constantly
proclaimed that these rites were folly and an abomination, but still
those who were attached to those superstitions pleased themselves. When,
therefore, God’s servants effected nothing by their sacred admonitions,
at length a real and actual proof was added, when their altars were
polluted, and that, too, with their own defilement. For in this God’s
remarkable vengeance appeared, as I have formerly said.

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#006.md)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**6.** In all your dwellingplaces the cities
shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your
altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken
and cease, and your images may be cut down, and your works may be
abolished.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span>**6.** In omnibus habitationibus vestris urbes
desolabuntur:  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) et excelsa in
vastitatem redigentur, ut vastentur et desolentur  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) altaria vestra, et conterantur, et
cessent  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) idola vestra, et
excidantur idola vestra, et deleantur opera vestra.

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span><span id="x.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>In other words, the Prophet signifies that God
would take vengeance on the superstitions of the ten tribes in all
places; whence it is *clear,* that no corner was free from corruption.
For, while he names all habitations, he means that they had defiled
every habitable place. Wheresoever they dwelt they had erected their
altars and strange worship, as another Prophet reproves them; according
to the number of your cities were your Gods. (<span
id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>[Jer 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028.md)<span
id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>; <span id="x.iv-p9.2"></span>[Jer
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#013)<span id="x.iv-p9.2"></span>..md) He
addresses the Jews there, but the meaning is the same. Hence the Prophet
signifies, that it was not a single part only that was polluted with
their idolatries, but their filth was spread abroad through the whole
land wherever there were any inhabitants. *In all your habitations,*
therefore, *the cities shall be deserted* When he threatens destruction
and desolation to the cities, he means what I have just said, that those
places were corrupted by impious superstitions. He adds, *and thy high
places shall be destroyed* or made desolate. Here he explains himself
more clearly, that the cities should be reduced to solitude, because
their religion was corrupt, and the inhabitants were given up to their
own fictions and idolatries. He adds therefore high places to cities,
that he may point out the reason of the cities perishing. He adds, *that
they may be desolate* or reduced to a desert: it is again the word <span
id="x.iv-p9.3"></span>חרב*, chereb, and your altars may perish.* He
confirms the same doctrine, namely, that he was so hostile to the cities
of Israel because they were all polluted with profane and strange
altars. For, as we have said, God had chosen that land to himself, and
so all its cities were dedicated to his glory. This, then, might move us
to wonder why he threatened them with destruction; for we might readily
answer this by saying his counsel was changed. But the Prophet shows,
that although the cities themselves were pleasing to God, yet they were
hated by him through the corruptions by which they were polluted. Hence
he joins high places to altars. Hence a probable conjecture is elicited,
that the Israelites did not sacrifice wherever they had erected high
places. They had then their own high places when they worshipped false
gods, and also their own altars. And since the worship of God was
vitiated in both ways, the Prophet, as I have said, here joins them
both.

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span>At length he adds, *and your idols shall be
broken up and cease,* or be abolished. Again he uses that reproachful
word which I have said is taken from the stench of dung. (<span
id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>[Lu 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015.md)<span
id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>.) But it signifies that which is highly esteemed
among men is abominated by God, especially when it is worshipped. *And
your idols,* says he, *shall be cut off. I* have said that this word is
derived from heat. It means, that the idols were the cause of their
madness, since the Israelites were so corrupted with impure love that
they deserted God and looked only at the idols: but he compares the zeal
with which idolaters are maddened to impure and brutal lust. At length
he adds, *your works shall be destroyed.* Here he uses a general name,
and significantly points out the difference between the pure worship of
God and all corruptions. There is no need of a long discussion if we
desire to know how God is to be worshipped. For he rejects and excludes
our works. If, therefore, we do not obtrude our works, but only follow
what God demands, our worship will be pure, but if we add anything of
our own, it is an abomination. We see, therefore, that useful
instruction can be collected from one word, namely, that all worship is
perverse and disapproved by God when men bring anything forward of
themselves. For by works he does not here understand idols made of
either wood, or stone, or brass, or gold, or silver, but it comprehends
likewise whatever men have fashioned, and whatever can be ascribed to
them, because they have not taken them from the mouth of God and the
commands of his law.

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#007.md)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**7**. And the slain shall fall in the midst of
you, and ye shall know that I *am* the LORD.

<span id="x.v-p3"></span>**7**. Et cadet interfectus in medio vestri: et
cognoscetis quod Ego Iejovah.

<span id="x.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p5"></span><span id="x.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p6"></span>Here the Prophet adds a small clause to his
former threats, namely, that God would so consume the whole people with
slaughter, that they would be compelled to acknowledge him as Jehovah.
*The slain,* therefore*, shall fall in the midst of thee,* that is, the
enemy shall arise who shall cause slaughter everywhere through the midst
of the land. As to the phrase, *I am Jehovah,* it refers to the
prophecy; for the Israelites did not openly deny God, but because they
had no faith in the words of the Prophet, hence God appears and confirms
and establishes the authority of the prophetic teaching, when he shows
that an avenger was at hand if it was despised, as we know it was
despised; and this he will soon explain a little more clearly. It
follows now —

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span><span id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#008.md)<span id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span>**8.** Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may
have *some* that shall escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall
be scattered through the countries.

<span id="x.vi-p3"></span>**8.** Et residuum faciam,  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) ut sint vobis qui evadant gladium in
gentibus, cum dispersi fueritis per terras.

<span id="x.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.vi-p6"></span><span id="x.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p7"></span>Yet here another promise is added, which may
temper the bitterness of so sorrowful a prophecy. For hitherto God shows
that he burns with indignation against the land of Israel, so that he
determined to destroy it, since it was polluted everywhere, and at all
corners. Nothing could therefore be hoped for, if Ezekiel had spoken
precisely; therefore a promise is added in mitigation — *I will leave a
remnant, says he, that you may have some who escape the sword;* that is,
that some of you may survive. But how? God does not promise simple
pardon, that he may leave the Israelites quiet and safe in the land, but
he says that their safety shall be in exile. Hence therefore we collect
that they were so depraved that they were unable to obtain pardon,
because God says that his *patience* was their scorn and aversion.
Although, therefore, he gives the Israelites some hope of favor, yet he
also admonishes them that they could not obtain safety in any other way,
except by a kind of death, namely exile. *I will leave a remnant,* says
he, *of you, who shall escape the sword;* but how? whom shall the enemy
have spared so that they do not change their place? nay, he says, *when
ye shall be dispersed among the Gentiles* He promises them life,
therefore, but a wretched one, because it was united with exile. But
God’s favor cannot be sufficiently estimated from these words, unless
what follows immediately is added.

<span id="x.vii"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p1"></span><span id="x.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#009.md)<span id="x.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p2"></span>**9.** And they that escape of you shall
remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives,
because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from
me, and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols: and they
shall loathe themselves for the evils which they have committed in all
their abominations.

<span id="x.vii-p3"></span>**9.** Et recordabuntur qui ex vobis
evaserint mei in gentibus, apud quas captivi fuerint illic  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) quia frangar ad cor ipsorum quod
fornicatur,  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) a quod recessit a
me, et ad oculos ipsorum scortantes  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) post idola sua, et pudifient coram
facie sua super malis quae fecerunt in omnibus abominationibus suis.

<span id="x.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.vii-p8"></span><span id="x.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p9"></span>I see that I cannot finish, and I think the
time is advancing.

<span id="x.viii"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou desirest a
continual memorial of thy former remarkable judgments on thy people,
that we may this day restrict ourselves to thy pure worship — grant, I
say, that we may be teachable by thee, and never attempt to adulterate
thy worship by our devices; and since thou hast clearly manifested thy
will to us, through thine only-begotten Son, that we may remain in
obedience to him, and may so invoke Thee the Father, in his name, while
we are pilgrims in the world, until at length we arrive at that blessed
inheritance which is laid up for us in heaven by the same, our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="x.ix"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Seventeenth.

<span id="x.ix-p2"></span>In the last lecture I only recited the ninth
verse, but did not explain it; for the Lord says, *he would afterwards
make some part of Israel a remnant,* since he hoped they would profit by
the chastisement: *then,* says he, *the remnant will remember me.* By
these words he obliquely reproves the sluggishness of the ten tribes,
who could never be brought to any sense of God’s anger, unless by
experiencing it. For there is an opposition between remembrance and
forgetfulness, since he says they would remember after they were
afflicted, he signifies that during their prosperity they were drowned
in *negligence* and contempt. *We* may learn from this that God’s
chastisements are very useful to us, because when he indulges us we
abuse his kindness, and flatter ourselves so as to become hardened in
sin. It is necessary, therefore, nay, even useful, that those who
indulge themselves in their vices, should be chastised, and although the
Lord can recall us to himself in other ways, yet our weakness is so
great that we always grow torpid in our sins, until his chastisements
draw us back to life. Besides, we must also observe, that; all are not
permitted to become wise again, even when chastised by God. And the
Prophet does not speak generally, but marks out the survivors, or those
who shall have been preserved. <span id="x.ix-p2.1"></span>פליטיכם*,
phlitikem,* says he, that is, those of you who shall be saved; but this
was only a small portion, as we have seen. Now as the difference is
sought for between the few permitted to escape*,* and the multitude
which perished, none other will be found, except because it pleased God
to preserve a seed. All were worthy of death; he consumed almost the
whole body of the people; he wished a small number to remain safe. We
see, therefore, that the safety of those of whom the Prophet now speaks
flowed from the mere mercy of God. Besides, what I have said must be
borne in mind — that none repented but those to whom it was given;
whence it follows, that repentance is a singular gift of God. And we see
that many plunge into a worse state, nay, even rage against God when he
chastises them: first they roar, then they are outrageous, then they
rush on to unbridled madness, so that they would be prepared to wage war
with God, if they could penetrate as far as the heavens. Since therefore
chastisements are common to the elect and the reprobate, and yet some go
on to rage more and more against God, it follows that it is not
permitted to all to repent when God admonishes them, cites them to his
tribunal, and demands punishment for their sins when they displease him.

<span id="x.ix-p3"></span>This therefore is the reason why the Prophet
restricts this promise to those who should be saved out of the whole
people. He had said they should be preserved, because God was unwilling
to extinguish the whole Church, that he might not destroy his covenant,
which ought to be perpetual and inviolable. He says *among the
Gentiles,* among whom, or where, *they were captives* Here also the
Prophet signifies that exile would be useful to the Israelites, because
as long as God suffered them to possess the Holy Land, they provoked him
as if on purpose. Since, therefore, they so polluted God’s worship in
the Holy Land, he ought long ago to have destroyed them. And the Prophet
signifies this when he says, *among the nations where they were
captives* they would then return to a sound mind, though they had been
obstinate in the region assigned them by God. It follows *that he was
broken down,* or worn down, *through their heart* There may be a double
sense of the words. The first is, that God was at length conquered by
their wickedness, after he had found that he did not profit by bearing
them patiently. For when he sees that his favor becomes a
laughing-stock, he is the more angry, and deservedly so. Thus,
therefore, this passage may be conveniently explained, *that God was
broken on account of the adulterous heart of the Israelites;* because
when he had long suffered them to sin with impunity, yet when he saw no
end to it, being conquered, as it were, by their obstinacy, he descends
to punish them. But we may also refer this to pardon, because they will
acknowledge that God is broken through their heart, because he wishes to
pardon them. For he is said to be broken who voluntarily forgives
injuries; and since there are many tender and kind, who willingly pardon
their enemies for even the greatest crimes. And this explanation is in
some degree suitable, because the sinner cannot really remember God,
without perceiving some taste of his goodness, so that he hopes he will
be propitious to him. Yet the first sense seems more suitable, that the
Israelites will begin to remember when they were dragged into exile,
that just punishment awaited them, because God had borne with them
patiently, and had not treated them at once with the utmost rigor, but
when compelled, he descended at length to take vengeance, after he was
broken down or worn down by their desperate wickedness. Now, therefore,
we understand the Prophet’s intention. Hence also we gather, that those
who seriously repent do not acknowledge their fault lightly, but think
within themselves in what ways, and how long, and how perversely, they
have provoked God’s wrath. The Prophet expresses this by the word
*breaking.* God, therefore, did not treat the Israelites so harshly,
while he was offended by their wickedness, but at length he was broken
by their hardness.

<span id="x.ix-p4"></span>He says, *Through their adulterous heart which
departed from me,* and *through their adulterous eyes after their idols*
This image occurs everywhere throughout the Prophets; and because I have
often explained it, I now pass it slightly by. For the superstitious are
said to commit whoredom with their idols, that all idolatry may be
rendered more detestable. For those who adulterate the worship of God by
their fictions, yet think that they offer an acceptable obedience.
Since, therefore, the blind and unbelieving so please themselves by
their corruptions, hence Scripture compares them to adulterers. The name
of devotion among the Papists is at this time so plausible that it
buries all the light of sound doctrine. For by this one word they reject
whatever is offered them in the law and the gospel: and so also
concerning “good intentions” as they call them. Since, therefore, the
incredulous so intoxicate themselves with their own comments, God
distinctly mentions fornicators, and says, that all who recede from the
pure rule of the law contaminate themselves with debaucheries. At the
same time, as I have often said, the prophets allude to a sacred and
spiritual marriage in which God has bound himself to his Church. For
chastity of soul means the pure worship of God. When, therefore, men
fall off from that sincerity, it is just as if a woman should desert her
husband and follow adulterers. Now that the Prophet may express this mad
desire more clearly, he adds eyes to the heart. By these words he
understands furious lust, not only because they were devoted to their
idols with all their heart, but they were drawn that way by their eyes,
as if their eyes had been torches to inflame their mind. He retains,
however, his own image, because adulterers by their wandering glances
generate the flames of lust, and so their heart is set on fire. For this
reason therefore he says, *they were adulterous both in eye and heart*

<span id="x.ix-p5"></span>Afterwards he adds, *and they shall become
ashamed,* or shall be cut off *in their faces,* that is, before their
face: others translate, they shall feel nausea, which seems rather too
rough. But because the word <span id="x.ix-p5.1"></span>קט, *ket,*
signifies to spew out, those who use a word of abomination render the
Prophet’s sense faithfully. *They shall be therefore,* says he, *an
abomination to themselves* Those who translate it, *“*They shall be cut
off,” also receive the word metaphorically; for he who suffers so much
shame that he scarcely dares to look on heaven and men, is said to be
cut off. But others translate, they shall contend or quarrel before
their eyes. But since that signification is rarer, I scarcely dare
subscribe to their opinion, especially when the best sense is, that they
should be abominable to themselves. Therefore, *they shall be rejected
before their face,* that is, they shall not wait till men condemn them
or until others reprove their perverse worship, but they shall willingly
abominate themselves. Now the Prophet shows that their penitence is
real, because it may happen that a person may feel that he has some
dealing with God, and yet not be truly humbled: just as Cain was
compelled to tremble at the sight of God, yet was always like himself.
(<span id="x.ix-p5.2"></span>[Ge
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#009)<span id="x.ix-p5.2"></span>..md) So
it usually happens to all the wicked. The acknowledgment of this
judgment of God is indeed some portion of repentance, but only half:
wherefore the Prophet, that he may show the Israelites that they would
remember God not without fruits when his hand was upon them, adds, that
they should be abominable to themselves. This displeasure is then the
second part of repentance. He says, *for the evils which they have done
in all their abominations* The Prophet expresses more clearly, that the
veil by which the eyes of the Israelites had been so long covered should
be removed when they returned to God. For escape from punishment causes
men to connive at their sins, as if a veil had been placed over their
eyes, and they imagine that what God not only rejects but even detests
is honorable. But when God by the infliction of punishment forces the
wretched to perceive this, and no longer to put light for darkness and
darkness for light, then they begin to be displeased with themselves.
Now it follows —

<span id="x.x"></span>

<span id="x.x-p1"></span><span id="x.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#010.md)<span id="x.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p2"></span>**10.** And they shall know that I *am* the
LORD, *and that* I have not said in vain that I will do this evil unto
them.

<span id="x.x-p3"></span>**10.** Et cognoscent quod ego Iehovah non
frustra locutus fuerim ad faciendum ipsis malum hoc.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md)

<span id="x.x-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.x-p6"></span><span id="x.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p7"></span>He now mentions the fruit of their repentance,
because the Israelites were beginning at length to attribute just honor
to his prophecies. For we know that they trifled carelessly while the
Prophets were threatening them. Because, therefore, they were in the
habit of destroying confidence in all the servants of God, and of
reducing as it were their truth to nothing, the Prophet says, that when
they repented they would then perceive that God had not spoken in vain.
While they were despising his threats, they did not perceive that they
ought therefore to be considered despisers of God. For listening only to
men, when they heard Jeremiah or Ezekiel, they thought that they were
contending with them only, and could do so with impunity against mere
mortals. God therefore, in opposition to this, testifies that he was the
chief author. For as error springs from error, they proudly rejected
whatever the Prophets said, when they treated it as frivolous and vain.
God therefore says: *They shall then know that I have not spoken in
vain, when I bring upon them this evil* This knowledge, which is
produced by real dissatisfaction with self, is very useful. I have said
that it is the fruit of repentance, but at the same time it profits the
miserable, to humble themselves seriously before God, and to call to
memory their own ingratitude: then they perceive what they had never
admitted before, that God is trustworthy as well in his threats as in
his promises. Hence it happens that they reverently embrace his word
which they had formerly despised. He pronounced the same thing
previously concerning the reprobate, who, as we have already said, feel
God’s hand without producing fruit. But because he now speaks of those
very few whose conversion he had previously praised, he doubtless
comprehends the fear of God under recognition or perception of him. For
if all God’s threats had been buried, the people could not be thought to
have returned into the right way, nor could their conversion have any
existence before God. We know that contempt is not free from impious
sacrilege, which is now treated of. Therefore, that the sinner may
submit himself sincerely to God, this acknowledgment is required, that
he should weigh within himself how unworthily and wickedly he had
formerly either repudiated or neglected the word of God. In the meantime
the Prophet triumphs over the arrogance of those who had wantonly
despised the teaching of all God’s servants, when he says, *they shall
feel (or acknowledge) that I Jehovah have not spoken in vain* Since,
therefore, the Prophet here depicts as in a painting their late
repentance, let us learn to tremble in time at God’s threats. Although
indeed God does not yet execute his vengeance upon us, yet let us be
sure that he does not speak in vain, and let us be alarmed as soon as he
shows any sign of his indignation. God indeed testifies that he would be
propitious to the Israelites, although their repentance was tardy; but
as far as we are concerned, let us repent in time, as I have already
admonished, and as soon as God utters his threats, let it be to us just
as if their execution were at hand. It follows —

<span id="x.xi"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p1"></span><span id="x.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#011.md)<span id="x.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p2"></span>**11.** Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with
thine hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel! for they shall fall by the sword,
by the famine, and by the pestilence.

<span id="x.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah, Percute
manu tua  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) et divarica pedes
tuos,  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) et dic Hei  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) super omnes abominationes mahas domus
Israel: quia gladio, fame et peste cadent.

<span id="x.xi-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.xi-p8"></span><span id="x.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p9"></span>This confirms what we have formerly seen
concerning the slaughter of the ten tribes. The kingdom of Israel had
been indeed afflicted, but because those remaining in their own country
thought themselves free from further calamity, and gave themselves up to
their idolatries more and more, it was on this account necessary that
final destruction should be denounced against them. Since, then, words
moved them but little, God adds a sign, according to his custom in
obstinate cases. He orders the Prophet, by clapping of hands, and by
extending his legs and feet, to show that the land was cursed. *Divide,*
therefore, *thy feet;* for thus men are accustomed to do when they
denounce anything gravely, or burn with indignation: they extend their
legs in opposite directions; so I have rendered it verbally *separate
thy feet:* the clapping of the hands has the same object. God wishes by
this gesture that his word should be confirmed, not for the Prophets
sake, but for the sake of the obstinacy of those who were deaf to all
words, as we have said. Hence we truly comprehend how great was the
stupidity of men, who, when God was thundering from heaven, yet remain
secure, and do not cease to follow after their own desires: even when
God inspires terror, they do nothing but laugh — this is monstrous. And
yet we see it was an old disease, and I wish we of this day were free
from what Ezekiel experienced.

<span id="x.xi-p10"></span>Lastly, it is just as if he had been
commanded to bring the Israelites into his presence When, therefore, he
was commanded to cry *alas!* or, oh! *upon all the abominations of the
house of Israel,* there is no doubt that his gesture as well as his
exclamation ought to be efficacious. The reason also is added — *that
all shall perish by sword, pestilence, and famine* We have said that
these three kinds of punishment are always proposed, not because God
strikes the despisers of his law with pestilence, the sword, and famine
only, but because this method is more known and more common. God has
innumerable hidden methods of punishing transgressors; but since, as I
have said, this scourge is more used, hence the Prophets more frequently
mention it.

<span id="x.xi-p11"></span>The result is, that destruction to the
kingdom of Israel was at hand, which they had never thought of; because
God avenges the wickedness of his people not only by war, but by
pestilence and famine. Sometimes by the figure, a part for the whole, it
comprehends other punishments. And we know with how many miseries war is
replete; for when once men begin to take up arms, the gate is opened to
robberies and rapines, burnings, slaughters, debaucheries, and all
violence; and in war all humanity and equity is buried. Then as to
famine, we know that it usually renders men ravenous. But in pestilence
the husband will desert the wife, every family is invaded by death,
orphanhood afflicts one, and widowhood another. Since, therefore, these
scourges of God draw with them infinite miseries, it is not to be
wondered at if the Prophets use war, pestilence, and famine, for
shortness, when they signify that those who provoke God too long shall
perish. Now follows a clearer explanation —

<span id="x.xii"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p1"></span><span id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#012.md)<span id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p2"></span>**12.** He that is far off shall die of the
pestilence; and he that is near shall fall by the sword; and he that
remaineth and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I
accomplish my fury upon them.

<span id="x.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Qui procul erit, peste morietur; et
qui prope erit, gladio cadet,  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md)
et qui relictus fuerit, et obsessus fame morietur: et complebo
Indignationem  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) meam in ipsis.

<span id="x.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.xii-p7"></span><span id="x.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p8"></span>Now the Prophet explains himself how the
Israelites were to be destroyed by famine, the sword, and pestilence,
namely, *those who shall be far off shall die by pestilence;* that is,
after they think themselves hidden in secret places, so that no danger
nor inconvenience can overtake them, they shall die there by pestilence.
For when they were dragged into distant exile, they thought themselves
altogether remote from all harm. But pestilence, he says, shall attack
them although the sword shall cease. Then those who shall be at hand,
that is, those who remain at home, the sword shall consume. Now the
remnant, he says, who had been besieged and hemmed in, shall die by
famine. And so he confirms what we formerly saw, that there should be no
cause why the Israelites should sleep amidst their sins when God spared
them: because if they do not all perish by the sword, God has other
means of punishing them; for he has pestilence and famine in his hand,
so that he can extinguish those who are far off, since pestilence will
pursue them even there; then if any are left, they shall perish — even
in the midst of peace — nevertheless, because God will destroy them by
famine and want. Then he adds, *I will fulfill my burning wrath against
them:* by which words God signifies that he had borne with that impious
people thus far, but if at any time he pleased to exercise rigor, that
he had not yet exacted sufficient punishment for their wickedness. Hence
God blames them, though he had borne with them thus far, and although he
had sometimes stricken them with his rods, yet he was not a rigid judge,
but admonishes them as a father to return to the right way. But since
they had so obstinately abused God’s forbearance, he here pronounces
that his last act was approaching, and for this reason he speaks of *the
fulfilling of his burning anger:* thus the Prophet turns away all envy
from God, that the Israelites should not charge him with cruelty; thus
he shows them that whatever evils they suffered were only a prelude to a
horrible slaughter which was overhanging them, and which they still
despised. It follows —

<span id="x.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p1"></span><span id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#013.md)<span id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p2"></span>**13.** Then shall ye know that I *am* the
LORD, when their slain *men* shall be among their idols round about
their altars, upon every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains,
and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the place where
they did offer sweet savour to all their idols.

<span id="x.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah,
cure vulnerati eorum  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) in medio
idolorum ipsorum  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) in circuitu
altarium ipsorum, super omnem collem excelsum, in omnibus capitibus
 <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) montium, et sub omni arbore
frondosa, et sub omni quercu densa,  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md) in loco ubi obtulerint suffitum bonae
fragrantiae omnibus idolis suis.

<span id="x.xiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="x.xiii-p9"></span><span id="x.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p10"></span>Now he again announces that they shall know
what they have long neglected. But here a different knowledge from the
former seems to be marked; for he has lately said that they should so
remember as to be ashamed, and acknowledge that the slaughters predicted
by the Prophets had not been in vain: but here he mentions nothing of
this kind, but only speaks of that experimental knowledge which is
common to the ungodly. And, in truth, this doctrine seems to be extended
promiscuously to all the commonalty. For although for the most part they
did not profit by it, yet all perceived that God was a judge, because so
clear and conspicuous was the proof of his vengeance, that they were
compelled to feel, whether they would or not, that their punishment was
just. We may perceive, then, that the Prophet intends the phrase — *then
ye shall know, etc.,* in a wide sense, because he addresses all the
Israelites without exception, even those who should perish. For, we
said, such was the character of that knowledge, that it only frightened
them, and did not bend them to humility. And, truly, the words which
follow show only the terrible vengeance of God, *when they shall be
slain,* says he, that is, shall fall, *near their idols* But we have
said that they would more clearly acknowledge the vengeance of God from
this — that he rendered their false gods an object of ridicule. But, as
I have said before, the Prophet uses an opprobrious name when speaking
of idols. Since, therefore, they so fell near their idols, under the
confidence and protection of which they thought that they would always
be safe; and although the idols themselves were thus involved in the
condemnation, this made God’s vengeance more manifest. And this is the
reason, as I have before suggested, why the Prophet enters into these
details. What follows is to the same purpose — by *the circuit of all
their altars* This, then, was profanation of all altars, to be defiled
by carcases being drawn over them, and then sprinkled with human blood.
But he also points out the places where they worshipped false gods; for
we have said that lofty places were chosen for them, but here he puts
*lofty hills,* and then *the tops of the mountains* But as
idol-worshippers heaped to themselves various and numerous games, when
they were satiated with their high places, they had shady valleys, for
their altars were under trees, where they offered incense. The Prophet
therefore pronounces that there was no place which God did not condemn
with infamy. When, therefore, he says that *the incense had a pleasing
smell,* the opposite is doubtless intended, since this incense was foul
before God: as when an immodest woman desires to please an adulterer, it
moves the wrath of her husband, so here God silently complains that he
was provoked by that foul incense with which the Israelites wished and
desired to gratify their idols.

<span id="x.xiv"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou not only
proposest to us this day the ancient examples of thine anger, by which
we may be restrained within thy pure and perfect worship, but also hast
so clearly manifested thyself to us, through thine only-begotten Son,
that we cannot err unless we are insane, — grant, I say, that we may be
not only docile and moral, but attentive to that doctrine which is
contained in thy gospel, so that we may be directed by this perfect
light, until we arrive at length at the full and solid alliance with the
Sun of righteousness, Christ, thy Son. — Amen.

<span id="x.xv"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p1"></span>Lecture Eighteenth

<span id="x.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p1"></span><span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014.md)<span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p2"></span>**14.** So will I stretch out my hand upon
them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness
toward Diblath, in all their habitations: and they shall know that I
*am* the LORD.

<span id="x.xvi-p3"></span>**14.** Et extendam manum meam super eos, et
ponam terram vastitatem, et derelictionem  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) prae deserto Diblathah in omnibus
habitationibus eorum: et cognoscent quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="x.xvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.xvi-p6"></span><span id="x.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p7"></span>Ezekiel pursues the same sentiment, but it is
necessary to persist with more words in confirmation of his prophecy,
because it was somewhat difficult of belief, especially among men so
secure, and who had been hardened against God by long habit. This is the
reason, then, why he uses so many words about a thing in itself by no
means obscure. Now he speaks concerning *the extension of God’s hand,*
which is a Scriptural form of speech sufficiently familiar; for it is
said that God extends his hand when he puts forth manifest examples of
his wrath. But the phrase is taken from men, who, if they wish to
accomplish anything great extend their arm. We know that God
accomplishes all things by his nod alone, but because through our
sluggishness we do not comprehend his judgment, the Scripture, in
compassion to our rudeness represents his hand as extended. But he says,
*that he will place the land in devastation and stupor* The two words,
<span id="x.xvi-p7.1"></span>שממה, *shemmeh,* and <span
id="x.xvi-p7.2"></span>שמה, *shemeh,* are different, though derived from
the same root. <span id="x.xvi-p7.3"></span>שמה*, shemeh,* signifies to
destroy and lay waste; also to wonder at: so that the explanation of
some is not bad — I will place the land for a desolation and an
astonishment. But because the comparison of a desert follows
immediately, I willingly subscribe to the opinion of those who translate
desolation or solitude, and vacancy or waste: for although these: two
words are synonymous, as they say, yet the Prophet properly adds vacancy
or solitude to waste, because he does not. inculcate the same thing too
often, for the sake of explanation, but only that he may confirm what he
otherwise knew would not be attended to by the Israelites. Some
translate from the desert even to Diblathah; and there are some who
think Riblatha should be read instead of Diblathah — and it may happen
that an error has crept in, on account of the similarity of the letters
<span id="x.xvi-p7.4"></span>ד and <span id="x.xvi-p7.5"></span>ר. But I
do not think any change is needed: and besides, I reject as absurd, the
explanation from the desert even to Diblathah or Riblatha. But <span
id="x.xvi-p7.6"></span>מ is rather a mark of comparison: *the land of
Israel shall be reduced to desolation* more than the desert of
Diblathah. For how could the Prophet have said — from the desert even to
Diblathah? The threat is against the land of Israel, but Diblathah was
in Syria beyond the land, for they think it was Antioch: hence the true
sense, according to the Prophet’s intention, could not be elicited from
this. But it is most suitable that the desert should be placed before
the eyes of the Israelites, because it was not far from their country:
Syria was between them and it, but since there was frequent intercourse,
that desert was sufficiently known to them. Already had they passed
through the desert when they passed into exile, and the difference in
the aspect of the country would rather waken up their senses: for the
whole of Syria is fertile, and Antioch has an excellent site, as
geographers relate. Since, therefore, the Israelites had traversed a
pleasant land, and one filled with all opulence, when they came to a
desert vast and sorrowful, that appearance, as I have said, would stir
them up the more. This, therefore, appears to me the reason why the
Prophet says that the desert Diblathah was not so waste, or solitary, or
dry, or squalid, as the land of Israel should become.

<span id="x.xvi-p8"></span>He says, *in all their habitations,* that
they may know that there would be no corner free from that devastation
which he predicts: for it will often happen that some land is partially
seized and spoiled, but here the Prophet comprehends all habitations.
*And they shall know,* he says, *that I am Jehovah:* that is, they shall
know that I have spoken by my Prophets. But God announces this with
displeasure, because the Prophet’s authority ought to have been sacred
and established among the people. For his calling was so marked out that
they could not contend against him without being opposed to God. Hence
Ezekiel is omitted here, and God comes forward, as if he had spoken
himself. *They shall know,* therefore, he says, both my faithfulness and
power. Besides this knowledge is extended to the reprobate who do not
profit by God’s chastisements. Although, therefore, experience compels
them to acknowledge God as a judge, yet they remain obstinate, as we
shall soon see again and again. It follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc22009.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p6"></span> Or, “against.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc22009.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="x.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p9"></span> “Some translate ‘torrents;’ others, ‘the
rushing down of waters;’ others, ‘rocks.’” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc22009.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="x.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span> Or, “I will lay prostrate ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc22009.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="x.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span> “The relation is in the third person.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc22009.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="x.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span> “He returns again to the second person ” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc22009.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="x.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span> That is, “in every habitable region they will
be deserted.” This word we have illustrated before — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc22009.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="x.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span> Or,” shall be destroyed and perish.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc22009.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span> Or, “abolished,” the same word for idols
which is derived from heat. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc22009.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="x.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p4"></span> “It is one word — ‘I will leave remaining.’”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc22009.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="x.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p4"></span> “The adverb of place is redundant ” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc22009.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="x.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p5"></span> “That is, which burns with adultery.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc22009.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="x.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p6"></span> “Or full of lust ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc22009.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="x.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.x-p4"></span> “That is, in making them bear this evil, or
slaughter, or penalty: for ‘evil’ is not to be taken here for unjust
violence, but only for adversity.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc22009.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="x.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p4"></span> That is, “clap thy *hands.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc22009.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="x.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p5"></span> Or, “*extend*;” verbally, “extend in thy
*foot.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc22009.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="x.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p6"></span> Or, “<span id="x.xi-p6.1"></span>*heus*,
alas!” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc22009.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="x.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p4"></span> “Some translate ‘shall fall on the sword,’
but too harshly. Already, in the last verse, the Prophet used the same
word in a different sense, therefore I change nothing: he who is near
shall fall by the sword.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc22009.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="x.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p5"></span> Or, “burning ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc22009.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="x.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p4"></span> Or, “slain.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc22009.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="x.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p5"></span> “The person is here changed, but this does
not obscure the sense.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc22009.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="x.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p6"></span> That is, “the tops ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc22009.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="x.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p7"></span> “Some translate ‘elm,’ but it is also oak.”
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc22009.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="x.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p4"></span> “Or, stupor: for <span
id="x.xvi-p4.1"></span>שמה, *shemeh, as* we have seen, signifies this
also.” — *Calvin*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc22010.md)
