[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc22003)  [Next](cc22005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>Lecture First

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>Ezekiel himself explains at the very beginning
of his Book, at what period he discharged the prophetic office; and on
this depends the knowledge of his argument. For unless we understand how
God stirred him up, we can with difficulty enter into his spirit, and
shall be unable to receive any just fruit from his instruction. It is
necessary, therefore, to begin from this point: namely, *the time of his
Prophecy:* for he says:

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Now it came to pass in the thirtieth
year, in the fourth *month*, in the fifth *day* of the month, as I *was*
among the captives by the river of Chebar, *that* the heavens were
opened, and I saw visions of God.

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit tricesimo anno, quarto meuse
quinta mensis, et ego  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) in medio
Captivitatis,  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) super fluvium Chebar
aperti sunt coeli, et vidi visiones Dei.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>**2.** In the fifth *day* of the month, which
*was* the fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity.

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>**2.** In quinta mensis, ipse est annus
quintus captivitatis regis Joiakim.

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span><span id="v.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>We see that the Prophet was called to the
office of a Teacher in the fifth year after Jehoiachin had voluntarily
surrendered himself to the king of Babylon, (<span
id="v.ii-p10.2"></span>[2Ki 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015.md)<span
id="v.ii-p10.2"></span>); and had been dragged into exile, together with
his mother: for it was, says he, “in the thirtieth year.” The greater
part of the Commentators follow the Chaldee Paraphrast, and understand
him to date from the finding of the Book of the Law. It is quite clear,
flint this year was the eighteenth of king Josiah; but in my
computation, I do not subscribe to the opinion of those who adopt this
date. For this phrase — “the thirtieth year,” would then appear too
obscure and ‘forced. We nowhere read that succeeding writers adopted
this date as a standard. Besides, there is no doubt that the usual
method among the Jews was to begin to reckon from a Jubilee. For this
was a point of starting for the future. I therefore do not doubt that
this *thirtieth year* is reckoned from the Jubilee. Nor is my opinion a
new one; for Jerome makes mention of it, although he altogether rejects
it, through being deceived by an opposite opinion. But since it is
certain that the Jews used this method of computation, and made a
beginning from *Jobel,* that is, the Jubilee, this best explains *the
thirtieth year* If any one should object, that we do not read that this
eighteenth year of king Josiah was the usual year in which every one
returned to his own lands, (<span id="v.ii-p10.3"></span>[Le
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p10.3"></span>.md) and
liberty was given to the slaves, and the entire restoration of the whole
people took place, yet the answer is easy, although we cannot ascertain
in what year the *Jobel* fell, it is sufficient for us to assign the
Jubilee to this year, because the Jews followed the custom of numbering
their years from this institution. As, then, the Greeks had their
Olympiads, the Romans their Consuls, and thence their computation of
annals; so also the Hebrews were accustomed to begin from the year
*Jobel,* when they counted their years on to the next restoration, which
I have just mentioned. It is therefore probable that this was a Jubilee
year — it is probable, then, that this was *the Jubilee.* For it is said
that Josiah celebrated the passover with such magnificent pomp and
splendor, that there had been nothing like it since the time of Samuel.
(<span id="v.ii-p10.4"></span>[2Ch
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018)<span id="v.ii-p10.4"></span>..md)
The conjecture which best explains this is, not that he celebrated the
passover even with such magnificence, but that he was induced to do so
by the peculiar occasion, when the people were restored and returned to
their possessions, and the slaves were set free. Since, then, this was
the Jubilee, the pious king was induced to celebrate the passover with
far greater splendor than was usual — nay, even to surpass David and
Solomon. Again, although he reigned thirteen years afterwards, we do not
read that he celebrated any passover with remarkable splendor. We do not
doubt as to his yearly celebration; for this was customary. (<span
id="v.ii-p10.5"></span>[2Ki 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#023.md)<span
id="v.ii-p10.5"></span>.) From this we conclude that the celebration
before us was extraordinary, and that the year was *Jobel.* But though
it is not expressed in Scripture, it is sufficient for us that the
Prophet reckoned the years according to the accustomed manner of the
people. For he says, that this was “the fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s
captivity*:”* who is called also Jehoiakim; for Jehoiakim succeeded
Josiah, and reigned eleven years. The thirteen years which remain of
Josiah’s reign and these eleven, make twenty-four. (<span
id="v.ii-p10.6"></span>[2Ki 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#036.md)<span
id="v.ii-p10.6"></span>.) Now, “his successor,” Jehoiachin, passed
immediately into the hands of king Nebuchadnezzar, and was taken captive
at the beginning of his reign, and reigned only three or four months.
(<span id="v.ii-p10.7"></span>[2Ki
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008)<span id="v.ii-p10.7"></span>..md)
After that, the last king, Zedekiah, was set up by the will of the king
of Babylon. We see, therefore, that nine years are made up: add the
space of the reign of Jehoiachin: so it is no longer doubtful as to the
reckoning of “the thirtieth year” from the eighteenth of king Josiah. It
is true that the Law of God was found during this year, (<span
id="v.ii-p10.8"></span>[2Ch 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.ii-p10.8"></span>,) but the Prophet here accommodates himself to
the received rule and custom.

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>We must now come to the intention of God in
appointing Ezekiel as his Prophet. For thirty-five years Jeremiah had
not ceased to cry aloud, but to little purpose. When, therefore, this
Prophet Jeremiah was so occupied, God wished to give him a coadjutor.
Nor was it but a slight relief when at Jerusalem Jeremiah became aware
that the Holy Spirit was speaking through another mouth in harmony with
himself; for by this means the truth of his teaching was confirmed. In
the thirteenth year of Josiah, Jeremiah undertook the prophetic office:
(<span id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>[Jer
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002)<span id="v.ii-p11.1"></span>:.md)
eighteen years remain: add the eleven years of Jehoiakim, and it will
make twenty.-nine: then add another year, and five more, and we shall
have thirty-five years. This then was his hard province, to cry aloud
continually for thirty-five years, to the deaf, nay, even to the insane.
God, therefore, that he might succor his servant, gave him an ally who
should teach the same things at Babylon which Jeremiah had not desisted
from proclaiming at Jerusalem. He profited not only the captives, but
also the rest of the people who still remained in the city and the land.
As far as the captives were concerned, this confirmation was necessary
for them: for they had false Prophets there, as we learn from <span
id="v.ii-p11.2"></span>[Jer 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#021.md)<span
id="v.ii-p11.2"></span>; there was Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and Zedekiah
the son of Maaseiah; they proudly boasted that they were endued with the
Spirit of revelation; they promised the people marvels, they derided the
softness of those who had left their country, they said that they were
determined to fight to the very last, and to run the risk of their lives
rather than voluntarily give up the inheritance of divine promise. In
this way they insulted the captives. After this there was Shemaiah the
Nehelamite, (<span id="v.ii-p11.3"></span>[Jer
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#024)<span id="v.ii-p11.3"></span>,.md)
who wrote to the high priest Zephaniah, and reproached him for being
careless and *neglectful,* because he did not severely punish Jeremiah
as an impostor and a fanatic, and a false intruder into the prophetic
office. Since, therefore, the Devil had his busy agents there, God
stationed his Prophet there, and hence we see how useful, nay, how
necessary it was, that Ezekiel should discharge his prophetic office
there. But the utility of his instructions extended much further, since
those at Jerusalem were compelled to listen to the prophecies which
Ezekiel uttered in Chaldea. When they saw that his prophecies agreed
with those of Jeremiah, it necessarily happened that they would at least
enquire into the cause of this *coincidence.* For it is not natural that
one Prophet at Jerusalem, and another in Chaldea, should utter their
prophecies, as it were, in the same key, just as two singers unite their
voices in accordance with each other. For no melody can be devised more
perfectly complete than that which appears between these two servants of
God. Now we see the meaning of what our Prophet says concerning “the
years.” *In the thirtieth year:* then *in the fourth month,* (the word
month being’ understood,) and *in the fifth day of the month, as I was
among the captives*

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>Before I proceed any farther, I will briefly
touch on the subjects which Ezekiel treats. He has all things in common
with Jeremiah, as I have said, with this peculiarity, that he denounces
the last slaughter against the people, because they ceased not to heap
iniquity upon iniquity, and thereby inflamed still more and more the
vengeance of God. He threatens them, therefore, and that not once only,
because such was the hard-heartedness of the people, that it was not
enough to utter the threatenings of God three or four times, unless he
should continually impress them. But, at the same time, he shows the
causes why God determined to treat his people so severely; namely,
because they were contaminated with many superstitions, because they
were perfidious, avaricious, cruel, and full of rapine, given up to
luxury and depraved by lust: all these things are united by our Prophet,
that he may show that the vengeance of God is not too severe, since the
people had arrived at the very last pitch of impiety and all wickedness.
At the same time, he gives them, here and there, some taste of the mercy
of God. For all threats are vain, unless some promise of favor is held
out. Nay, the vengeance of God, as soon as it is displayed, drives men
to despair, and despair casts them headlong into madness: for as soon as
any one apprehends the anger of God, he is necessarily agitated, and
then, like a raging beast, he wages war with God himself. For this
reason, I said, that all threats are vain without a taste of the mercy
of God. The Prophets always argue with men with no other intention than
that of stirring’ them up to penitence, which they could never effect
unless God could be reconciled to those who had been alienated from him.
This then is the reason why our Prophet, as well as Jeremiah, when they
reprove the people, temper their asperity by the interposition of
promises. He also prophesies against heathen nations, like Jeremiah,
especially against the children of Ammon, the Moabites, the Tyrians, the
Egyptians, and the Assyrians. (<span id="v.ii-p12.2"></span>[Jeremiah
26](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p12.2"></span>-29..md)
But from the fortieth chapter he treats more fully and copiously
concerning the restoration of the Temple and the city. He there
professedly announces, that a new state of the people would arise, in
which both the royal dignity would flourish again, and the priesthood
would recover its ancient excellence, and, to the end of the book, he
unfolds the singular benefits of God, which were to be hoped for after
the close of the seventy years. Here it is useful to remember what we
observed in the case of Jeremiah: (<span id="v.ii-p12.3"></span>[Jer
28](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p12.3"></span>:.md)
while the false Prophets were promising the people a return after three
or five years, the true Prophets were predicting what would really
happen, that the people might submit themselves patiently to God, and
that length of time might not interrupt their calm submission to his
just corrections.

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>As we now understand what our Prophet is
treating, and the tendency as well as the substance of his teaching, I
will proceed with the context.

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>He says: *as I was among the captives* While
some skillfully explain the words of the Prophet, they think that he was
not in reality in the midst of the exiles, but refer this to a vision,
as if; when he uses the word “among,” signifying “in the midst,” its
sense could be, that he was in the assembly of the whole people: but his
intention is far otherwise, for he uses the above phrase that he may
show that he was an exile together with the rest, and yet that the
prophetic spirit was granted to him in that polluted land. Hence the
words, “among the captives,” or, “in the midst of the captives,” do not
mean the assembly, but simply narrate, that, though the Prophet was far
from the Sacred Land, yet the hand of God was extended to him there,
that he might excel in the prophetic gift. Hence the folly of those is
refuted, who deny to our Prophet the possession of any spirit of
revelation before he went into exile. Although they do not err so much
through mistake and ignorance as through willful stupidity; for the Jews
took nothing so ill as the thought of God’s reigning beyond the sacred
land. To this day, indeed, they are hardened, because they are dispersed
through the whole world, and scattered through all regions, and yet
retain much of their ancient pride. But then, when there was any hope of
return, this profanation seemed to them scarcely tolerable, if the truth
of God were to shine forth elsewhere than in the holy land, but
especially in the Temple. The Prophet then shows, that he was called to
the office of instruction when he was in the midst of the exiles, and
one among them. God’s inestimable goodness is conspicuous in this,
because he called the Prophet, as it were, from the abyss: for Babylon
was a profound abyss: hence the Spirit of God emerged with its own
instrument, that is, brought forth this man, who should be the minister
and herald of his vengeance as well as of his favor. We see, therefore,
how wonderfully God drew light out of darkness, when our Prophet was
called to his office during his exile. In the meantime, although his
doctrine ought to be useful to the Jews still remaining in this country,
yet God wished them not to return to him without some mark of their
disgrace. For, because they had despised all the prophecies which had
been uttered at home, in the Temple, the Sanctuary, and on Mount Zion,
these prophecies were now to issue forth from that cursed land, and from
a master who was sunk, as I have said, in that profound abyss. We see
then, that God chastised their impious contempt of his instructions, not
without putting them to shame. For a long time Isaiah had discharged the
prophetic office; then came Jeremiah: but the people ever remained just
as they formerly were. Since then prophecy when flowing freely from the
very fountain was despised by the Jews, God raised up a Prophet in
Chaldea. Blow, therefore, we see the full meaning of the clause.

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span>He says, *“by the river of Chebar,”* which
many understand to mean the Euphrates, but they assign no reason, except
their not finding any other celebrated river in that country; for the
Tigris loses its name after flowing into the Euphrates, and on this
account they think the Euphrates is called Chebar. But we are ignorant
of the region to which our Prophet was banished: perhaps it was
Mesopotamia, or else beyond Chaldea, and besides, since the Euphrates
has many tributaries, it is probable that each has its own name. But
since all is uncertainty, I had rather leave the matter in suspense.
Because the Prophet received his vision on the banks of the river, some
argue from this, that the waters were, as it were dedicated to
revelations, and when they assign the cause, they say that water is
lighter than earth, and as a prophet must necessarily rise above the
earth, so water is suitable for revelations. Some connect this with
ablution, and think that baptism is prefigured. But I pass by these
subtleties which vanish of themselves, and very willingly do I leave
them, because in this way Scripture would lose all its solidity:
conjectures of this kind are very plausible, but we ought to seek in
Scripture sure and firm teaching;, in which we can acquiesce. Some for
instance torture this passage, “By the rivers of Babylon we sat down and
wept,” (<span id="v.ii-p15.1"></span>[Ps
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001)<span id="v.ii-p15.1"></span>,.md)
as if the people betook themselves to their banks to pray and worship;
when the situation of that country only is described, as being watered
by many rivers, as I have just mentioned.

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span>He says, *the heavens were opened, and I saw
visions of God* God opens his heavens, not that they are opened in
reality, but when, by removing every obstacle, he allows the eye of the
faithful to penetrate even to his celestial glory; for if the heavens
were cleft a thousand times, yet what great brightness must it be to
arrive at the glory of God? The sun appears small to us, yet it far
exceeds the earth in size. Then the other planets, except the moon, are
all like small sparks, and so are the stars. Since, therefore, light
itself grows dark before our glance penetrates thus far, how can our
sight ascend to the incomprehensible glory of God? It follows therefore
when God opens the heavens, that he also gives new eyesight to his
servants, to supply their deficiency to pierce not only the intervening
space, but even its tenth or hundredth part. So, when Stephen saw the
heavens open, (<span id="v.ii-p16.1"></span>[Ac
7:56](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#056)<span id="v.ii-p16.1"></span>,.md)
his eyes were doubtless illuminated with unusual powers of perceiving
far more than men can behold. So, at the baptism of Christ, the heavens
were opened, (<span id="v.ii-p16.2"></span>[Mt
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016)<span id="v.ii-p16.2"></span>,.md)
that is, God made it appear to John the Baptist, as if he were carried
above the clouds. In this sense the Prophet uses the words, *the heavens
were opened,* He adds, I saw visions of God Some think that this means
most excellent visions, because anything excellent is called in
Scripture divine, as lofty mountains and trees are called mountains and
trees of God; but this seems too tame. I have no doubt but that he calls
prophetic inspiration “visions of God,” and thus professes himself sent
by God, because he put off as it were his human infirmities when God
intrusted to him the office of instructor. And we need not wonder that
he uses this phrase, because it was thought incredible that any prophet
could arise out of Chaldea. Nathaniel asked whether any good thing could
come out of Nazareth, and yet Nazareth was in the Holy Land. How then
could the Jews be persuaded that the light of celestial doctrine could
shine in Chaldea, and that any testimony to the grace of God could
spring from thence? and that there also God exercised judgment by the
mouth of a Prophet? This would never have been believed unless the
calling of God had been marked in some signal and especial manner. Since
he next adds, *this was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity,*
(or Jechoniah, or Jechaniah,) it is plain that by these very words he
reproves the obstinacy of the people. For when God afflicts us severely,
at first we are much agitated, but by degrees we necessarily become
submissive. Since, however, the willfulness of the people was not
subdued during these five years, we infer that they persevered in
rebellion against God. Nor does he spare those who remained at
Jerusalem, for these took credit to themselves for not going into exile
with their brethren, and so they despised them, as we often find in
Jeremiah. Since then those who remained at home pleased themselves and
thought their lot the best, the Prophet here marks the time, because it
was necessary to allay their ferocity, and since they resisted the
prophecies of Jeremiah, to use a second hammer that they might be
completely broken in pieces. This is the reason why he speaks of *the
fifth year of king Jehoiachin’s captivity.*

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003.md)<span id="v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>**3.** The word of the LORD came expressly
unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans
by the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Fuit sermo Iehovae ad Ezechielem
filium Buzi sacerdotem, in terra Chaldaeorum, super fluvium Chebar: et
fuit super eum illic manus Iehovae.

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span><span id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>He does not repeat the *copula* which was
placed at the beginning of the first verse, and we may perhaps wonder
why the book should begin with a *copula:* for when he says, *“and* it
came to pass,” it seems to denote something going before it, and it
seems out of place when nothing precedes it. But probably an oblique
antithesis or comparison is intended between those prophecies which had
flourished for a long period at Jerusalem, which was their peculiar and
genuine scat, and that which was arising in Chaldea; as if he would say,
*“even* among Chaldaeans,” for the particle <span
id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>ו, *vau,* is often used in the sense of <span
id="v.iii-p6.2"></span>גם, *gam, “even.”* The sense therefore is, after
God had exercised his servants even to weariness, since many prophets
had discharged their duties at Jerusalem, now at length he speaks in
Chaldea. He says, therefore, *“the* word of the Lord came unto him.” I
know not why some dream that Jeremiah is here called *“Buzi,”* unless
because it was a foolish persuasion of the Jews, that the *father* of a
prophet is never mentioned unless he were a prophet himself. Their
ignorance is proved on other occasions, and here surely their curiosity
is shameful, since they decide this *Buzi* to be a prophet, and because
they know of no one else, they fix on Jeremiah: as if it were probable,
that when the father was left at Jerusalem, the son was an exile, which
is entirely conjectural. But because he was a priest;, so he says, *“the
son of Buzi*.” Our Prophet ought to have some reputation, for if he had
been of plebeian obscurity, he would scarcely have been listened to. The
priestly dignity, then, availed something towards securing attention.
Now he expresses what I have previously mentioned, *in the land of
Chaldea,* as if he had said: although God has not been accustomed to
raise up prophets in lands so distant and polluted, yet now his rule is
changed, for even among the Chaldeans is one endued with the prophetic
spirit. And the particle <span id="v.iii-p6.4"></span>שם, *illic,*
“there,” is emphatically added, “was there upon him,” says he. For
otherwise the Jews would have dreaded Ezekiel, as if he were a monster,
when they found that the word of God had proceeded from Chaldea. “What,”
say they, “will God pollute and contaminate his doctrine, by its
springing up from such a place as that? Who are the Chaldeans, that God
should erect his seat there? Mount Zion is his dwelling-place: here he
is worshipped and invoked. Here must his lamp burn of necessity, as he
has often witnessed by his prophets.” To such taunts the Prophet;
replies: God has begun to speak in Chaldea — there his power is
conspicuous: “The word of the Lord is come unto me; for we know that God
alone is to be heard, and that prophets are only to be attended to, as
far as they utter what proceeds from him.” Hence it is required that all
teachers of the Church should first have been learners, so that God
alone may retain his own rights, and be the only Lord and Master. As
then supreme authority resides in God alone, when prophets desire to be
heard, they profess not to offer their own comments, but faithfully to
deliver a message from God. Thus also our Prophet. I touch these points
rather lightly now, as I have treated them more at length elsewhere. At
length he adds, *the hand of the Lord was upon him* Some explain the
word “hand” by “prophecy,” but this seems to me weak and poor: I take
“hand” to mean divine power, as if Ezekiel had said that he was endued
with divine power, so that it should be quite clear that he was chosen a
Prophet. The hand of God, then, was a proof of new favor, so that
Ezekiel might subject; to his own sway all the captives, since he
carried with him the authority of God. This may also be referred to the
efficacy of his doctrine. For the Lord not only suggests words to his
servants, but also works by the secret influence of his Spirit, and
suffers not their labors to be in vain. The passage then may be received
in this sense. But since the Prophet only assumes to himself what was
necessary, and so claims for himself the position and standing of a
Prophet, so when he uses the word *“hand,”* I do not doubt his meaning
to be an inward operation. There is, it is admitted, an inward efficacy
of the Holy Spirit when he sheds forth his power upon hearers, that they
may embrace a discourse by faith, so also if all hearers were deaf, and
God’s word should evaporate as smoke, yet there is an intrinsic virtue
in the prophecies themselves: Ezekiel points out this as given to him by
God. Here I shall finish, because I should be compelled to break off
directly, and we shall be coming to the vision, which is the most
difficult of all.

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou didst bless
thy people with the continued grace of thy Spirit when it was cast out
of its inheritance, and didst raise up a Prophet even from the lowest
depths, who should recall it to life when it was all but despaired of —
O grant, that although the Church in these days is miserably afflicted
by thy hand, we may not be destitute of thy consolation, but show us,
through thy pity, that life may be looked for even in the midst of
death; so that we may bear all thy chastisements patiently, until thou
shalt show thyself’ our reconciled Father, and thus at length we may be
gathered into that happy kingdom, where we shall enjoy our full
felicity, in Jesus Christ cur Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span>Lecture Second.

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>A Vision is now to occupy our attention, whose
obscurity so deterred the Jews that they forbade every attempt to
explain it. But God appeared to his Prophet either in vain or not in
vain: it is most absurd to suppose the former — then if the vision is
useful, it is necessary for us to attain at least a partial
understanding of it. If any one object that the vision was exclusively
intended for the Prophet — the objection is easily answered, for what
the Prophet wrote was clearly for the use of the whole Church. Now, if
any one asks whether the vision is lucid, I confess its obscurity, and
that I can scarcely understand it: but yet into what God has set before
us, it is not only lawful and useful but necessary to enquire. Base
indeed would be our sloth should we willingly close our eyes and not
attend to the vision. We shall perhaps but skim the surface of what God
wills: yet this is of no small moment, and not only a moderate but a
slight degree of understanding may suffice for this. Thus briefly do I
finish my preface, and come to the words of the Prophet: —

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004.md)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>**4.** And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind
came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a
brightness *was* about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of
amber, out of the midst of the fire.

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et vidi, et ecce ventus furbinis  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) veniens ab Aquilone: nubes magna, et
ignis involutus  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) et splendor ei
undique: et e medio ejus tanquam facies Hasmal e medio ignis.

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span><span id="v.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>We must first consider the intention of this
Vision. I have no doubt but that God wished first to invest his servant
with authority, and then to inspire the people with terror. When
therefore a formidable form of God is here described, it. ought first to
be referred to reverence for the teaching conveyed; for, as we have
remarked before, and shall further observe as we proceed, the Prophet’s
duty lay among a hard-hearted and rebellious people; their arrogance
required to be subdued, for otherwise the Prophet had spoken to the
deaf. But God had another end in view. An analogy or resemblance is to
be held between this vision and the Prophet’s doctrine. This is one
object. Then as to the vision itself, some understand by the four
animals the four seasons of the year, and think that the power of God in
the government of the whole world is here celebrated. But that sense is
far-fetched. Some think that the four virtues are represented — because,
as they say, the image of justice is conspicuous in man, that of
prudence in the eagle, of fortitude in the lion, of endurance in the ox.
Yet although this is a shrewd conjecture it has no solidity. Some take
the contrary view, and think that four passions are here intended, viz.
fear and hope, sorrow and joy. Some think that three faculties of the
mind are denoted. For in the soul, <span id="v.vi-p8.1"></span>τὸ
λόγικον, is the seat of reason; <span id="v.vi-p8.2"></span>θύμικον*,*
that of the passions; <span id="v.vi-p8.3"></span>ἐπιθυμήτικον*,* that
of the lusts; and <span id="v.vi-p8.4"></span>συντέρεσις that of the
conscience. But these guesses are also puerile. It was formerly the
received opinion, that under this figure were depicted the four
Evangelists: they think Matthew was compared to a man, because he begins
with the generation of Christ; Mark to a lion, because he begins at the
preaching of John; Luke to an ox, because he begins his narrative by
mentioning the priesthood; and John to an eagle, because he penetrates,
as it were, to the secrets of heaven. But in this fiction there is no
stability, for it would all vanish if it were to be properly examined.
Some think it a description of the glow of God in the Church, and that
the animals are here to be taken for the perfect who have already made
greater progress in faith, and the wheels for the weak and
undisciplined. But they afterwards heap together many trifles, which it
is better to bury at once, and not take up our time ill refuting them.
All these, then, I reject; and now we must see what the Prophet really
does mean. I have already said, that it was the Almighty’s plan, when he
gave commands to his Prophet so to honor him, that his doctrine should
not be open to contempt. But the special reason which I touched upon
must be considered — viz.: that God shortly points out by this symbol,
for what purpose he sends his Prophet. For the visions have as great a
likeness to the doctrine as possible. For this reason, in my opinion,
Ezekiel says*, behold! a whirlwind came out of the north* The people had
already experienced the vengeance of God, Mien he had used first the
Assyrians and then the Babylonians to chastise them. Jeconiah, as we
have seen, had gone into voluntary exile. The Jews thought that they
would still have a quiet home in their city and country, and laughed at
the simplicity of those who had so quickly gone into exile. The Prophet
therefore says, that he *saw a stormy wind from the north* This rush of
the wind or tempest ought to be referred to the judgment of God: for he
wished to strike terror into the Jews, that they should not grow torpid
in their security. After he has spoken concerning the storm or tempest,
he adds — *I saw four living creatures and four wheels connected
together,* to signify that their motion had not originated from chance
but from God. These two things ought to be joined together, viz.: that
the storm sprang up out of the north, and that God, the author of the
storm, was beheld upon his throne. But in the meanwhile, that God’s
majesty might the Jews, he says — I *saw four living creatures and four
wheels connected together* By the four living’ creatures he understands
cherubim: and we have no need of any other explanation, for he explains
it so in chapter 10., when he saw God in the temple, the four living
creatures were under his feet, and he says they are cherubim. Now we
must see why four animals are here enumerated, when two cherubim only
embraced the Ark of the Covenant; and next, why he describes four heads
to *each:* for if he wished to accommodate his language to the rites of
the Sanctuary, why did he not place two cherubim, with which God was
content? (<span id="v.vi-p8.5"></span>[Ex
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)<span id="v.vi-p8.5"></span>;.md)
for he seems here to depart from the command of God himself: (<span
id="v.vi-p8.6"></span>[Nu 7:89](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#089.md)<span
id="v.vi-p8.6"></span>) now, four heads and round feet, do not suit the
two cherubim by whom the Ark of the Covenant was surrounded. But the
solution is at hand: the Prophet so alludes to the Sanctuary, or, at the
same time, to bend his discourse to the rudeness of the people. For
their religion had become so obsolete, and their contempt of the law so
great., that the Jews were ignorant of the use of tie Sanctuary; then
they so worshipped God as if he were at a distance from them, and
entirely rejected his providential care over human affairs. Here, then,
we see how gross was their stupor, so that though often stricken, they
never were aroused. Because the Jews were thus completely torpid, it
became needful to propose to them a new form, and so the Prophet chooses
half of it from the Sanctuary itself, and assumes the other half, as it
was required for so rude a people; although he did not manufacture
anything out of his own mind, for I am now speaking of the counsel of
the Holy Spirit. God was, therefore, unwilling to drive the Jews away
from the sanctuary, for that was the foundation of all right
understanding of truth, but because he saw that the legal form was not
sufficient, he therefore added a new supply, and as he gave each cherub
four heads, so he wished their number to be four.

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>With regard to their number, I doubt not that
God wished to teach us that his influence is diffused through all
regions of the world, for we know the world to be divided into four
parts; and that the people might know that God’s providence rules
everywhere throughout the world, four cherubim were set up. Here also it
is convenient to repeat, that angels were represented by cherubim and
seraphim: for those who are called cherubim here and in <span
id="v.vi-p9.1"></span>[Eze 10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#000.md)<span
id="v.vi-p9.1"></span>, are called seraphim in <span
id="v.vi-p9.2"></span>[Isa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.vi-p9.2"></span>; and we know that angels are called
principalities and powers, (<span id="v.vi-p9.3"></span>[Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="v.vi-p9.3"></span>,.md) and
are rendered conspicuous by these titles, while Scripture calls them the
very hands of God himself. (<span id="v.vi-p9.4"></span>[Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="v.vi-p9.4"></span>..md)
Since, therefore, God works by angels, and uses them as ministers of his
power, then when angels are brought forward, there the *providence* of
God is conspicuous, and his power in the government of the world. This,
then, is the reason why not two cherubim only were placed before the
Prophet’s eyes, but four: because God’s providence ought to be evident
in earthly things, for the people then imagined that God was confined to
heaven; hence the Prophet teaches not only that he reigns in heaven, but
that he rules over earthly affairs. And for this reason, and with this
end, he extends his power over the four quarters of the globe. Why,
then, has each animal four heads? I answer, that by this, angelic virtue
is proved to reside in all the animals. Yet a part is put for the whole,
because God by his angels works not only in man and other animals, but
throughout creation; and because inanimate things have no motion in
themselves, as God wished to instruct a rude and dull people, he sets
before them the image of all things under that of animals. With
reference, then, to living creatures, man holds the first place,
*because* he was formed after the image of God, and the lion reigns over
the wild-beasts, but the ox, because he is most useful, represents all
domestic animals, or, as they are usually called, *tame* animals. Since
the eagle is a royal bird, all birds are comprehended under this word;
and here I am not fabricating allegories, but only explaining the
literal sense; for it seems to me sufficiently plain, that God signifies
angelic inspiration by the four cherubim, and extends it to the four
regions of the earth. Now:, as it is equally clear that no creature
moves by itself, but that all motions are by the secret, instinct of
God, therefore each cherub has four heads, as if it were said that
angels administer God’s empire not in one part of the world only, but
everywhere; and next, that all creatures are so impelled as if they were
joined together with angels themselves. The Prophet then ascribes four
heads to each, because if we can trust our eyes when observing the
manner in which God governs the world, that angelic virtue will appear
in every motion: it is then, in fact, just as if angels had the heads of
all animals: that is, comprehended within themselves openly and
conspicuously all elements and all parts of the world; — thus much
concerning the four heads.

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>As to the four wheels, I do not doubt their
signifying those changes which we commonly call revolutions: for we see
the world continually changing and putting on, as it were, new faces,
*each* being represented by a fresh revolution of the wheel, effected by
either its own or by some external impulse. Since, then, there exists no
fixed condition of the world, but continual changes are discerned, the
Prophet joins the wheels to the angels, as if he would assert that no
changes occur by chance, but depend upon some agency, viz., that of
angels; not that they move things by their inherent power, but because
they are, as we have said, God’s hands. And because these changes are
really contortions, the Prophet says, *I saw wheel within wheel;* for
the course of things is not continuous, but when God begins to do
anything, he seems, as we shall again perceive, to recede: then many
things mutually concur*,* whence the Stoics fancied that fate arose from
what they called a connection of causes. But God here teaches his people
far otherwise, viz., that the changes of the world are so connected
together, that all motion depends upon the angels, whom he guides
according to his will. Hence the wheels are said to be full of eyes. I
think that God opposed this form of the wheels to the foolish opinion of
men, because men fancy Fortune blind, and that all things roll on in a
kind of turbulent confusion. God, then, when he compares the changes
which happen in the world to wheels, calls them “full of eyes,” to show
that nothing is done with rashness or through the blind impulse of
fortune. This imagination surely arises from our blindness: we are blind
in the midst of light, and therefore when God works, we think that he
turns all things upside down; and because we dare not utter such gross
blasphemy against him, we say that Fortune acts without consideration,
but in the meantime we transfer the empire of God to Fortune itself.
Seneca tells a story of a jester belonging to his wife’s father, who,
when he lost the use of his eyes through old age, exclaimed that he had
done nothing to deserve being cast into darkness — for he thought that
the sun no longer gave light to the world; but the blindness was in
himself. This is our condition: we are blind, as I have already said,
and yet we wish to throw the cause of our blindness upon God himself;
and because we do not dare openly to bring a charge against him, we
impose upon him the name of fortune; and for this reason the Prophet
says the wheels have eyes.

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>We now understand the scope of the vision,
and we must next approach its several parts. After he has said, *a wind
sprung up from the north,* and *a great cloud,* he adds, *there was also
a fire folding round itself* Moses, in the ninth chapter of Exodus,
(<span id="v.vi-p11.1"></span>[Ex
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024)<span id="v.vi-p11.1"></span>,.md)
uses the same word when he speaks of the storm which he caused in Egypt.
*There was fire en-folded or entwined,* and *the splendor of fire.* Some
shrewdly expound this splendor of the fire, as if God’s judgments were
not obscure, but exposed to the eyes of all. I cannot agree in this
meaning, nor do I think it correct. Here the majesty of God is described
to us according to the usual scriptural method. He says, *the fire was
splendid in its circuit,* and then *there was as it were the appearance
of “Hasmal” in the midst of the fire* Many think Hasreal to be an angel
or an unknown phantom, but, in my opinion, without reason, for Hasmal
seems to me a color. Jerome, following the Greek, uses the word
*electrum,* but surprises me by saying that it is more precious than
gold or silver; for electrum is composed of gold, with a fifth part of
it silver, hence, as it does not; exceed them both in value, Jerome was
mistaken. But whether it was electrum or any remarkable color, it so
clearly portrayed to the Prophet the majesty of God, that he ought to be
wrapt in admiration, although the vision was not offered for his sake
personally, but, as I have said before, for the Church at large. The
color differed from that of fire, that the Prophet might understand that
the fire was heavenly, and, as a symbol of God’s glory, had a form
unlike that of common fire. Now follows:

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#005.md)<span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>**5.** Also out of the midst thereof *came*
the likeness of four living creatures. And this *was* their appearance;
they had the likeness of a man.

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et e medio ejus similitudo quatuor
animalium, et hic aspectus eorum, similitudo hominis ipsis.

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span><span id="v.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span>I have already explained why God showed four
angels to his Prophet under the form of four animals. It was necessary
to turn a little aside from the sanctuary, since the whole legal worship
was obnoxious to the profane. God therefore descends, as it were, from
heaven, and appears familiarly on earth, as if he would say that he
reigned not only above among his angels, but that he exercised his power
here, because angels are engaged on earth, and are connected with all
regions of the globe; and the conclusion is, that God’s providence is
everywhere diffused. He says, *these animals have the likeness of a
man,* which does not seem in accordance with the rest of the context. He
will immediately say that each animal had four heads, then that their
feet were round or like those of a calf, as some interpret it: but here
he says they have the form of a man, and the solution is, that the first
feet are like those of a man, although in some respects different; nor
is it doubtful that cherubim were beheld by the Prophet as angels of
God. Wings also do not suit human nature, but he means, that they had
*the* usual human stature: although they are not entirely like human
beings, yet there is much likeness in their general appearance: and now
we understand why it is said that *the likeness was human*

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006.md)<span id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And every one had four faces, and
every one had four wings.

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et quatuor facies cuique, et quatuor
alae cuique ex ipsis.

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span><span id="v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span>He now comes to the heads and wings
themselves. Many suppose that each animal had four heads, and then that
four appearances belonged to each head; others extend the wings much
further, because they assign four wings to each of the four heads, and
others even sixteen; but this does not seem in accordance with the
Prophet’s words. He simply says *each had four heads,* and then *four
wings.* The wings and the heads correspond; but one animal was endowed
with only four heads, and so I do not think that it had more than four
wings, which will again be evident from the context. He adds afterwards
—

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span><span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007.md)<span id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span>**7.** And their feet *were* straight feet;
and the sole of their feet *was* like the sole of a calf’s foot: and
they sparkled like the colour of burnished brass.

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Et pedes eorum pes rectus, et planta
pedis eorum tanquam planta pedis vituli:  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) et scintillas jaciebant,  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) tanquam aspectus chalybis politi.

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span><span id="v.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>This seems added by way of explanation. Since
Ezekiel has spoken of their human form, he adds that *their feet were
straight,* although he calls them round or like those of a calf. I refer
the straightness not to the feet only but also to the legs. It is
therefore just as if he had said that these animals stood as men do. For
we differ from the brutes, who look down towards the ground. As the poet
appositely remarks, when he commends the singular favor which God has
conferred upon man,

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span>Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes  
Beholds his own hereditary skies.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md)

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span>The Prophet now signifies the same thing,
when he says that *the animals had straight feet.* He asserts that they
had not anything akin to brutes, but rather to the appearance or
likeness of man. He says that *their feet were round,* and this seems to
indicate their agility or the variety of their movements, as if he had
said that their feet were not confined, to any one direction, but
wherever God impels them they move easily, since their feet are round.
If any of us wishes to turn either to the right or the left, he will
feel himself to be contending with nature, if he attempt at the same
time to walk backwards; if however his feet were round, or of the form
of calves’ feet, he could easily move in any direction. Agility of this
kind then seems pointed at in the animals. As to *the sparks which shone
like polished brass or steel,* we know that this similitude often occurs
in Scripture, for whenever God wishes to render his servants attentive,
he proposes new figures which may excite their admiration. This very
thing happened to our Prophet, because if the usual fleshy color had
appeared in these animals, this perhaps would have been neglected: even
the Prophet had not considered the meaning of the vision with sufficient
attention. But when he saw the glistening thighs and sparks shining in
every direction, as if from polished steel, then he was compelled to
apply his mind more attentively to this vision, Now, therefore, we see
why he says that the appearance of the legs was *like polished steel,*
and that sparks *glittered on them*

<span id="v.x"></span>

<span id="v.x-p1"></span><span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008.md)<span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p2"></span>**8.** And *they had* the hands of a man under
their wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their
wings.

<span id="v.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et manus hominis sub alis *de sub alis*
super quatuor latera *vel angulos,* et facies et alae ipsis quatuor.

<span id="v.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.x-p5"></span><span id="v.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p6"></span>Now the Prophet says: *hands were under their
wings* Since hands are the principal instruments of action, we know that
all actions are often denoted by this word: whence hands, either pure or
defiled, signify the works of men either clean or unclean. When the
Prophet says that the animals were endowed with hands, he signifies that
they were ready for the performance of any duty enjoined upon them: for
he who is without hands lies useless, and cannot execute any work.
Therefore that the Prophet may express angelic vigor, he says that they
had hands. This also refers to their human figure, but hands denote
something peculiar: namely, that they have such agility that they can
execute every commandment of God. For he says: *they were under their
wings,* by which words he signifies, that the angels have no motions in
themselves, so that they cannot be carried where they please, except
they are divinely impelled, and their every action guided by the will of
God. For without doubt by wings, as in this place so in others, we must
understand something more than human, Since therefore the wings, with
which the animals are clothed, signify nothing else but the secret
instinct of God, it follows, that *hands hidden under the wings* denote
nothing else than that angels do not move, as we say, intrinsically, but
are impelled from without, namely, by the power of God himself: hence
they are not carried about rashly hither and thither, but all their
actions are governed by God, since he bends and directs them
whithersoever he pleases. This is the reason why the Prophet says that
he saw *hands on the animals,* and then *that those hands were under
their wings* He repeats again, *they had faces, and four wings to them*
The use of the phrase *four sides* is worthy of notice, just as if he
had said that the animals have the power of acting equally in all
directions, not that they had four hands each, although at first sight
this may appear to be the meaning of the words *on four sides,* or in
each corner, but it simply means that the hands so appeared on the
animals, that they were ready for action whensoever God wishes to impel
these animals. Now follows —

<span id="v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009.md)<span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Their wings *were* joined one to
another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight
forward.

<span id="v.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Societae erant quaeque ad aliam alarum:
 <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) ipsorum *animalium* non
revertebantur in gradiendo:  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) vir,
 <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) versus faciem suam ex opposite
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) incedebant.

<span id="v.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.xi-p9"></span><span id="v.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p10"></span>He says *the wings were conjoined,* which he
soon more clearly explains: for he will say that the wings were joined
together, and that two were so extended that they clothed or ruled the
whole body: but here he touches shortly upon what he will soon treat
more at length. Their wings then were so joined together that one
touched the other: and afterwards he adds, *they so went forward that
they did not return;* and he seems to contradict himself when he
afterwards says the animals ran like lightning and then returned: but
these two things are not inconsistent, for he will soon add the
explanation: namely, that the animals so go forward that they proceed in
a perpetual course towards their own end or goal, but it does not follow
that they afterwards rest there. Therefore when the animals proceed,
they do not turn aside in either one direction or another, nor do they
turn back, but go straight on in their destined course afterwards, like
lightning, yet they have different meetings: and what this means we have
no time to explain now, but must defer it till tomorrow.

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span>Almighty God, since by our dullness we are so
fixed down to earth that, when thou stretchest forth thine hand to us,
we cannot reach forth to thee, grant, that being roused up by thy
Spirit, we may learn to raise our affections to thee, and to strive
against our sluggishness, until by a nearer approach thou mayest become
so familiarly known to us, that at length we may arrive at the fruition
of full and perfect glory laid up for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Third

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span>We must now see why the Prophet says, *each
animal walked onwards, or in the direction of his face.* I simply
interpret it in a straight course, so that they neither wandered nor
declined to either the right hand or the left. For those who turn the
face on one side or the other, often stumble, and thus decline from the
right way: there was therefore such attention in the animals, that they
always kept their object in view, and never bent from their fixed
purpose. Hence we see that a fixed, and, as we say, inflexible rule in
divine actions is here commended. Men often change their places, and
fluctuate, and when they have any purpose, if a different thought strike
them, they are carried back again, as if they had forgotten themselves.
But God wishes to show that his actions are so arranged, that they have
nothing in them either crooked or erroneous. For we have said that
angels are represented by these living creatures; and under the image of
angels the government of the whole world is signified, because it must
be held, that they are, as it were, the hands of God, since he used them
in obedience to his will.

<span id="v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010.md)<span id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** As for the likeness of their faces,
they four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right
side: and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four
also had the face of an eagle.

<span id="v.xiv-p3"></span>**10.** Et similitudo facierum facies
hominis, et facies leonis ad dextram ipsis quatuor: facies bovis a
sinistra ipsis quatuor, et facies aquiae ipsis quatuor.

<span id="v.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xiv-p5"></span><span id="v.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p6"></span>He now comes down to the faces or
countenances of the living creatures themselves. The face is properly
used with reference to the whole body, but the Prophet only means the
countenance. He says therefore that *there was on the right as it were
the face of a man and of a lion, and on the left, the face of an ox and
of an eagle* We explained yesterday why four heads and as many faces are
ascribed to the angels of God, because so great was the dullness of the
people, that they did not acknowledge the providence of God over all
parts of the world. For we know that they were so intoxicated with
foolish confidence, that they wished to hold God shut up as it were
within a prison: for their temple was as it were God’s prison. Hence the
Prophet shows how the providence of God shines over other parts of the
world. But since there is vigor in animals, so for brevity’s sake he
puts four remarkable species of animals. Yet one question remains, and
that a difficult one, for in <span id="v.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Eze
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#014.md)<span id="v.xiv-p6.1"></span>, he
puts a cherub for an ox. Some think, or at least reply, that it appeared
at a distance the face of an ox, but nearer it was that of a cherub. All
see that this is a sophistry, and because they cannot otherwise escape
the difficulty, they have imagined that fiction, which has no firmness
in it. Others think that cherub and ox are identical; but this may be
refuted from many places, for cherubim have not the heads of oxen, as
all very well know. I therefore have no doubt there was some difference
in the second vision, when God appeared to his own Prophet in the
Temple. It is called the same vision on account of the likeness, but it
does not follow that all particulars were exactly the same. Nor ought
this conjecture to be rejected, because when God made himself known to
his servant in Chaldea, as I have said before, he wished to reprove the
sloth of the people by this multiform image; but when he appeared a
second time in the Temple, there it was something more divine. Hence
therefore the variety, because each animal then bore the *face* of a
cherub instead of that of an ox. Therefore, besides the stature of the
whole body, there was a remarkable feature whence the Prophet could more
easily and familiarly recognize these living-creatures to be cherubim or
angels. This reason also seems to explain why God showed to his Prophet
a form which approached more nearly to that of the sanctuary, and to the
two cherubim who surrounded the ark. Besides, some think that the heads
were so arranged, that the man’s head should look towards the east, and
the opposite head towards the west. But it is scarcely to be doubted
that the four faces had the same aspect, and turned their eyes in the
same direction, there being on the right the two forms which we have
mentioned of a man and a lion, and on the left, those of an ox and an
eagle. Afterwards follows —

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#011.md)<span id="v.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p2"></span>**11.** Thus *were* their faces: and their
wings *were* stretched upward; two *wings* of every one *were* joined
one to another, and two covered their bodies.

<span id="v.xv-p3"></span>**11.** Et facies eorum  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) *animalium;* et alae eorum extensae *vel
divisae* erant ab excelso, euique  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md)
colligatae ad socium, et duabus tegebant corpore.

<span id="v.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xv-p7"></span><span id="v.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p8"></span>He says, that *the faces as well as the wings
were extended,* because the four faces proceeded from one body. Here
then the Prophet says, that they are not united together, so that a
fourfold form could be seen on one head: there was the form of a man,
and then that of a lion, as in one glass various forms sometimes appear,
but each answers to its own original. So also the reader might mistake
here, as if different faces belonged to the same head: hence the Prophet
says, *they were stretched forth or divided from above.* Here he points
out a diversity of heads, and as to the wings, he says they were
extended, and, at the same time, shows the manner, viz., two joined or
bound together, so that each animal was bound to its neighbor. The four
living creatures were united by their wings: this the Prophet means; and
as to the other wings, he says that they covered their bodies, and so we
see some likeness between this vision and that vouchsafed to Isaiah,
which he relates in his chap. 6. The reason why the rings were joined
together *upwards* is sufficiently clear; because God has such different
motions, and so agitates the earth, that the things which seem to be
conflicting are most in unison. *The joining,* then, *was upwards,* that
is, with respect to God himself, because on earth there often appears
dreadful confusion, and the works of God, as far as we can understand
them, appear mutually discordant: but whoever raises his eyes to heaven
will see the greatest harmony between those things which have the
appearance of opposition below — that is, as long as we remain upon
earth, and in the present state of the world.

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#012.md)<span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span>**12.** And they went every one straight
forward: whither the spirit was to go, they went; *and* they turned not
when they went.

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>**12.** Et unum quodque ad *contra* faciem
suam ambulabat; secundum quod erat illuc spiritus ad ambulandum,  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) ambulabant, non revertebantur ambulando.

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span><span id="v.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span>Here the Prophet repeats, that the movement
of the living creatures was in each case directed *towards, or in the
direction of its face:* and he will say the same again: nor is this
repetition superfluous, since, as we said yesterday and must repeat
again, mankind can scarcely’ be induced to ascribe glory to the wisdom
of God. For we are so stupid, that we think that God mingles all things
inconsiderately, as if he were in the dark. Since, therefore, the
actions of God appear to us distorted, it is needful to repeat this
clause, viz., *that angels proceed straight forward,* that is, are
constrained to obedience. For the son who wishes to imitate his father,
and the servant his master, is often agitated and at a loss what to do.
Since then, something always appears confused in *creatures,* the
Prophet diligently enforces that *angels proceed in the direction of
their face,* that is, they tend at once to their goal, and decline
neither to one side or the other. What he announces with regard to
angels, ought to be referred to God himself; because his intention was
not to extol angelic wisdom, but he sets them before us as God’s
ministers, that we may perceive here one of the fundamental principles
of our faith, viz., that God so regulates his actions, that nothing is
with him either distorted or uncontrolled.

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span>He adds, *wheresoever there was spirit for
proceeding, they proceeded*  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) Spirit
is here used in the sense of mind or will: we know that it is often put
metaphorically for wind, and also for the human soul, but here the will
ought to be understood, and so the Prophet alludes to that very motion
by which angels are borne along when God uses their assistance. Since,
therefore, the vigor and swiftness of angels is so great that they fly
like the wind, the Prophet seems to allude to this likeness. And what
David says in the 104th Psalm, “God makes the winds his ministers,” the
Apostle, in the first chapter of the Hebrews, aptly applies to the
angels themselves. This analogy then, will stand very well, viz., that
the angels proceeded wherever their will bore them; and yet by this word
the Prophet points out that secret motion by which God bends his angels
as he pleases. In the meantime, he confirms what we have lately seen,
that angels are not rashly driven in every direction, but have a
definite end, because God, who is the fountain of all wisdom, works
through their means. He says again, *they so proceed as not to return,*
that is, that they do not deviate from their course, for he afterwards
says, *they do turn backwards.* But it is easy to reconcile these
statements, because it only signifies that their course was not abrupt.
While, therefore, they are proceeding in one direction, they go forward
until they finish their allotted space, and then they return like
lightning. For God does not so fit his angels for one single work, and
that they should rest ever afterwards, but daily, nay, every moment, he
exercises them in obedience. Since, then, the angels are continually
occupied, it is not wonderful that the Prophet says, that *they go and
return, and yet not return,* which is explained by their not receding
until they have discharged their duty. Lastly, this vision has no other
meaning than to inform the Prophet that God does not desert his works in
the middle of their course, as he says in <span
id="v.xvi-p9.2"></span>[Ps 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008.md)<span
id="v.xvi-p9.2"></span>. Since, therefore, in the works of God, there is
nothing unfinished or mutilated, the angels go forward, and finish their
allotted space till the goal: they afterwards return like lightning, as
he will shortly say. It follows: —

<span id="v.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013.md)<span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** As for the likeness of the living
creatures, their appearance *was* like burning coals of fire, *and* like
the appearance of lamps: it went up and down among the living creatures;
and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.

<span id="v.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Et similitudo animalium aspectus
eorum tanquam carbones ignis ardentis, tanquam aspectus lampadum
discurrens inter animalia, et splendor igni, et ex igne egrediebatur
fulgur.

<span id="v.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xvii-p5"></span><span id="v.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p6"></span>As I said yesterday, something divine ought
to shine forth in this vision, because God set forth the face of a man
and of an ox, of an eagle and of a lion, and in this he accommodates
himself to the stupidity of the people, as I have said, and also to the
capacity of the Prophet, because, as we are men, we cannot penetrate
beyond the sky. God therefore bore in mind his Prophet, and all the
pious, while, at the same time, he wished indirectly to reprove the
people’s sluggishness. At the same time, if the face of a man had not
been different from common forms, the vision had not excited such
admiration in the mind of the Prophet. Hence something heavenly ought to
be mixed with the earthly figures. This is the reason why the living
creatures were *like burning fire* Now we begin to understand what this
difference means; as when God appeared to Moses, if there had been
nothing wonderful in it, Moses would not have thought that he was called
by God, but he acknowledged God in the bush, because he saw that the
bush was on fire and yet not consumed. (<span
id="v.xvii-p6.1"></span>[Exod. 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#003)<span id="v.xvii-p6.1"></span>..md)
Then he began to be aroused, and to reflect within himself, that a
divine vision was presented to him. The same is to be diligently
observed in this place. And hence we gather, how humanely, nay, how
indulgently, God deals with us. For, as on his part, he sees how small
is our comprehension, so he descends to us: hence the faces of the
living creatures, the stature of their body, and what we have formerly
mentioned. Now, however, since he sees us torpid upon the ground, and
lying there, as it were idle, so he raises us up: this is the meaning of
what Ezekiel now says, viz., *the appearance of the living creatures was
like burning coals.* And since coals taken out of the fire sometimes die
out, he says the coals were burning. The Prophet would of necessity be
moved when he saw that. the living creatures were not really such, that
is, when he saw in the form of the animals something celestial, and
exceeding the standard of nature, and even the senses of man: and this
also \]s profitable to the rest of man.-kind. For when we read this
vision we acknowledge what the Prophet narrates to be so evident, that
God shines forth in it, and does not suffer his Prophet to doubt. Hence
his teaching, which is marked by such certain proofs, is better
confirmed to us. In the meantime, it is desirable to impress upon the
memory what we said yesterday, that there is something terrific in this
vision, since the people were hardened against all threats, nay, even
blows themselves. For God had already inflicted severe judgments, not
only on the kingdom of Israel, but on the city itself, and the whole
land of Judah. Even the captives were champing their bits and roaring,
because driven into exile, and, in the meantime, those who remained in
the city thought that they were treated nobly. Wherefore such was their
security, that it was necessary to put terrors before them, as we shall
see a little while afterwards. And it is also said, *the fire burned
before God,* where he not only wishes his own glory to be beheld by us,
but where he wishes to strike fear, as he did at the promulgation of the
law. (<span id="v.xvii-p6.2"></span>[Ex
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020)<span id="v.xvii-p6.2"></span>.md)
And David, in the 18th Psalm, narrates that God appeared to him in this
way when he was preserved by him: (<span id="v.xvii-p6.3"></span>[Ps
18:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008.md)<span
id="v.xvii-p6.3"></span>:) doubtless he understands that God unfolded
his formidable power against the unbelieving. So also in this place, he
says, *the appearance of the living creatures was like fiery and burning
coals,* and then he adds another image, that *they were like lamps,*
which some explain as firebrands or burnt wood. But another opinion is
more general, and more approved by me. The Prophet now expresses the
form of the fire more dearly, viz., *that the coals were like lamps* For
lamps send out their brightness to a distance, and seem to scatter their
rays in every direction, like the sun when it shines through the serene
air. On the whole, the Prophet means, that the fire was not obscure but
full of sparks, and shows that rays were diffused like lighted lamps.
Afterwards he says, *they walked between the living creatures* The
Prophet sees, as it were, a fiery form amidst the living creatures
themselves. Thus God wished to show the vigor of his own spirit in all
actions, that we should not measure it in our manner, according to the
depravity which is innate with us. For when we discourse concerning the
works of God, we conceive what our reason comprehends, and we wish in
some way to affix in our minds an image of God. But God shows, that when
he works there is a wonderful vigor, as if fire were moving to and fro.
Hence that vigor is incomprehensible to us.

<span id="v.xvii-p7"></span>Afterwards he says, *The fire was bright,
and lightning issued from it* This would affect the Prophet’s mind, when
he saw fire glittering in an unaccustomed manner. We know that fire is
often bright, especially when flame is added; but the Prophet here
intends something very uncommon, as if he had said that the fire is not
like that arising from lighted wood, but that it was resplendent, whence
we may readily collect that God here sets before us his visible glory:
and for the same reason he says, *lightning issued from the fire* Hence
arises the splendor just mentioned, since lightning is mingled with the
fire. But we know that lightning cannot be beheld without fear; for in a
moment the air seems inflamed, just as if God would in some way or other
absorb the world: hence the appearance of lightning is always terrible
to us. He was unwilling, indeed, that his Prophet should be frightened,
except as far as was needful to humble him. But, as I stated at the
beginning, this vision was not offered to the Prophet for his private
use, but that it might be useful to the whole people. Meanwhile the
Prophet, as he was but human, had need of this preparation, that he
might be humbled. For we always attribute something to pride, which
renders our senses obtuse, so as to be incapable of the glory of God.
Therefore when God wishes to become familiarly known to us, he strips us
of all pride and all security: lastly, humility is the beginning of true
intelligence. Now we understand why *lightning issued from the fire:* he
afterwards confirms this.

<span id="v.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#014.md)<span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** And the living creatures ran and
returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.

<span id="v.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Et animalia currebant, et
revertebantur instar fulguris.  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md)

<span id="v.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xviii-p6"></span><span id="v.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p7"></span>Here the Prophet explains more clearly what
would otherwise be obscure. He says that *the living creatures ran, and
returned like lightning:* by which words he doubtless signifies their
amazing swiftness. For lightning (as Christ uses that comparison when he
speaks of his own Advent — <span id="v.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Mt
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)<span id="v.xviii-p7.1"></span>.md)
goes forth from one part of the world and penetrates instantly to the
opposite. Since, then, the swiftness of lightning is so great that it
reaches in a moment through the immensity of heaven, for this reason the
Prophet says*, the living creatures ran, and returned like lightning:*
as if he had said, in whatever direction God wishes to impel them, they
were ready to obey; as we have formerly said, angels are at hand to obey
the commands of God: but we cannot comprehend the extreme swiftness of
their course, unless by this comparison of lightning. Now we see how
well these two things agree, that they did return and yet did not: they
did not return until they had arrived, as I have already said, at the
goal, because, although many hindrances occur, yet God breaks through
them, so that they never interrupt his actions. The devil, indeed, by
his obstacles, endeavors to compel God to recede; but here the Prophet
shows that when God determines anything, the angels are ready to govern
the world, and that they have so much vigor in them, that they go on
constantly to the end, as far as God inspires them with his own power.
Afterwards it follows —

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span><span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015.md)<span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p2"></span>**15.** Now as I beheld the living creatures,
behold one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four
faces.

<span id="v.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Et aspexi animalia,  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) ecce rota una in terra prope animalia ad
quatuor ad faciem cujusque.

<span id="v.xix-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xix-p6"></span><span id="v.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p7"></span>Now the Prophet descends to the wheels which
were joined to the living creatures. Each had a double wheel, as we
shall see afterwards — that is, one wheel rolling upon another. The
Prophet did not notice at one glance that the wheels stood near the
living creatures, and this is occasioned by the magnitude of the vision.
For although he was attentive, and God doubtless gave him understanding
by his Spirit, and although he was taken up, as it were, into heaven,
yet inasmuch as he could not at once embrace so great a vision he was
convicted of infirmity. Then this wonderful secret was set before him,
that he might attend to the whole spectacle with greater reverence. He
says, therefore, *when he had fixed his eyes upon the living creatures,
immediately the wheels appeared* He uses indeed the singular number, but
afterwards declares, there were four wheels. And now he removes all
doubt: *behold,* says he, *one wheel* — *how* one wheel? thus, *near
each living creature, at right angles, at the face of each*  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) We see, then, that there was a wheel to
each animal: this is easily gathered from the Prophet’s words. I
explained yesterday what God meant to represent to his servant and to us
by these wheels: namely, the changes which constantly occur in the
world. For if we consider what the condition of the world is, we may
correctly compare it to a sea, and even a tempestuous one. For as the
sea is subject to opposite winds, and hence storms are excited, so also
since there is nothing firm or calm in the world, its condition is a
perpetual change like the turning of a wheel. *The wheels stood near the
Angels,* because the world is governed by the secret inspiration of God.
When all things seem to roll round by a blind and rash chance, yet God
has his servants who regulate all their motions, so that nothing is
confused, nothing discomposed. This, then, is the reason why *the wheels
went forward and stood near the Angels,* as he immediately repeats
again. Now follows —

<span id="v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span><span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016.md)<span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span>**16.** The appearance of the wheels and their
work *was* like unto the colour of a beryl: and they four had one
likeness: trod their appearance and their work *was* as it were a wheel
in the middle of a wheel.

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span>**16.** Aspectus rotarum et opus  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) stent aspectus Tharsis et strutlitudo
unius ad quatuor,  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) et aspectus
eorum, et forma  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) quemadmodum si
rota esset in medio rotae.

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span><span id="v.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span>Now the Prophet uses the plural number, and
says, there were four wheels. He says, the color was like a precious
stone. Jerome translates *it “sea,”* because the sea which looks towards
Cilicia with respect to Judea is called Tharsis. But I know not why the
color of the sea or the sky took his fancy. But granting that, the word
is not found simply for a bluish-green color, for tharsis is a precious
stone, as we learn from Exodus, <span id="v.xx-p9.1"></span>[Ex
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#020.md)<span id="v.xx-p9.1"></span>, and
many other places. The Greeks translated it chrysolite, but I know not
whether correctly, nor does it much matter. We need only hold it to be a
precious stone, whose color was so exquisite that it attracted all eyes
to itself. And so God wished, under the figure of wheels, to place
before his Prophet something earthly; but, at the same time, to raise
his mind by its color, because he would ascertain from this that they
were not either common wheels, or wooden, or of any earthly material,
but heavenly ones. The color, then, was intended to draw off the
Prophet’s mind, so that he might ascertain that heavenly secrets were
laid open to him.

<span id="v.xx-p10"></span>*Like the appearance of a precious stone,* he
says: afterwards, *and they four had one likeness* This may, indeed, be
referred to the living creatures as some have conjectured, but I have no
doubt that the Prophet here teaches, that the wheels were so equal that
there was no difference between them. Therefore their proportion and
equality shows that in all God’s work there is the greatest arrangement
— not that this lies on the surface, (for we should rather think that
all things are involved in hurried confusion,) but if we raise our
senses above the world, it will doubtless be given us to acknowledge
what the Prophet here describes, viz.: that in all God’s works the
arrangement is so complete that no line could be better directed. God
therefore, whilst he turns round the world, preserves an even course
with *respect* to himself, so that what we call changes or revolutions
have no inequality with respect to himself, but each is in harmony with
all the others. At length he adds, *their aspect and workmanship, or
form, was as if each wheel were in the midst of a wheel,* so that the
bending of one wheel is across that of another. For he does not mean to
say, that one wheel was greater and another less, but that two wheels
were so united that they were at right angles to each other. Now, we may
see why the wheels were double; I touched on it briefly yesterday —
viz., because God does not seem to hold on a direct course, but to have
various changes, and, as it were, in contrary directions, as if the
motion by which each creature is inspired with vigor was drawn in
different ways. Therefore it is said, *one wheel was in the middle, of
another* Finally, here God represents to us to the life what experience
teaches. For first, the world is carried, along just as the wheels run
round, and that, too, not simply but with such great variety that God
seems to send forth his impelling force, now to the right hand and now
to the left. This, then, is as if two wheels were entangled together.
But I cannot proceed further now, and must leave the rest till
to-morrow.

<span id="v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, O Almighty God, since thou wishest us
to be subject to so many changes, that we cannot settle on earth with
quiet minds — grant, I pray thee, that, being subject to so varying a
condition, we may seek our rest in heaven, and always aspire to behold
thy glory, so that what our eyes cannot discern may shine upon us from
thence; and may we so acknowledge thy hand and power in the government
of the whole world, that we may repose upon thy paternal care till we
arrive at the enjoyment of that happy rest Which has been acquired for
us by the blood of thine only begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="v.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Fourth

<span id="v.xxiii"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017.md)<span id="v.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p2"></span>**17.** When they went, they went upon
their four sides: *and* they turned not when they went.

<span id="v.xxiii-p3"></span>**17.** Ad quatuor latera sua, ambulando
ibant, non revertebantur cum ambularent.

<span id="v.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="v.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiii-p6"></span>What he had already explained he now
repeats for the sake of confirmation, *that they went upon their four
sides* — that is, each living creature proceeded straight forward; the
words *they turned not* refer to their perseverance; not that they
exceeded the appointed space, but because they went forward to their
object without intermission. I touch but lightly now on what has been
already sufficiently explained.

<span id="v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018.md)<span id="v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p2"></span>**18.** As for their rings, they were so
high that they were dreadful; and their rings *were* full of eyes round
about them four.

<span id="v.xxiv-p3"></span>**18.** Et circumferentiae ipsis,  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) it proceritas ipsis, et terror ipsis: et
terga ipsarum  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) plena oculis per
circuitum ipsis quatuor.

<span id="v.xxiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxiv-p7"></span><span id="v.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p8"></span>What he says about the circumferences of the
wheels may seem superfluous, but he refers to the second clause of the
verse, where he says, that these circumferences were full of eyes. Here,
then, he now treats about their height and terrible aspect. It signifies
that the wheels were large, for being round their length and breadth is
equal. When he says *they were lofty,* he, doubtless, signifies that
they inspire terror by their very appearance, as he afterwards expresses
it.. The sum of the whole is, that these wheels were not common ones,
but. they so exceeded the usual size that their magnitude was
formidable. But all these things tend to impress the vision on the
attention of the Prophet, because unless the Lord should, as it were,
draw us violently to himself, we should become torpid through sloth. The
Prophet then required to be so variously affected, that, as soon as he
sees that no common vision is before him, he should apply all his
faculties to its consideration. What he now says, *that the
circumferences of the wheels were full of eyes,* signifies that all the
wheels were not rashly but considerately put in motion. If the eyes had
been in other parts, they had not been useful; but since the wheels
turned by means of their felloes — that is, their iron hoops — there the
Prophet saw the eyes fixed.

<span id="v.xxiv-p9"></span>Now, therefore, we see in what manner God
directs the world in various ways, and yet nothing’ is done without
reason and plan. By *the eyes,* the Prophet understands, that providence
which never wanders. He does not say, that every wheel had two eyes, but
*that the circumferences were full of eyes,* which expresses much more
than if he had said they possessed eyes: which means that there was not
the least motion in the wheels unless arranged and governed with the
utmost reason. And hence the error of those who think that years are
intended by the entangled wheels is refuted. This idea they obtained, I
suppose, front the Egyptians, for in their hieroglyphics the year is
represented under the image of a serpent., which, being twisted round,
bites his own tail. It is indeed true, that the continual series of time
is so woven together that year draws year behind it, *as Virgil* also
says in his second Georgic —

<span id="v.xxiv-p10"></span>“The year returns into itself by its own
footsteps.”

<span id="v.xxiv-p11"></span>But this is altogether out of place here,
where the Prophet; signifies that motions which seem to us confused are
yet connected, because God does nothing either rashly or
inconsiderately. Now, therefore, we comprehend the sense of this
portion. He adds —

<span id="v.xxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019.md)<span id="v.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p2"></span>**19.** And when the living creatures went,
the wheels went by them: and when the living creatures were lifted up
from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

<span id="v.xxv-p3"></span>**19.** Et cum incederent animalia,
incedebant rotae prope illa; et cum attollerentur animalia e terra,
simul elevantur rotae.

<span id="v.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxv-p5"></span><span id="v.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxv-p6"></span>By this verse the Prophet teaches, that all
the changes of the world depend on celestial motion. For we have said
that the living creatures represent to us Angels whom God inspires with
a secret virtue, so that he works by means of their hands. Now,
therefore, when he says, that the wheels proceeded through a higher
movement than their own, it follows that nothing happens by chance in
the world, but that God, by his own incomprehensible wisdom, so directs
all things that nothing happens except by that secret instinct which is
imperceptible to us. Therefore in this teaching of the Prophet, as in a
glass, we ought to consider what is concealed from human comprehension.
We see many things happen, and in the meantime we think the motions,
which are so perplexed and multiplied, confused; but the Prophet meets
this perverse imagination, and teaches that the wheels rest by
themselves and are set in motion by a higher force — that is, as the
living creatures or cherubim are moved, so the wheels are drawn along by
their influence. Now, therefore, because we perceive the meaning of the
Holy Spirit, so the usefulness of the doctrine is to be noticed. When we
see men planning’ so many things that they disturb the whole world, when
we see many conspiracies made, and then all things necessary for action
prepared, let us perceive that God governs all things, but in a secret
manner which surpasses our senses. Also, when we see many things happen
as we think unseasonably, let us think that Angels are discharging their
duty, and that by their motion and inspiration things in themselves
motionless are borne along. The same may be said of other things:
winter, for example, may be too mild or too rough; in that excess, let
us consider what the Prophet teaches here, viz.: that God so governs the
order of the seasons, that nothing happens unless by his inspiration.
When, therefore, *the living creatures went forward, the wheels near
them also wear forward,* he says, meaning that the living creatures were
the rule by which the wheels directed their course, and *when they were
raised,* he adds, *the wheels were raised also*

<span id="v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020.md)<span id="v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p2"></span>**20.** Whithersoever the spirit was to go,
they went, thither *was their* spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted
up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature *was* in the
wheels.

<span id="v.xxvi-p3"></span>**20.** Quo erat spiritus ad curtdum
ambulabant, illuc spiritus ad eundum; etiam rotae attollebantur cum
ipsis; quia spiritus antmalis erat in rotis.

<span id="v.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="v.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvi-p6"></span>Thus I arrange the clauses, for though
others join the first; clause with the second part of the verse, it is
too forced. Therefore the Prophet repeats what he had said, though he is
rather prolix. Afterwards he adds, *that the wheels were raised,* taking
the word generally for elevated, but not exactly as in the last and next
verse. I now add the next verse —

<span id="v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021.md)<span id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p2"></span>**21.** When those went, *these* went; and
when those stood, *these* stood; and when those were lifted up from the
earth, the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of
the living creature *was* in the wheels.

<span id="v.xxvii-p3"></span>**21.** Ambulando ambulebant:  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) et cum starent stabant: et cum
elevarentur,  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) attollebantur rotae
simul cum ipsis; quia spiritus animalis in rotis.

<span id="v.xxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxvii-p7"></span><span id="v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p8"></span>He continues the same sentence, that the
wheels were fixed, not that they fell but stood without motion, which we
know to be unnatural, for a wheel cannot stand on any part of its rim,
but will either fall on one side or the other, or will roll on: for the
Prophet says that the wheels were immovable. Whence it follows that
their moving force was external to themselves. Afterwards he confirms
the same by additional words. *For as the living creatures and the
wheels stood together, so they moved and were elevated together.* Here
the Prophet enlarges upon what he had just touched upon. For although
the matter is obscure, yet this copiousness excites attention, and leads
us to understand that the motion of the wheels is not uselessly
transferred to the living creatures, and that the cause resides there:
because if this had been said briefly, it might have been transmitted
carelessly, but since the Prophet so often asserts the motion of the
wheels to be derived from the living creatures, hence it follows that
all changes of things which are seen in the world have their origin from
some external source, as I have formerly said. The reason, too, is
repeated — *that the spirit of the living creatures* or animals *was in
the wheels:* for here as before there is an alteration in the number.
Though the Prophet understood the spirit of the living creatures to be
in the wheels, yet the wheels do not comprehend anything, but receive
vigor, as the moon obtains its brightness from the sun. So we perceive
that the wheels are impelled, not that the intelligence of the living
creatures had been transfused through the wheels. For God does not give
mind and judgment to either winter or summer, to either peace or war, to
either the calm or the storm, the pestilence or anything else. What
then? Neither air, nor earth, nor sea, have any rigor by themselves,
unless so far as God by his angels directs the earth to this use, or
while he bends the minds of men in one direction or the other, to either
war or peace. Now, therefore, we clearly see the meaning of *the spirit
of the living creatures being in the wheels,* viz., that God transfuses
his influence through angels, so that not even a sparrow falls to the
earth without his foresight, as Christ says, (<span
id="v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>[Mt
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029.md)<span id="v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="v.xxvii-p8.2"></span>[Lu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#006)<span id="v.xxvii-p8.2"></span>..md)
Therefore, whenever the confusion of our affairs urges us to despair,
let us try to remember this sentiment, that the spirit of the living
creatures is in the wheels. And truly when we tremble in doubtful
circumstances, what can we do but acquiesce in this doctrine — viz.,
that the end of everything will be according to God’s decree, because
nothing is carried on without his permission, and that there, is no
motion, no agitation under the heavens, unless he has inspired it by his
angels. Now it follows —

<span id="v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022.md)<span id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p2"></span>**22.** And the likeness of the firmament
upon the heads of the living creature *was* as the colour of the
terrible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above.

<span id="v.xxviii-p3"></span>**22.** Et similitudo super capita
animalis *hoc est animalium* firmamenti:  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) tanquam aspectus chrystalli terribilis;
expansi  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) super capita ipsorum
*animalium* desuper.

<span id="v.xxviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xxviii-p7"></span><span id="v.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p8"></span>Now the Prophet states the principal thing
in this vision — that God was seated on his throne: because if he had
spoken only of wheels and living creatures, the vision had been partial,
and therefore inefficient. But when he places God upon his own throne,
we understand that angels, who inspire motion in other things, have
neither vigor nor motion peculiar to themselves. On the whole, the
Prophet here says that angels so move all things that are done under
heaven, that no proper motion ought to be ascribed to them. And why?
because God presides over them and governs their actions. This is the
object of the latter part of the vision, which we are now going to
explain.

<span id="v.xxviii-p9"></span>He says then, *above the heads of the
living creatures was the likeness of a firmament*  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) By these words he wishes gradually to
draw us to God himself, and God also so deals with his Prophet that he
places different steps by which the Prophet himself according to his
capacity may gradually climb to an immense altitude. The Prophet does
not here speak concerning the throne of God, but only concerning the
firmament. For when we raise our eyes upwards, God’s glory appears
nearer to us than it does on earth. True it is, that it shines equally
on all sides; but heaven has in itself: greater excellence than the
whole earth, and the nearer we approach to God, the more conspicuous to
us becomes his image. For truly God there exercises his own power and
wisdom much more clearly than on earth. How many wonders does the sun
present to us! If we consider first the planets, and next the stars, we
shall be inspired a hundred times with admiration. Therefore when the
Prophet speaks of the firmament, he raises our thoughts so that they
approach by degrees unto God. *He saw* therefore *the likeness of the
firmament* Had he simply seen the firmament, it would not have been a
vision: for this is always visible. I know not why the Greeks used the
word <span id="v.xxviii-p10.3"></span>στερέωμα, nor why the Latins
followed them: for the Hebrew word <span
id="v.xxviii-p10.4"></span>רקיע, *rekiang*, has nothing like it or in
affinity with it. Yet I use the received word. The heavens then, which
are always visible, could not render the Prophet sufficiently attentive.
But he saw the *likeness of the firmament,* whence he noticed that it
was not the mere sky, but a new form submitted to his eyes, as if God
were bringing the Prophet himself into heaven with outstretched hand.
*Above the heads of the living creatures an expansion was spread out*
Here another participle is used, <span id="v.xxviii-p10.5"></span>נטוי,
*netvi,* signifying *“extended,”* for the word <span
id="v.xxviii-p10.6"></span>נטה, *neteh,* means to extend or stretch out.
*As the appearance of terrible crystal,* he says; for the color of
crystal was in this sky which the Prophet saw, but God added the terror,
because, as I have previously mentioned, on account of our sluggishness
God must put forth violence when he wishes to attach us entirely to
himself. *Above the heads of the living creatures themselves, he says,
upwards;* that is, that we may understand them to be subject to the sway
of Almighty God, as we shall afterwards see. It follows —

<span id="v.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p1"></span><span id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023.md)<span id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p2"></span>**23.** And under the firmament *were* their
wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which
covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side,
their bodies.

<span id="v.xxix-p3"></span>**23.** Et sub expansione *vel firmamen,to*
alto ipsorum recta, quaeque ad socium suum, cuique animali duae alae
quibus se operiebat, et euique dum quibus *operiebant* se sua cotpora
*vel in corporibus suis.*

<span id="v.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxix-p5"></span><span id="v.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p6"></span>There is some obscurity in the words, but it
may be easily removed if we remark the two ways of covering; for those
wings which tended upwards covered the living’ creatures themselves-
that is, their faces, but the other wings, which were joined to their
bodies, covered the body itself. Some think that there is a repetition
here, and say that the two wings which cover the face and those which
cover the body are the same. But this seems to me absurd. I have no
doubt but that what we saw before is repeated, namely, that each living
creature was covered with four wings, comprising the two which were
raised upwards, and the two which were so joined that *each* living
creature was connected with another. That was one form of covering: but
another was by letting the wings fall which covered the whole body. On
the whole, the Prophet adds nothing new, but impresses what he had said
before. It follows —

<span id="v.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p1"></span><span id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024.md)<span id="v.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p2"></span>**24.** And when they went, I heard the noise
of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the
Almighty, the voice of speech, as the noise of an host: when they stood,
they let down their wings.

<span id="v.xxx-p3"></span>**24.** Et audivi vocem alarum ipsorum sicuti
vocem aquarum magnarum *vel multarum* sicuti vocem Dei,  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) cum ambularent vocem sermonis sicuti
vocem castrorum, *hoc est exercitus:* cum starent remittebant alas suas.

<span id="v.xxx-p5"></span> 

<span id="v.xxx-p6"></span><span id="v.xxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p7"></span>When the Prophet says, *he heard the voice of
wings,* it is an explanation of his former teaching, when he said that
the wings followed the course of the living creatures, and stood, unless
when they were drawn by the living creatures: this he now expresses more
clearly by the word *voice* We know that, precepts are expressed by the
voice, and this is the means of human intercourse, so that he who bears
sway proclaims by the voice what he wishes to be done. Since therefore
what we have previously said was obscure — that the wheels were moved by
the living creatures — therefore the Prophet says there was *a voice in
the motion of the wings* He had said this before, and he now repeats
that the living creatures sometimes rested and let fall their wings.
When the wings were thus let fall there was no motion in the wheels; but
as the wheels obey the motions of the living creatures, he says *the
wings were vocal;* not that the wheels were endued with ears or could
hear any commands. But the Prophet could not otherwise express what I
have just said: viz., that heaven and earth are full of angelic motion,
unless he said that in such motion there was something like a voice, as
he said that whatever happens obeys God’s will. But this obedience
cannot be conceived unless a voice go before it. Now therefore we see
the Prophet weaving his own discourse, and by a new form of speech
expressing and confirming what we formerly saw — that the wheels were
mowed by the living creatures, because in the wings themselves a voice
was heard, he adds, *it was as it were a voice many or mighty waters* We
know that a great noise arises from the overflow of art impetuous river.
Nothing is more terrible than its sound, for it is something like a
crash which seems to threaten the breaking up of the whole earth, and
this vehemence the Prophet now expresses. He adds, *a voice of God* It
will be harsh to explain this of God himself, to whom although the
phrase is often attributed, yet we know that it is done metaphorically.
But there ought to be some external likeness which may show the Prophet
what was not visible of itself. But that cannot suit the phrase, “the
voice of God,” unless we understand it as in <span
id="v.xxx-p7.1"></span>[Ps. 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009.md)<span id="v.xxx-p7.1"></span>*,*
concerning thunder: the voice of God shakes the cedars and the
mountains, and makes the animals miscarry in the woods. Here David calls
thunder the voice of God, but I know not whether this metaphor is
suitable to the present place. Nor yet if we could take the word of God
in another sense, could it mean anything but thunder. Others translate
<span id="v.xxx-p7.2"></span>שדי*, shedi,* brave or violent, which suits
tolerably well, unless a general form of speech is not sufficiently
fitted to this place. For those images of things ought to be set before
the mind of the Prophet that tend to raise it upwards. Besides, if he
had said simply the voice of a strong or violent man, it would imply but
little, so I dare not reject the meaning — thunder; and if this
exposition is unsatisfactory to any one, yet the meaning will still be a
loud and terrific voice, because Scripture calls cedars and mountains,
cedars and mountains of God, on account of their superior excellence.
(<span id="v.xxx-p7.3"></span>[Ps
80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011.md)<span id="v.xxx-p7.3"></span>;
<span id="v.xxx-p7.4"></span>[Ps
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="v.xxx-p7.4"></span>..md)

<span id="v.xxx-p8"></span>He says, *when they walked,* because there
was no other motion, for he said that the wings of the animals were let
fall while they stood. Then it was not necessary for earthly things to
be agitated, unless when the inspiration goes forward in the living
creatures, that is the angels. He adds, *the voice of speech* Here
Ezekiel proceeds further, asserting the voice to be articulate. True,
inanimate things cannot hear a voice, but as I have said, he wished to
represent the obedience in the wheels to be such as if they had been
taught, and God had eloquently and articulately commanded what he wished
to be done; or as if the wheels had spoken intelligibly, so that the
wheels might not afterwards roll round rashly, but in accordance with a
received command. He says, *as it were the voice of armies* And the
simile is to be diligently noticed, because in an army, in consequence
of the multitude, one can scarcely notice another with the view of
promoting union, and yet military discipline requires this.  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) Therefore, in camps there is great clamor
and confusion, yet each accommodates himself to others, and so order is
preserved. The Prophet therefore signifies, that although infinitely
numerous events meet together, yet nothing is left without guidance,
because God governs all earthly motions with much better skill than a
general, though endued with singular foresight, rules his army. We see
therefore what the Spirit intends by this part of the vision, when he
compares the things that are carried on in the world to mighty forces;
for he says that such reason was displayed among this multitude, that
although their clamors are tumultuous, yet all things are mutually
suited to each other. Again he says, *when they stood they let down
their wings* This question may be asked, how can the living creatures
rest when God is always at work: as also Christ says, My Father and I
work even to this day? (<span id="v.xxx-p9.1"></span>[Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="v.xxx-p9.1"></span>..md)
Since therefore the power of God is never at rest, what can the resting
of the living creatures mean? for God works by angels as we have seen:
if they rest, God has his periods of repose, which is absurd. But when
the Prophet says *they rested,* he wishes to mark the variety of human
events. For sometimes they are so tranquil, that we think God is taking
some repose, and is completely at rest in heaven: not that he ever
ceases, but because we do not perceive the agitations, which plainly
show his virtue to consist in motion and in action. Therefore the
Prophet here wishes only to denote variety; not that we ought to imagine
God to rest at any time or his angels to repose, but because he does not
always work in the same equable manner.

<span id="v.xxxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxxi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xxxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty *God,* that though we have
wandered far from thee, we may be taught by thy word, and hold on in the
right way of approach to thyself, and by faith contemplate what is
otherwise hidden from us, and thus depend entirely on thee. May we so
rely on thy providence, as not to doubt our perfect safety while our
life and salvation are in thy care, so that while tossed about by
various storms we may remain quiet, until at length we enjoy that
blessed and eternal rest which thou hast prepared for us in heaven by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.xxxii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p1"></span>Lecture fifth.

<span id="v.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#025.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p2"></span>**25.** And there was a voice from the
firmament that *was* over their heads, when they stood, *and* had let
down their wings.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p3"></span>**25.** Et fuit vox desuper expansione
quae erat super caput eorum; cum ipsa starent remittebant alas suns.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p4"></span>**26.** And above the firmament that *was*
over their heads *was* the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a
sapphire stone: and upon the likeness of the throne *was* the likeness
as the appearance of a man above upon it.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p5"></span>**26.** Et super firmamentum  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) quae erat super caput eorum tanquam
visio, *vel aspectus* lapidis saphiri similitudo solii: et super
similitudinem solii similitudo tanquam aspectus hominis super ipsum
desuper.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxiii-p8"></span><span id="v.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p9"></span>Is a former lecture we said, that the
Prophet, while magnifying the glory of God, spoke of the firmament,
because human minds cannot penetrate to so great a height, unless by
degrees. On this account, the Prophet described to us the expansion of
the heavens. He now adds, *there was a likeness of a throne* above the
*firmament, and the likeness of a man sat on the throne.* He mentions
the steps in order by saying, *above the expansion was the throne, and
above the thone a man* For he repeats what he had formerly said about
the expansion of the heavens. And as God consulted his infirmity, so he
now accommodates his discourse to the measure of our capacity. It is
worthy of observation that he says, *he saw the likeness of an
appearance.* Hence we gather, that it was not the true heavens which he
beheld, nor was it a throne formed of any material substance, nor was it
a real and natural body of a man. This also the Prophet clearly
expresses, lest any one should imagine that there is anything visible in
God, and, like the fanatics, should suppose him to be corporeal; so from
this passage any one might ignorantly collect, that God can be seen by
the eye, confined within place and be seated as a man. Lest these
imaginings should creep into men’s minds, the Prophet here testifies,
that it was not a human body nor any material throne which he saw, but
that these forms and appearances only were presented to him. Let not any
one think that the Prophet is vainly prolix in matters sufficiently
clear.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p10"></span>He says, *above the expansion, which was
above the head of the living creatures* We have already explained why he
treats of the heads of the living creatures — namely, because the former
vision ought all to be referred to God himself. He now adds, *the
expansion,* because we cannot ascend from the living creatures to God
without some assistance. Hence the firmament is brought before us, so
that we may arrive at the loftiness of God by degrees. The phrase, *the
likeness of a sapphire stone,* is used to show that figures only were
apparent to the Prophet: and this is the meaning of the likeness of a
throne. For we know that heretics formerly disturbed the Church by their
folly, who thought God to have a human form like ourselves, and also a
throne on which he sits. Hence the Holy Spirit, that he may meet such
comments, says, that the Prophet did not see a material throne, but only
the likeness of one. But this is chiefly needful in mentioning the
figure of a man: ‘for this and similar passages, having been erroneously
explained by those who assigned a human form to the Almighty, have given
occasion to the error that God is corporeal and circumscribed within a
defined space, and they proceeded to that pitch of fury, that they
rushed in troops and wished to stone all those who opposed their
impiety. The Prophet, therefore, says here, *that he saw, as it were,
the likeness of a human appearance* One noun ought to suffice, but
because we are so prone to vague and erroneous opinions, he joins the
word “appearance” to “likeness.” We see, then, that whatever the ancient
heretics fabricated about the visible form of God is excluded by the
clearest language.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p11"></span>It is now asked, Why God put on the form
of a man in this vision as well as in other similar ones? I willingly
embrace the opinion of those fathers who say that this is the prelude to
that mystery which was afterwards displayed to the world, and which Paul
magnificently extols when he exclaims —

<span id="v.xxxiii-p12"></span>“Great is this mystery — God is manifest
in the flesh.”  
(<span id="v.xxxiii-p12.2"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.xxxiii-p13"></span>The view of Jerome is harsh, who applies
these words to the Father himself. For we know that the Father was never
clad in human flesh. If he had simply said, that God is here
represented, there would have been no absurdity; let all mention of
persons be removed, and then it is true enough that the man seated on
the throne was God. The Prophet also at the end of the chapter bears
witness to this, when he says, this was the likeness of God’s glory,
(<span id="v.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>[Eze
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>:) for he uses the name Jehovah, by which the
eternity and primary essence of God is expressed. It is quite tolerable
that God should be represented by this figure, but what John says in his
chapter 12 (<span id="v.xxxiii-p13.2"></span>[Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p13.2"></span>,) must be added, that when Isaiah saw God
sitting on his throne, he saw the glory of Christ, and spoke concerning
him. Hence what I have already cited from the ancients completely agrees
with this, that as often as God appeared under the form of man, an
obscure glimpse was afforded of the mystery which was at length
manifested in the person of Christ. In the meantime we must entirely
avoid the dreams of Servetus, who is easily refuted by the words of the
Prophet. For he contends that this likeness was really a man, and then
that Christ was a figurative Son, because God was visibly composed, as
he said, of three uncreated elements.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p14"></span>These are most detestable blasphemies,
and unworthy of refutation, yet because that impious blasphemer
fascinated many vain persons, who suffered the deserved punishment of
their foolish curiosity, it is useful just to touch on their errors in
passing. He imagines, then, that Christ was the visible God from the
creation of the world, and in this way he interprets him to be the image
of God. He does not acknowledge the Father as a person, but says, the
Father was the invisible God, but that Christ is both the Father’s image
and also a person. He now says, he was composed of three uncreated
elements. If he had said of three elements only, Christ had not been
God, but he fancies for himself elements called into being which have
their origin in the essence of God; these elements, he says, were so
disposed as to have the form of man, so that he does not say that Christ
appeared only in human form, but he says, that Christ was a man figured
in that. divine essence. At length he says, that Christ was made man of
the seed of Abraham, because to these three elements a fourth was added,
which he allows to be created: so he says Christ was man, because he
imagines a mass concocted in some confused manner out of that visible
deity and of the seed of Abraham. Christ then, according to him, was man
for a time, because that visible deity was mingled with flesh, he next
adds, that the flesh of Christ was absorbed by the Deity; and so God was
made man not by union but by confusion; and then he says, that the man
was deified, and that Christ’s flesh became of the same essence with
God: and hence, that he is no longer man. Hence he derides us, who teach
that we cannot be partakers of Christ unless we ascend by faith into
heaven, because he feigns his body to be everywhere and immense. How can
this be? He is deified, says he, and hence retains no trace of human
nature. We now see what monstrous things this impostor fabricated. But
our Prophet dispels such clouds when he says — *then appeared the
likeness of the appearance of a man.*

<span id="v.xxxiii-p15"></span>Daniel describes to us the throne of God
more distinctly, who (<span id="v.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>[Da
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md)<span id="v.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>
and following) brings forward The Ancient of Days as wearing- the figure
of a man. There God is placed on the highest summit: next Christ the
Mediator is joined to him: and Daniel says he was brought to the Ancient
of Days, because as Christ descends from the Father, so he was received
into his glory, and now the greatest sway and power has been given to
him, as we are there taught at length. But, with reference to this
passage, it ought to suffice us, that the Prophet saw God only in the
person of Christ, because what is said of the likeness of a man cannot
be transferred to either the Father or the Spirit: for neither the
Father nor the Spirit was. ever manifested in flesh, but God was
manifested to us in flesh when Christ appeared, in whom resides the
fullness of the Divinity. In <span id="v.xxxiii-p15.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span id="v.xxxiii-p15.2"></span>,
Paul says that Christ was made in man’s likeness; and that in form and
habit he appeared man, but in another sense: for he does not make a
figurative Christ, nor does he treat professedly of the essence of
Christ’s body, but he informs us, that such was his condition when he
came down to us. He says, that he was humbled, so that he differed in
nothing from the human species: and even the word <span
id="v.xxxiii-p15.3"></span>μόρφη is used by Paul, which distinguishes
essence from species. Now, therefore, we hold the view of Paul, who
says, that Christ was found in fashion as a man, because he was outcast
and despised in our flesh. But in this place the Holy Spirit teaches
otherwise, viz., that Christ now appeared in the form of man, though not
yet made man. If any one should now ask, whence this body was taken, the
reply is at hand: the body was not created as to substance, but this
form was created for the time. For God, as is well known, sometimes
gives his angels bodies, which afterwards vanish away. But there was
another reason for this vision, because Christ did not appear in the
form of man, that he might taste food as the angels did, (<span
id="v.xxxiii-p15.4"></span>[Gen. 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#003)<span id="v.xxxiii-p15.4"></span>.md)
but only that he might accommodate himself to the capacity of the
Prophet.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p16"></span>The sum of the whole then is this: the
likeness of body was only in appearance, as the Prophet says, but not in
essence. Hence we collect, that when mention is made of God the whole
essence is understood, which is common to the Son and the Holy Spirit
with the Father: for under the name Jehovah it is absurd to understand
Christ only. It follows, then, that the whole essence of God is here
comprehended. At the same time, when the persons are mutually compared,
the phrase, “in the form of man,” belongs solely to Christ. The whole
Deity, then, appeared to his Prophet, and that too in the form of a man,
but yet neither the Father nor the Holy Spirit appeared, because the
persons begin to be considered when the peculiar property of Christ is
shown forth. We are compelled to remark this, because fanatics now
spread a new error, as if Christ and the Holy Spirit were distinct
Deities from the Father. A certain impostor, named George Blandrata of
Piedmont, once came among us under the character of a physician, and
concealed his impiety as long as he could, but when he found himself
detected he fled to Poland, and infected the whole of that region with
his poison. He is unworthy of mention, but because he wished to acquire
a name by his blasphemies, he has become, forsooth, as famous as he
desired. Since, then, this error is widely circulated, and the whole of
Poland is infected with this diabolical delirium, as I have said, those
who are less exercised in Scripture ought to fortify themselves lest
they fall into those snares. They imagine that Christ is indeed God, but
not that God whom Moses and the Prophets celebrate; and although God is
often mentioned in the Law and the Prophets, yet they restrict this to
the Father alone: they allow, indeed, Christ to be God, but when pressed
closer, they say that he is God in essence,  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) to whom the Father has communicated his
essence, as it were, by transfusion; so, according to these, he is only
a fictitious God, because he is not the same God with the Father. They
think their impiety is established as often as the Father is simply
called God: but the solution is easy, that a comparison is then made
between the Father and the Son. In <span
id="v.xxxiii-p17.3"></span>[John
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#000.md)<span id="v.xxxiii-p17.3"></span>,
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son: true, the
Father is here called God, but, on the other hand, the Son is added: so
it is not to be wondered at that the original Deity is placed in the
highest position. At other times, when there is no comparison between
one person and another, then the whole Deity, which is common to Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, and is one and simple, is denoted. Lastly, when
the persons do not come into consideration, there is no relation of one
to the other, but when the persons are considered, then the mark of
relation between them arises, so that the Father is put first, and then
the Son and Holy Spirit, each in its own order.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p18"></span>I shall not collect the universal
testimony of Scripture, because it is sufficient just to put the finger
on these foul errors, lest any of the unskillful should be caught by
such snares. When Paul says, (<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>,) that God was manifest in the flesh, surely
he does not speak of any secondary or adventitious essence. For the
essence of God is one: therefore the whole Deity was manifest in the
flesh, as also Christ says, I am in the Father and the Father in me;
(<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.2"></span>[John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.2"></span>;.md)
and in other places he teaches, that the whole fullness of Deity resides
in Christ. Hence we collect, that the essence of God ought not to be
torn, as if one part could be with Christ, and another with the Father.
So that when John, in his Canonical Epistle, (<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.3"></span>[1Jo
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.3"></span>,) says, that Christ is truly God: This is
the true God, he says, and life eternal — surely the blasphemy will not
be tolerated if men should say that the true God is any other than the
Father. Concerning whom then can this be predicted, except the only God?
If this is transferred from the Father he will cease to be God. If,
therefore, Christ is truly God, it follows, that his essence is the same
as the Father’s. So that when Paul says, that the Church was purchased
with the blood of God, (<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.4"></span>[Ac
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.4"></span>,) surely the name of God is placed there
simply and without addition. When that impostor restricts the name of
God to the Father, how will this agree with the opinion of Paul? God, he
says, redeemed the Church with his own blood: if this were so, we ought
to understand that God of glory who was from eternity and whom Moses and
the Prophets celebrate. Now therefore, we understand how Christ appeared
as to person in human form, and yet the whole Deity appeared. That
Christ appeared can be clearly shown from that twelfth chapter of John
which I have quoted. (<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.5"></span>[Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.5"></span>.) That the whole Deity appeared both Isaiah
and Ezekiel plainly testify. I saw Jehovah seated on his throne. (<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.6"></span>[Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001)<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.6"></span>..md)
Who is that Jehovah unless the God of Israel, concerning whom Moses
formerly pronounced, Thy God, O Israel, is one God, (<span
id="v.xxxiii-p18.7"></span>[De
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="v.xxxiii-p18.7"></span>..md)
How then does John transfer this to Christ? why, with regard to person.
We see then how well all these things harmonize, because the whole Deity
appeared in the perfection of his glow, and of his immense essence, and
yet appeared in the person of Christ alone, because neither the Father
nor the Spirit were ever clothed in human flesh.

<span id="v.xxxiii-p19"></span>I have dwelt a little longer on this
doctrine, because there are many who are not versed in the writings of
the Fathers, and cannot easily satisfy themselves, and these are knotty
points; yet I have endeavored so to clear up a matter which seems
obscure and perplexing, as shortly as possible, that any one of moderate
capacity and judgment can easily understand what I have said. At the
same time, I shall not proceed with what I could skillfully bring
forward on the point;. Nothing is more useful in such matters than
wisdom tempered with sobriety and discretion. God appeared under a
visible form to his servant: could Ezekiel on that account do as
scholastic theologians do — philosophize with subtility concerning God’s
essence, and know no end or moderation in their dispute! by no means,
but he restrained himself within fixed bounds. Paul was caught up even
to the third heavens, (<span id="v.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>[2Co
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>,) but he says, that he heard unspeakable
things which he was not permitted to explain. So, therefore, let us be
content with sound doctrine, which can sufficiently fortify us against
all the snares of the devil. For this reason he says, *upon the throne
was the likeness as of the appearance of a man upon it.*

<span id="v.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#027.md)<span id="v.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p2"></span>**27.** And I saw as the colour of amber,
as the appearance of fire round about within it, from the appearance of
his loins even upward, and from the appearance of his loins even
downward, I saw as it were the appearance of fire, and it had brightness
round about.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p3"></span>**27.** Et vidi tanquam formam Hasmal,
tanquam aspectum ignis intus per circuitum, ab aspectu lumborum ejus et
supra, et ab aspectu lumborum ejus et infra, vidi quasi aspectum ignis
et splendor illi in circuitu.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="v.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiv-p6"></span>By these words the Prophet signifies that
God appeared so visible under the form of man that the splendor dazzled
his eyes. For if the appearance of Christ was such that the Prophet
could consider each part separately, as when I behold a man, I not only
cast my eyes upon his form from head to foot, but I consider of what
kind his eyes are, and also his sides, and what his stature is, whether
tall or short.

<span id="v.xxxiv-p7"></span>When we look at men or trees, a glance is
sufficient for distinguishing their several parts. But if we wish to
cast our eyes upon the sun, they are immediately made dim, for the
brightness of the sun is so great that it dazzles us. Then if our eyes
cannot bear the light of the sun, how can the glance of our mind
penetrate even to *God,* and comprehend the whole of his glory? This
then is the Prophet’s object when he says, *I saw as it were the color
of amber.* We have said that some interpreters understand an angel here,
but in my judgment, their view is erroneous: hence I reject it, for I
have no doubt that color is meant, and what sort of color. As to
Jerome’s version, *electrum,* I leave it doubtful: as to his saying that
it is more precious than gold and silver, this is foolish, because it is
composed of both metals. But then its color was remarkable, because it
not only attracted the eyes of the Prophet but dazzled them with its
splendor, so that he acknowledged it as celestial and divine. Therefore
he adds, *there was as it were the appearance of fire within,* which we
have previously explained, and that, too, *round about it* The fire was
apparent, so that the Prophet might understand that there were some
marks of the glory of God; and at the same time, that he might perceive,
as we shall see at last, this vision to be otherwise useless unless he
restrained himself within due limits: because when the majesty of God
meets us on the way, it can destroy the angels themselves. What
therefore would become of us? But God suits himself to our capacities,
so that visions should be useful to us only when we avoid pride and are
not carried away by foolish and bold curiosity. He says then, *the fire
appeared upwards and downwards,* that is above and below his loins, and
*the fire was brilliant round about* Afterwards he adds —

<span id="v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028.md)<span id="v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p2"></span>**28.** As the appearance of the bow that is
in the cloud in the day of rain, so *was* the appearance of the
brightness round about. This *was* the appearance of the likeness of the
glory of the LORD. And when I saw *it,* I fell upon my face, and I heard
a voice of one that spake.

<span id="v.xxxv-p3"></span>**28.** Tanquam similitudo atcus,  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) tanquam aspectas arcus, qui est in nube
in die phvia  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) sic fuit aspectus
splendoris in circuitu. Haec visio similitudinis gloriae Iehovm, et
aspexi, et cecidi super faciem meam, et audivi vocem loquentis.  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md)

<span id="v.xxxv-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.xxxv-p8"></span><span id="v.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p9"></span>The Prophet now adds, *that the likeness of
a celestial bow was presented to him,* which profane men call his, and
imagine that she performs the commands of the gods, and especially of
Juno. But Scripture calls it the bow of God, not because it was created
after the Deluge, as many falsely suppose, but because God wished to
stir up our hope with that symbol, as often as thick vapors cloud the
heavens. For we seem as if drowned under those waters of the heavens.
God therefore wished to meet our distrust, when he wished the bow in the
heavens to be a testimony and pledge of his favor, because it is said by
Moses, I will put my bow in the heavens. (<span
id="v.xxxv-p9.1"></span>[Ge 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#013.md)<span
id="v.xxxv-p9.1"></span>.) Now some distort this as if the bow was not
in existence before: but there is no doubt that God wished to inscribe a
testimony of his favor on a thing by no means in accordance with it, as
he freely uses all creatures according to his will. The bow in the
heavens is often a sign of continued rain, and seems as if it attracted
the shower. Since then its very aspect may cause terror, God says in
opposition to this feeling, as often as the bow appears, it is clearly
determined that. the earth is now safe from a deluge. But the opinion of
those who consider it in this place a testimony of favor does not seem
to me proved, for the whole vision is opposed to it. This is indeed
plausible that a bow appeared because God now wished to show himself
propitious to his servant, just as they interpret that verse in the
fourth chapter of Revelations, (<span id="v.xxxv-p9.2"></span>[Re
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003)<span id="v.xxxv-p9.2"></span>,.md)
when John saw the throne of God surrounded by a bow, because God was
reconciled to the world by Christ. As far as this passage is concerned,
I do not dispute it, but to interpret it so here would be altogether out
of place, because the whole of this vision was formidable, as I said at
the beginning. Thus to mingle contrary things would pervert the whole
order of the vision.

<span id="v.xxxv-p10"></span>What, then, is the object of this bow in
the heavens? We have said that heaven appeared to the Prophet as he
ascended by degrees to comprehend the glory of God, because the marks of
deity are more conspicuous in heaven than on earth. For if we look back
upon what we have formerly explained, God is never without witness, as
Paul says, (<span id="v.xxxv-p10.1"></span>[Ac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="v.xxxv-p10.1"></span>,.md)
but yet his majesty shines clearer in the heavens. But when the bow
appears, a new reason occurs for magnifying the glory of God. For in the
bow we have the image of deity more clearly expressed, whilst we reflect
on the magnificent workmanship of heaven, and whilst we turn our eyes
round to all the stars and planets. In this way, I allow, God compels us
to admire his glory, but the bow presents an addition not to be
despised, as if God would add something to the; bare aspect of heaven.
Now therefore we see why the Prophet saw a celestial bow, — that he
might be more and more affected when God presented such signal
appearances to his view, and that he might be more induced to
contemplate his glory. Hence what interpreters bring forward about a
symbol of reconciliation is altogether out of place.

<span id="v.xxxv-p11"></span>*I saw,* says he, *the form of a bow which
is placed, or* which is *in the cloud on a rainy day.* If any one should
ask if those colors are without substance, it is certain that colors
arise from the rays of the sun on a hollow cloud, as philosophers teach.
Therefore when the Prophet says, *a bow appears on a rainy day,* he
simply means, exists or appears in the midst; not that the colors have
any substance, as I have just said, but the rays of the sun, whilst they
are mutually reflected on the hollow cloud, occasion the manifold
variety. Afterwards he adds again, like *the appearance of brightness
round about* Again the Prophet confesses that his eyes were blinded,
because he could not bear such great splendor. And God manifests himself
familiarly to all his servants, yet so as not to foster our curiosity,
to which mankind are ‘far too inclined. God then wished to manifest
himself as far as it was useful, but not so far as the desire of mankind
— which is always immoderate — would carry them. Since mankind so
eagerly strain themselves that they easily become weakened, we must
remark what the Prophet inculcates a second time, namely, *that the
appearance of brightness was seen round about* Of what sort, then, was
that brightness? Why, such as to blind the Prophet’s eyes, and to render
him conscious of his weakness, so that he should not desire to know more
than was lawful, but submit himself humbly to God.

<span id="v.xxxv-p12"></span>At length he says, *this was a vision of
the likeness of the glory of Jehovah,* and by these words confirms what
I have said before, that the glory, of God was so beheld by the Prophet,
that God did not appear as he really is, but as far as he can be beheld
by mortal man. For if the angels tremble at God’s glory, if they vail
themselves with their wings, what should we do who creep upon this
earth? We must hold, then, that as often as the Prophets and holy
fathers saw God, they saw *as it were the likeness or aspect of the
glory of God,* but not the glory itself, for they were not fit for it;
for this would be to measure with the palm of our hands a hundred
thousand heavens, and earths, and worlds. For God is infinite; and when
the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, how can our minds comprehend
him? But although God has never appeared in his immeasurable glory, and
has never manifested himself as he really exists, yet we must
nevertheless hold that he has so appeared as to leave no doubt in the
minds of his servants as to their knowing that they have seen God. And
this is the purport of those phrases which sometimes appear difficult. I
have seen God face to face, says Jacob. (<span
id="v.xxxv-p12.1"></span>[Ge
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span id="v.xxxv-p12.1"></span>..md)
But was he so foolish as to think that he saw God like a mortal? by no
means; but that appearance convinced him of its certainty, as if he had
said that no specter by which he could be deceived was presented to his
view; for the devil deludes us unless we are attentive and cautious.
Therefore Jacob here distinguishes the vision which he enjoyed from all
prodigies in which profane nations delighted. Familiar knowledge, then,
is the meaning of seeing face to face. At the same time, as I have said,
God never gave the Fathers a sight of himself except according to their
capacity. He always had respect to their faculties, and this is the
meaning of the phrase, *this was a vision of the splendor of Jehovah’s
glory.* Since, then, it is certain that Christ was beheld by him, he is
Jehovah, that is, Eternal God; and although he is distinct from the
person of the Father, yet he is entirely God, for the Father is in him:
for the essence cannot be divided without impiety, although the persons
must be distinguished. The rest I shall put off till tomorrow.

<span id="v.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="v.xxxvi-p2"></span>Grant, O Almighty God, since of thine
unbounded goodness, thou hast counted us worthy of such honor as to
descend to earth in the person of thine only-begotten Son, and to appear
familiarly to us daily in thy gospel, in which we contemplate thy living
image: — grant, I pray thee, that we may not abuse so great a benefit to
vain curiosity, but may be truly transformed into thy glory, and so
proceed more and more in the renewal of our mind and conduct, that we
may at length be gathered to that eternal glory which has been obtained
for us by thine only-begotten Son our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="v.xxxvii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixth.

<span id="v.xxxvii-p2"></span>After the Prophet has recited the Vision,
the object of which was to confirm his mission, he now adds, *I fell
upon my face,* by which words he expresses his persuasion that God’s
glory was manifested to him. For the knowledge of God does truly humble
us, while the Prophet also teaches that men cannot be brought to order
unless they are laid prostrate: for he does not say that he was only
prepared to receive the commands of God, nor does he commend his own
teachableness, but rather signifies that he was violently thrown down.
For he had not all at once put off the affections of the flesh; but we
know that confidence is born with us. Therefore, because the Prophet was
not naturally disposed to obey God, he ought to be cast down with fear,
that at length he might be really humbled. Now he adds:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc22004.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span> That is, when I was. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc22004.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="v.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span> Among the Captives. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc22004.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="v.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span> Or *tempestuous.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc22004.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="v.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span> Or twisted. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc22004.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span> I conjecture that the points have been
changed in this place, because <span id="v.ix-p4.1"></span>עגל signifies
*round,* and here <span id="v.ix-p4.2"></span>עגל is put, which is *a
calf.* I know no reason why the Prophet should say calves’ feet or like
a calf: this seems rather strange, but I do not contend about trifles. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc22004.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="v.ix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span> Others. translate, “and sparks” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc22004.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="v.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span> <span id="v.ix-p10.1"></span>Os *homini
sublime, etc.* — *Ovid Metam.* 1 *Dryden.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc22004.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="v.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p4"></span> That is, each wing was connected with the
next wing. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc22004.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="v.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p5"></span> That is, when they moved, they did not turn
back. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc22004.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="v.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p6"></span> Or each, <span id="v.xi-p6.1"></span>איש —
that is, each animal. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc22004.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="v.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p7"></span> Literally, in the direction of its face. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc22004.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="v.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p4"></span> Some stop here, and take the words, “but
their wings were extended,” disjunctively: but because the copula is
used in each place, perhaps we had better unite the clauses in the same
context, thus, “Their faces therefore and their wings were extended.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc22004.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="v.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p5"></span> Now he speaks of the wings themselves. —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc22004.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="v.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span> That is, as far as the spirit led them for
walking. — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc22004.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="v.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span> This rendering seems most in accordance with
Calvin’s Interpretation, and is evidently better than Newcome’s,
“whithersoever the Spirit was to go, they went.” The French reads,
“<span id="v.xvi-p9.1"></span>selon que l’esprit estoit pour cheminer,
ils cheminoyent.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc22004.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="v.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p4"></span> He uses another word, but they both (<span
id="v.xviii-p4.1"></span>בזק, *bezek,* and <span
id="v.xviii-p4.2"></span>ברק, *berek,)* signify the same thing: for they
signify lightning and *brilliancy.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc22004.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="v.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p4"></span> That is, while I was beholding the living
creatures. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc22004.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="v.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p8"></span> Latin, <span id="v.xix-p8.2"></span>*ad
quatuor adfaciem cujusque,* by which Calvin seems to mean that each
wheel intersected another at right angles, the four spherical parts thus
becoming four faces or sides. The French translation has in the text
<span id="v.xix-p8.3"></span>*aux quatre,* and in the comments <span
id="v.xix-p8.4"></span>a *quatre a la face d’ un chacun*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc22004.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="v.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span> That is, workmanship or form — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc22004.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="v.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span> That is, there was a certain equable
proportion between the four wheels, so that one was altogether like
another — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc22004.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="v.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span> Either their work or workmanship; — <span
id="v.xx-p6.1"></span>On leur ouvrage ou leur facon. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc22004.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="v.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p4"></span> Properly backs, but he means circumferences
or felloes, iron hoops. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc22004.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="v.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxiv-p5"></span> That is, circumferences or strakes; their
strakes were full of eyes. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc22004.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="v.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p4"></span> i.e. When the living creatures went, the
wheels went, and when the one stood the other stood. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc22004.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="v.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p5"></span> This word, <span
id="v.xxvii-p5.1"></span>נשא*, nesa,* is correctly used for being lifted
up from the earth, for he had said “raised” before without any addition.
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc22004.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p4"></span> *Expansion,* <span
id="v.xxviii-p4.1"></span>רקיע*, rekiang,* is the word used by Moses in
the history of *creation.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc22004.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p5"></span> Others translate *ice.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc22004.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p10"></span> *Firmament,* or *extended expansion;*
the word, <span id="v.xxviii-p10.1"></span>נטרי*, netvi,* is referred to
<span id="v.xxviii-p10.2"></span>רקיע, *rekiang.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc22004.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="v.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p4"></span> Or a strong voice, or the voice of a strong
one, as some think. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc22004.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="v.xxx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxx-p9"></span> The French Translation rather amplifies than
accurately renders this sentence.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc22004.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p6"></span> Or rather expansion, as we have said. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc22004.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="v.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxiii-p17"></span> *“*<span id="v.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>Deum
essentiatum. Deus factitius.” — *Orig.* “<span
id="v.xxxiii-p17.2"></span>Dieu essentie. Dieu qui a este fait.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc22004.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="v.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p4"></span> We must repeat the words *“I* saw” from the
former verse. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc22004.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="v.xxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p5"></span> That is, when it rains. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc22004.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="v.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxv-p6"></span> Others translate, a speaking voice. —
*Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc22005.md)
