[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22009)  [Next](cc22011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Moreover, the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying,

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Iehovæ ad me, dicendo,

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Also, thou son of man, thus saith the
Lord GOD unto the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four
corners of the land.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et tu fili hominis, sic dicit Dominator
Iehovah terrae Israel, vel de terra; finis, venit finis super quatuor
alas terrae.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span><span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>Ezekiel seems here too verbose; for he repeats
the same sentiments almost in the same words. But the reason which I
have brought forward must be marked, if God had only uttered his
commands shortly, when the people were not only slow to believe but of a
perverse disposition, his message had proved cold and ineffectual. With
this design he uses, as we have seen, many words, and now repeats the
same: he now changes his expression, because he ought by all means to
stimulate that sloth, or rather sluggishness, under which the people
labored. Another thing to be noted is, that he came not once only by
God’s command to preach to the people, but. that he was often sent to
stir up their minds. For if he had included in one context what God had
enjoined, the Israelites might for the time have thought of God’s
judgment, but a prophecy once uttered would have easily escaped them.
Besides, when Ezekiel testifies that he was sent by God, and afterwards
returns and affirms that he brings new commands, this was more effectual
to influence their minds. Now we see the meaning of the phrase, *the
word was given by Jehovah* For this prophecy is distinguished from the
former, and yet the matter is the same, without any difference, as it
seems to weave in with the same discourse: this, indeed, is true, but he
ought to be sent twice, that the people may understand that not once
only, but twice and perpetually, what he heard from God’s mouth was to
be repeated: since it was sufficiently clear, that God was anxious for
their safety, since he never ceased to exhort them. *Thus,* therefore,
*says the Lord Jehovah concerning the land of Israel: an end is coming,
an end upon the four corners of the land* Here God seems to regard the
moderate punishments which he had already inflicted on the kingdom of
Israel. For we know that they often felt God’s hand, but when some
relaxation was afforded them, they thought themselves escaped, so they
forgot their wickedness and went on in it so carelessly that it was very
clear that they despised God, unless when he oppressed them with his
dreadful power. This seems the meaning of the word *end,* and it is
emphatically repeated: *an end is coming, an end upon the four corners
of the land* He puts, indeed, wings, but intends it metaphorically for
four different regions. God, therefore, reproves the Israelites for
their obstinacy, because though often chastised they did not cease to
transgress, through not supposing that any thing more grievous could
happen. He puts therefore the word *end,* as if he said, hitherto I have
treated you moderately. And surely God had displayed a remarkable
specimen of clemency in punishing the Israelites so lightly when he
might utterly have cut them off. Since, therefore, he had so refrained
himself in punishing, the sluggishness of the people was on that account
the less tolerable, since they thought all was over as soon as God had
withdrawn his hand. *An end,* says he, *an end is come,* that is, after
this you must not hope for any moderation. I see there is no hope of
repentance in you, and so I shall utterly consume you; and he adds, *on
the four corners of the land,* as he had just said, in all your
dwellings. Again, therefore, he teaches, that no part of the earth
should be free from the slaughter which he predicts. It follows —

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#003)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Now *is* the end *come* upon thee, and
I will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy
ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Nune finis super to: et mittam
indignationem meam in to, et judicabo to secundum vias tuas: et ponam
super to cunctas abominationes tuas.

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span><span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>He puts the word *end* a third time, and
repeats it even a fourth and a fifth time. Whence we collect, that those
miserable ones, although admonished more than enough both by teaching
and experience, were yet like brute animals, so that they always
promised themselves something to fly to, and were not impressed with the
fear with which the Prophet would strike them. They did not think that
an end was really coming, but said, Oh! something will remain, some will
escape; and this therefore was their pride. Hence the Prophet does not
inculcate the same word in vain: *now,* says he, *the end is come* When
he says *the end has come,* he signifies that the Israelites vainly and
foolishly trusted in the future, because they had not yet experienced
extreme rigor. God, as he had said, had been lenient with them as to
punishment. What then did they do? When they perceived such forbearance
in God they thought, that it would always be so. Hence the Prophet marks
the difference between the past and future, as if he should say, that
God’s vengeance as they had formerly known it, was moderate, but now
nothing else remained but that God should utterly tear them up and
consume them. *Now,* therefore, *there is an end concerning thee* He had
spoken in the third person, but he was directing his discourse to the
whole land of Israel, and he had said upon the four corners of the land,
*now,* says he, *the end cometh upon thee* Then, *I will send my
indignation upon thee* God indeed had given signs of his anger, but he
had not been so severe that the Israelites ceased from flattering
themselves. When, therefore, he speaks of his own indignation, he
doubtless signifies that he was so offended that he would not restrain
himself as he had formerly done. This too is the sense of what follows,
*I will judge thee according to thy ways.* They had been judged
formerly, but only in part; for God had given them time for repentance
had they been curable: but now, when he compares their judgment with
their sins, he means, that nothing was wanting to extreme severity. And
he explains that more clearly at the end of the verse, *I will put upon
thee all thine abominations,* that is, I will cast thine own burden upon
thee. For although God had begun to exact just punishment. for their
superstitions, yet they had not suffered a greater burden than they
deserved. Hence God now pronounces *that all their abominations should
come upon their own heads,* so that they should be utterly buried. It
follows —

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#004)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** And mine eye shall not spare thee,
neither will I have pity: but I will recompense thy ways upon thee, and
thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee: and ye shall know that
I *am* the LORD.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et non parcet oculus meus super to,
et non miserebor: quia vias tuas super to ponam, et abominationes tuae
in medio tui erunt: et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span>In other words he confines his own sentence,
that *God will not spare them,* nor will he be entreated. For when
hypocrites hear the praises of God which are assigned to him in
scripture, namely, that he is merciful and long-suffering, (<span
id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>[Nu 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span
id="xi.iii-p6.1"></span>; <span id="xi.iii-p6.2"></span>[Ps
103:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#008)<span id="xi.iii-p6.2"></span>,)
they seize upon them and fabricate for themselves the material of
foolish and perverse confidence. God here pronounces that his pity would
not be accessible to the wicked, who do not cease to repel it far from
them. And this is worthy of notice, because nothing is more natural than
to be intoxicated with false hope when we hear that God is merciful,
unless we know for what purpose he testifies this concerning himself,
namely, that sinners may betake themselves to him, and may fearlessly
call upon him, and implore his mercy, of which they have such remarkable
testimony. But hypocrites always become worse, meanwhile they wish God
to be propitious to them. Hence when he says, *his eye will not spare,
neither would he pity them,* his intention must be observed, that.
wicked and ungodly men should not think his clemency prepared for them
against which they have previously shut the door. *Because I will put
thy ways upon thee* — that is, I will cast thy wickedness against thee.
We see then that the people’s sins were placed before them, and as it
were lay there as long as God spared them. Now, therefore, he first
signifies that they should have no cause of quarrel or complaint,
because he will cast against them the iniquities which they had heaped
upon him. Then also he silently accuses them of too much security,
because they never could be brought to repentance, while God sustained
and tolerated their sins. *And thy abominations,* he says, *shall be in
the midst of thee* They were so from the first as far as their guilt was
concerned, but God had not yet poured forth his anger. He says,
therefore, *thy abominations shall be in the midst of thee,* because it
should really appear that they were not obstinate against God without
punishment. Again he repeats, *ye shall know that I am Jehovah* It is
quite clear, that by their obstinacy they compelled God to speak thus,
since they despised Ezekiel. But although they pretended to some piety,
it cannot be doubted that they would despise God himself.

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>Therefore he reproves their impiety so
sharply, because they denied that God was God as often as they withdrew
their confidence from the teaching of the holy man. It follows —

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#005)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**5.** Thus saith the Lord GOD, An evil, an
only evil, behold, is come.

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Sic dicit Dominator Iehovah: Malum,
unum  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) malum ecce veniet.

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span><span id="xi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span>If we read <span id="xi.iv-p7.1"></span>אחת*,
acheth,* or <span id="xi.iv-p7.2"></span>אחר, *acher,* the sense seems
to me the same, *an evil, another evil is come:* that is, one evil is
come from another, or one evil is come and an evil: that is, when one
evil is come another will soon follow. Some explain it in way which
seems to me harsh and unsatisfactory: one evil is come; this is so
severe that at its first impulse it suffices for complete slaughter, so
subtilely do they explain it. But it seems to me that the sense of the
Prophet flows best thus, *one evil shall come upon another* — that is,
there will be no cessation in God’s heaping evils upon evils until the
very name of the whole people shall become extinct. And this appears to
me to be said, that the Israelites should not after their manner suppose
themselves safe, if God gives them a short respite. For when a slight
intermission happens, the impious erect their crests, and keep up their
spirits, and think that God is at peace with them. Since, therefore, any
intermission is taken by hypocrites, as if they had made their peace
with God, therefore the Prophet says, *one evil shall come upon another*
It follow —

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#006)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**6.** An end is come, the end is come: it
watcheth for thee; behold, it is come.

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span>**6.** Finis venit, venit finis: evigilavit
super to, ecce venit.

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span><span id="xi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span>The whole context has the same meaning,
namely, that although the Israelites are deaf, yet they are compelled to
attend to God’s continued threats. The Prophet therefore strikes their
ears, because he was not immediately attended to, and again he speaks of
the end: *an end is come,* says he, *an end is come* Here Ezekiel does
not affect to use graceful figures of speech, but was rather compelled
by necessity to use the repetitions which we see. For *the end*
concerning which he speaks could with difficulty penetrate their minds,
for they were always supposing that God could be appeased by various
means. Since, therefore, they promised themselves something remaining
behind, and put away from them what the Prophet taught about the end, he
could not do otherwise than threaten often though he could scarcely
persuade them. Hence *an end is come, an end is come: it has been
watchful against thee: behold it is come* When he says *it has watched,*
he signifies haste, not that God had suddenly revenged the wickedness of
the ten tribes, but that he regards the torpor of those who indulged in
a vain confidence and dream that God’s judgment is far distant. That
diabolic proverb — “*Le terme vaut l’argent,”*  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) is still common in the mouths of many,
and such impiety has been rife in all ages. When therefore God suspends
his judgments, the reprobate intemperately boast themselves as if they
could continue in sin with impunity. For this reason the Prophet says,
*the end is watching* — *that* is, hastening — because although God had
delayed he would no longer refrain from destroying the Israelites. It
follows —

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#007)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**7.** The morning is come unto thee, O thou
that dwellest in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble *is*
near, and not the sounding again of the mountains.

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span>**7.** Venit mane super to, habitator terrae:
venit tempus, propinquus est dies tumultus,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) et non clamor  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) montium.

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span><span id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span>Now he uses another word. He says, *the
morning is come,* though some translate kingdom, but erroneously. For
although <span id="xi.vi-p8.1"></span>צפירה, *tzephireh,* is a turban
sometimes, or a royal diadem, yet the Prophet’s language is distorted
when they say that the kingdom was transferred, or taken over to the
Babylonians. But the sentence flows best — *the morning cometh* By “the
morning” he implies what he had said before, namely, the hastening of
God’s vengeance. As, therefore, he said the end was watching, since God
was hastening to take vengeance, so also he says, *the morning is come
to them,* and then rouses them from that drowsiness in which they had
grown torpid. We know that hypocrites commit all their sins as if no eye
were upon them; as long as God is silent and at rest they revel without
shame or fear. But the chosen remain faithful even in secret; but God’s
word always shines before them, as Peter says — ye do well when ye
attend to the Prophetic word, as a lamp shining in darkness. (<span
id="xi.vi-p8.2"></span>[2Pe 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019)<span
id="xi.vi-p8.2"></span>.) Although the faithful may be surrounded by
darkness, yet they direct their eye to the light of celestial doctrine,
so that they are watchful, and are not children of the night and of
darkness, as Paul says. (<span id="xi.vi-p8.3"></span>[1 Thess.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005)<span id="xi.vi-p8.3"></span>.) But
the impious are, as it were, immersed in darkness, and think they shall
enjoy perpetual night. As the rising morning dispels the darkness of
night, so also God’s judgment, on its sudden appearance, strikes the
reprobate with unexpected terror, but too late.

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span>For this reason, then, the Prophet says, that
*morning is come to the Israelites,* because they had promised
themselves perpetual night, as if they were never to be called upon to
render an account of their conduct. We see, therefore, that he alludes
suitably to that torpor which was the cause of their obstinacy, when
they thought themselves safe in their hiding-places. Hence he laughs at
their perverse confidence, who promise themselves impunity because they
are in night. For the *morning,* he says, will immediately seize upon
you; hence *morning is coming upon thee, O inhabitant of the land;*
afterwards, *the time is come:* <span id="xi.vi-p9.1"></span>עת*,
gneth,* properly signifies all appointed or determined time. Hence the
Prophet meant that the time had come which God had fixed beforehand for
his judgment, and thus he takes away from the impious the material for
pride, for they always suppose that God is as it were asleep when he
does not attack them at the very first moment. He speaks, therefore, of
an appointed time, as in other places the Prophets usually do, and
frequently of the year of visitation. He signifies the same thing when
he says, *the day of tumult,* or noise, *is at hand.* This member of the
sentence answers to the former. He had said the end was watching; he had
said that the judgment was hastening on: now simply and without figure
he says, the day is *at hand,* <span id="xi.vi-p9.2"></span>קרוב*, krob,
a day,* I say, *of noise, and not the echo of the mountains,* says he;
that is, it shall not be an empty resounding, as when a. sound is
produced among the mountains a concussion arises, and since the sounds
which are uttered there, when taken up by the neighboring mountains,
return to their own place, and thus a greater resounding occurs, called
echo. The Prophet therefore says, that the clamor of which he speaks
should not be an echo, that is, an empty resounding, because all should
seriously cry out. Some think <span id="xi.vi-p9.3"></span>הד, *hed,*
means *“*acclamations*,”* which is properly <span
id="xi.vi-p9.4"></span>הידד*, hided;* it is, indeed, from the same root,
but <span id="xi.vi-p9.5"></span>הר, *her,* is used in the same sense.
But if this explanation seems better, the Prophet will allude to
mountains, not lofty, but vine-bearing, as many were in the land of
Israel. But the other explanation is preferable, namely, *there shall be
the sound of a tumult,* not on account of the reverberation, as they
say, but because every one should cry out, until sorrow and crying
should abound on every side. It follows —

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#008)<span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>**8.** Now will I shortly pour out my fury
upon thee, and accomplish mine anger upon thee: and I will judge thee
according to thy ways, and will recompense thee for all thine
abominations.

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Nunc e propinquo effundam
indignationem meam super to, et complebo iram meam in to, et judicabo to
secundum vias tuas: et ponam super to cunctas abominationes tuas.

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span><span id="xi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span>He repeats here almost the same words. We
have explained the intention, namely, that the Israelites should be
positively assured that God threatened not for the sake of frightening
them, but because the execution of his wrath was prepared. *Now,* says
he, *I will shortly pour out my indignation* He had said the day was at
hand. This refers to the time; for it would be foolish to place together
*I will shortly pour out my indignation, against thee,* and *I will
fulfill my indignation against thee;* this *fulfilling* explains what he
had formerly said concerning the end. For God had formerly executed his
vengeance against the Israelites, but not completely. This completion,
then, of God’s wrath prevails even as far as their ultimate destruction.
Now I have explained those words — *I will judge thee according to thy
ways, and I will put upon thee all thine abominations*

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we being
admonished by such remarkable proofs of thy wrath, may learn to walk
anxiously in thy sight, and so to bring ourselves into voluntary
obedience to thyself, that the certain testimony to our gratuitous
adoption may appear in our life; and grant that we may so prove
ourselves to be sons, that we may truly invoke thee the Father, until we
arrive at that blessed inheritance which has been obtained for us by the
blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Nineteenth.

<span id="xi.x"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p1"></span><span id="xi.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#009)<span id="xi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p2"></span>**9.** And mine eye shall not spare, neither
will I have pity: I will recompense thee according to thy ways and thine
abominations *that* are in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I
*am* the LORD that smiteth.

<span id="xi.x-p3"></span>**9.** Et oculus meus non parcet, neque
miserebor: secundum vias tuas super to ponam, et abominationes tuae in
medio tui erunt: et cognoscetis quod ego Iehovah percutiens.

<span id="xi.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.x-p5"></span><span id="xi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p6"></span>This verse contains nothing besides a
repetition, unless that at last the Prophet more clearly points out what
that knowledge was which he formerly mentioned, namely, that they should
unwillingly feel God’s power, because they had withdrawn their
confidence from the Prophet’s teaching. For he had said two or three
times, *ye shall know that I am Jehovah:* now he adds the participle,
*and that it is I who smite you* This then is the knowledge by which God
makes himself known to the reprobate, while they are compelled, whether
they will or not, to feel that there is a judge of the world. The
faithful indeed profit under God’s chastisements, and they are at times
humbled under his hand, because they do not willingly obey his word: but
we said that the Prophet here triumphs over the people’s pride who dared
to deride all threats as if God were sleeping in heaven. He says
therefore at length, that when God strikes them they should feel what
they did not believe. It follows —

<span id="xi.xi"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#010)<span id="xi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p2"></span>**10.** Behold the day, behold, it is come:
the morning is gone forth; the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

<span id="xi.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Ecce dies ecce venit: egressum est
 <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) mane, floruit baculus,
germinavit superbia.

<span id="xi.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xi-p6"></span><span id="xi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p7"></span>Now Ezekiel uses another figure, but to the
same purpose. He repeats what he had said before: *the day is come,* and
he adds another part, that *the morning had advanced* But we said that
the impious, when God connives at their sins, exult as it were in
darkness without shame or fear. Since therefore they were as wanton as
if they had obtained the license of night, the Prophet denounces that
morning is at hand, because God would suddenly bring to light what they
thought would be always hidden. Since therefore, when God retired, they
supposed themselves in complete darkness, the Prophet recalls them to
the consideration of the daily order of things: for light emerges
immediately from the dawn. Thus he laughs at their folly, because they
thought that God had his eyes shut, when for the time he dissembles.
This therefore is the reason, as was fully explained yesterday, why the
Prophet calls the sudden change *morning* Therefore *the morning has
arisen,* afterwards, *the rod has blossomed, pride has flourished* It is
not doubtful that he means Nebuchadnezzar by the rod, but interpreters
vary on the context; for many refer the following verse to the king of
Babylon: but others, in my judgment rightly, take it of the Israelites
themselves. As to his saying *the rod has blossomed,* it refers to God’s
forbearance. For when the Israelites had sinned a long while with
impunity, they thought, as I said yesterday, that their peace with God
would be perpetual. But here Ezekiel pronounces in opposition to this,
that God had as it were a hidden root; as he who plants a tree waits for
the time, till it rises to a just magnitude. Hence he compares
Nebuchadnezzar to a rod which was growing. God could indeed without
man’s assistance destroy the Israelites, and could also compel others to
obey him: for all creatures are at hand to fulfill his commands; but
here Ezekiel commends God’s forbearance, though he had planted the tree,
from which the rod was to spring up with which he would smite the
Israelites. So he reproves their sloth, because they did not reflect
upon the time of their visitation, which God had determined in his
secret counsel.

<span id="xi.xi-p8"></span>On the whole, in saying *the rod has
flourished,* he refers to those steps which God takes in executing his
judgments. For he does not act hastily after the manner of men, but just
as a husbandman in sowing and planting. Hence God provides for his own
use ministers of vengeance, and permits them to increase and to arrive
at maturity. If therefore God does not hasten as we wish, we may know
that he still has rods prepared, and if they are not yet grown to
maturity, it is because the time which the Almighty has previously fixed
is not yet arrived. Now it follows, *that pride has budded* I have just
said that some referred this to the Babylonians, but I rather understand
it of the Israelites. Hence God shows how the staff grew in Chaldea by
which the Israelites were to be struck, and yet the root was among
themselves. For here the noun “pride” is to be taken as usual in a bad
sense: it does not denote simply haughtiness or arrogance, but that
licentiousness which springs from a contempt of God. But this does not
suit the Babylonians as far as God governed them with his hand, when he
wished to take vengeance on the Israelites. But in this sense there is
nothing forced, *that the staff with which the Israelites were to be
struck had increased,* and yet it had no other origin than their sins,
and hence that no other root need be sought for than this. Hence *it
flourished,* but whence did it spring? from pride *The seed* therefore
*of this staff* was the pride of the Israelites. But this pride is akin
to impiety, and we know that they were blinded by their confidence when
they despised God, and treated all his threats as vain. Hence the
Prophet points out pride as the fountain of all evils. A clearer
explanation follows —

<span id="xi.xii"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#011)<span id="xi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p2"></span>**11.** Violence is risen up into a rod of
wickedness: none of them *shall remain*, nor of their multitude, nor of
any of theirs: neither s*hall there be* wailing for them.

<span id="xi.xii-p3"></span>**11.** Violentia surrexit in baeulum
impietatis, non ex ipsis, et non ex opulentia ipsorum, et non ex
strepitu ipsorum, et non luctus inter ipsos.

<span id="xi.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p6"></span>This is an explanation of the words, *that
pride had budded:* now he adds violence to pride, which is its fruit:
for contempt of God always begets cruelty and savagery, and rapine, and
all injustice. But he speaks, as I have said, concerning the Israelites.
He says *that violence had risen up into a rod of wickedness* Thus he
confirms what he had touched upon, that the rod of God’s vengeance was
not to be sought elsewhere than among the Israelites. God indeed had
stirred up the king of Babylon to punish them: but the rod had grown up
from the root of their wickedness by which the Israelites had provoked
God’s anger: and so he adds, *that nothing should be left of them:
nothing, says he, should remain safe, either of themselves or of their
opulence:* for so I interpret <span id="xi.xii-p6.1"></span>המון*,
hemon:* then, of their noise or multitude; either will do moderately
well; *and there shall not be wailing for them* Jerome reads, <span
id="xi.xii-p6.2"></span>נה, *neh,* and hence translates — there shall
not be rest among them: but the Prophet means that there shall be
neither sorrow nor lament, because the slaughter of all would be
promiscuous. And we saw the same in Jeremiah: when one family has
perished, friends and acquaintances assemble, and celebrate the funeral
of the deceased; but when a pestilence pervades the whole city, and no
house is free from death: nay when fathers are mingled with sons, so
that their carcases can scarcely be drawn out for multitude, all sorrow
ceases. With this intention then the Prophet says, *there shall be no
grief* nor lamentation. For <span id="xi.xii-p6.3"></span>נהה, *neheh,*
means lamentation. But we have already explained its meaning, namely,
that all the Israelites were so destined to destruction that there
should be, no survivors to lament the dead, and even should there be
any, they should be so astonished amidst the multitude of the dead, that
every duty of humanity towards them would perish. Now it follows —

<span id="xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#012)<span id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p2"></span>**12.** The time is come, the day draweth
near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath *is*
upon all the multitude thereof.

<span id="xi.xiii-p3"></span>**12.** Venit tempus statutum,
appropinquavit dies, quo emens non lætabitur, et qui vendit non
afficietur tristitia; quia indignatio super omnem multitudinem ejus.

<span id="xi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet now uses another kind of
speech. Meanwhile he teaches that there should be such a change that all
things should be so mixed as if there were no difference between the
rich and the poor. Yet such a change does not happen unless God were
grievously offended, and so did not exact ordinary vengeance as he had
formerly denounced. Paul indeed exhorts all the pious to pass through
this world as if they were pilgrims in it, (<span
id="xi.xiii-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor. 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="xi.xiii-p6.1"></span>,)
and thus he says is our faith proved, as with the buyer so with the
seller, as with the married so with the single. This general doctrine is
prescribed to all the children of God, since the fashion of this world
passes away, that they may pass through it, without having their minds
fixed on these perishing things. But the meaning of our Prophet is
different, because God will so disturb all things among the Israelites,
that there shall be no difference between buyer and seller. He who
acquires rejoices, and he who is compelled to sell suffers some degree
of sorrow; and sometimes the man who is deprived of his lands and
possessions tears out as it were his own entrails. It is natural
therefore for the buyer to rejoice, and for the seller to lament. Now
God shows that the confusion in the kingdom of Israel was so great, that
neither poverty nor riches afford the material for sorrow or grief. Now
we understand the Prophet’s meaning. He says, *the time has come, the
day has approached, in which the buyer will not rejoice, and the seller
will not lament: because,* says he, *indignation is upon all this
multitude* Here that reason of Paul is not brought forward, that the
fashion of this world passes away, but a concussion, or rather ruin of
that land is pointed out, so that nothing remains safe. For although,
whilst we travel through the world, we ought always to erect our minds
and senses towards heaven, yet the political faculty remains and
flourishes even among the faithful. For the sons of God, though they are
poor in spirit, yet possess what God has conferred upon them: they
exist, as Paul exhorts them, as it were not possessing but yet enjoying
their goods. But the Prophet here signifies, that when the kingdom of
Israel shall have been overturned, there will be no use for either money
or lands, because all being cast out of their country shall be reduced
to want. And he follows up the same sentiment —

<span id="xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#013)<span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** For the seller shall not return to
that which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision *is*
touching the whole multitude thereof, *which* shall not return; neither
shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.

<span id="xi.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Quia vendens ad venditionem  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) non revertetur: et adhuc inter vivos
vita ipsorum:  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) quia visio super
omnem multitudinem ejus: non revertetur, et vir in sua iniquitate animam
suam non roborabit.  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)

<span id="xi.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiv-p8"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p9"></span>This verse is interpreted variously, but the
Prophet’s meaning is by no means obscure: at the beginning he says, that
those who sold had no cause of sorrow on account of their not returning
to their lands. But this does not seem suitable. But, under one member,
the Prophet comprehends what I have lately said — that the disturbance
of all things would be so great, that the lands would be deprived of
their masters, and those who formerly possessed them would be outcasts
and exiles; they would be in want of all things, and be unable to plant
their foot on their own soil. Nor is this opinion contrary to Jeremiah’s
prophecy. (<span id="xi.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Jer.
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#009)<span id="xi.xiv-p9.1"></span>.)
When Jeremiah was in prison, he was commanded to buy land from a
relation: but that was done that the faithful might hope for their
promised restitution with quiet minds. But the discourse is now directed
to the reprobate, who were excluded from all hope of freedom. Our
Prophet, therefore, only fulminates here in God’s name, and breathes
nothing but terrors; there is no mention of favor in the meantime,
because they had cast themselves into despair. And this is the reason
why he speaks of perpetual slaughter. He says, therefore, *they shall
not return to the things sold, although their life is among the living*
This clause is variously explained, but I do not willingly consume time
in repeating the errors of others: I shall follow what appears to me to
be right. First, this clause must be read adversatively: he says,
indeed, *and as yet their life is among the living:* but the copula
ought thus to be resolved — although their life is among the living. The
Prophet seems to allude to a custom then common. For there was not a
sale of lands in perpetuity among the sons of Abraham; for that was
forbidden by the law, because they were only strangers in the land.
(<span id="xi.xiv-p9.2"></span>[Lev.
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015)<span id="xi.xiv-p9.2"></span>.)
God, therefore, in claiming the dominion of the land, did not permit
them to sell their land except for a time — for every fiftieth year they
returned to their own possessions. If they sold in the twentieth year,
they were restored after thirty years; if in the fortieth, the sale was
only for ten years, through the occurrence of the Jubilee. Now therefore
the Prophet says, *although they remain survivors, yet they shall not
return* Why? for the captivity will hinder them. Now, therefore, we
understand the Prophet’s meaning: *those who sold,* says he, *shall
suffer no loss* For if they had remained at home, they would have been
deprived of their possessions; but this shall not happen, for they shall
be dragged to a distant region, and there they shall live and die
exiles. But if they should protract their life even to the hundredth
year, yet their possession will remain deserted, because the conquerors
will not allow them to return to their country. Hence the miserable
condition of the exiles is denoted, since, if God were to prolong their
life, they would still be compelled to consume it in poverty and want,
since they had been driven away from their lands and were unable to
return to them.

<span id="xi.xiv-p10"></span>He adds, *because the vision shall not
return upon all the multitude of them* Here also interpreters differ.
For some distinguish this part into two clauses, because the vision was
for the whole people, nor had any one been converted or repented. This
opinion is plausible, because it contains a useful and fruitful
doctrine, which is everywhere met with among the Prophets. For we know
that nothing is less tolerable to God, than when men, admonished by
Prophets, do not return to a sound mind, but go on in their wickedness.
Since, therefore, such obstinacy exceedingly provokes God’s anger, this
sense seems to suit well enough — that the vision was for the whole
multitude, and yet none repented; that is, that God exhorted all, from
the least to the greatest, to repentance; for all were deaf, and, as it
were, desperate in their vices. Although, therefore, this exposition
seems probable, I do not adopt it: for I doubt not the Prophet’s meaning
to be that *the vision concerning the whole multitude should not
return;* that is, be in vain. And thus also Isaiah speaks when he says,
thy word shall not return to me void, (<span
id="xi.xiv-p10.2"></span>[Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011)<span id="xi.xiv-p10.2"></span>,)
for he means that prophecies are always joined with their effects. Some
turn this to the fruit of the doctrine, because God will always have
some disciples who will embrace the prophetic word. But this is foreign
to the purpose. The Prophet rather means that hypocrites will be greatly
deceived, while they think God’s word to be an empty sound, by which the
air only is struck. Hence he says that God’s word will not want its
effect., because God will fulfill whatever he pronounces — whether he
promise safety to the faithful, or denounce destruction on the
reprobate. As therefore Isaiah says God’s word shall not return to him
fruitless, since he will prosper it, so our Prophet denies that God’s
word should return after it had been promulgated against the whole
multitude. *The vision,* therefore, is taken here for the prophetic
doctrine; but there is no doubt that he restricts the vision to God’s
judgment. *The vision,* therefore, *was towards the whole multitude, nor
shall it return;* that is, it shall be certainly executed. Afterwards he
adds*, and a man shall not strengthen his soul in his iniquity* Others
term it — in the iniquity of his soul: but since the relative is double,
this opinion cannot stand; but others take it otherwise. But I am
unwilling to hold you in suspense here, and it seems to me that nothing
is more useful than to investigate the genuine sense of the Prophet. I
have no doubt the Prophet here confirms what we have now explained —
that it is vain for the despisers of God to hope to escape, because when
God executes his vengeance, he will hold them in his grasp. For as to
what others say, that they have not fortified their soul on account of
iniquity; that is, that they were so bound down to their sinfulness,
that they did not lift up their minds and desires to the hope of safety,
that sense is too forced. Therefore the Prophet confirms what we now
see, namely, that his threats should not return empty, because God would
take away all material for confidence from the hypocrites and despisers
of his teaching. For the impious wrestle against God, and oppose their
own obstinacy and hardness, as if by violence they could break and
destroy his word. Since, therefore, the wicked precipitate themselves so
boldly, says the Prophet, *they shall not fortify themselves by iniquity
unto life;* that is, they shall strive in vain to obtain life by their
iniquity, which is not sufficient for resistance. I do not understand —
on account of their iniquity; because he simply denounces that obstinacy
should be in vain, which profane men use as a shield against God, and
its force be reduced to nothing. They shall not fortify themselves*,*
therefore, *in life,* or by iniquity, *unto life*; that is, by that
obstinate wickedness by which they think themselves superior. Let us,
therefore, from this place learn to tremble at God’s threats, and always
to have their effect before our eyes, as the Apostle says — Noah saw by
faith the deluge which was hidden, (<span id="xi.xiv-p10.4"></span>[Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007)<span id="xi.xiv-p10.4"></span>,)
because, whilst others indulged themselves, he was always reflecting
during one hundred and twenty years how horrible that vengeance would
be. So, therefore, when God has spoken, may we immediately apprehend his
judgment, as if it were clear before our eyes; and let us especially
beware of that obstinacy which will assuredly be in vain, because we
hear what the Prophet here denounces. It follows —

<span id="xi.xv"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#014)<span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p2"></span>**14.** They have blown the trumpet, even to
make all ready; but none goeth to the battle: for my wrath *is* upon all
the multitude thereof.

<span id="xi.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Clanxerunt tuba, pararunt omnia;
 <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) nemo autem egressus ad
proelium: quia indignatio mea super totam multitudinem ejus.

<span id="xi.xv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xv-p6"></span><span id="xi.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p7"></span>Here the Prophet adds, although the
Israelites provide themselves with every aid, and prepare all things for
carrying on the war, nay, while they omit nothing for the best
fortification, yet when it came to the point, their hopes would be vain,
and all the supplies which they prepared for themselves of no avail.
*However,* therefore, *they may blow the trumpet, and prepare all
things,* he says, *yet no one goes out to battle* The reason must be
marked, *since God’s indignation was upon the whole multitude of them,*
that is, because God determined to destroy them all. Now it follows —

<span id="xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#015)<span id="xi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p2"></span>**15.** The sword *is* without, and the
pestilence and the famine within: he that *is* in the field shall die
with the sword; and he that *is* in the city, famine and pestilence
shall devour him.

<span id="xi.xvi-p3"></span>**15.** Gladius foris, pestis et fames e
domo: qui in agro erit, gladio morietur: qui autem in urbe, eum fames et
pestis in urbe, eum fames et pestis consumet.

<span id="xi.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xi.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p6"></span>He inculcates what we have seen before,
although this sentence agrees with the last verse. He had said that
God’s anger should be on all the people; now he shows that none were
safe when God stretched forth his hand for avenging their sins. Now he
says, *he had in his hand a sword, and pestilence, and famine. If they
went out into the field, says he, a sword shall meet them; if they
remain at home in the city, pestilence and famine shall consume them
there;* as if he said, God could fetch various kinds of destruction from
different quarters, because he will arm foreign enemies, who shall
devastate the whole land; and if these enemies were at rest, yet there
were others, *famine and pestilence* Here he signifies, that although
the Israelites closed their houses, and desired and endeavored to expel
every thing injurious, yet God’s wrath could penetrate all
hiding-places. It follows —

<span id="xi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#016)<span id="xi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p2"></span>**16.** But they that escape of them shall
escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of
them mourning, every one for his iniquity.

<span id="xi.xvii-p3"></span>**16.** Et evadent evasores ipsorum,  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) et erunt super montes quasi columbae
vallium, omnes fremendo,  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) vir
 <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) in sua iniquitate.

<span id="xi.xvii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xi.xvii-p8"></span><span id="xi.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p9"></span>The Prophet seems here to be at variance
with himself, because he formerly pronounced them all devoted to
destruction. How, then, does he now say that some should come hither and
thither, to seek hiding-places in the mountains? But what seem at,
variance easily agree, because by these words he means that the life of
those who escaped should be more miserable than if they had perished by
the sword, or had been consumed by pestilence and famine. And why so?
*They shall be,* says he, *in the mountains.* By mountains he doubtless
understands dry and desert places. But he who seeks hiding-places in the
mountains is only anxious about preserving his life, since he expects
not to live. So, therefore, the Prophet means, nothing can be more
miserable than the exile of those who had escaped, because they would be
in dry and desert places, *like doves of the valleys,* there they will
not dare to cry out. He means, also, that they would be so timorous,
that even in anxiety, want, and squalidness, and despair of all things,
finally, in the heap of their miseries, they would groan *as doves,* and
as *doves of the valleys,* that is, which hide themselves through fear,
and dare not show themselves; unless, perhaps, the contrast increases
the evil, as if he had said that they should be much more astonished,
because the unaccustomed aspect of the place should strike them with
greater fear. Now, therefore, we understand the Prophet’s meaning — *if
any should escape from the people,* yet nothing else would happen
through their flight, than that they should miserably protract their
life in the greatest anxiety. For we know that this is the last solace
in evils, when men complain freely, and unburden themselves by weeping
and groaning. But when the wretched one dares not complain, he becomes
as it were twice dead among the living. It follows —

<span id="xi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#017)<span id="xi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p2"></span>**17.** All hands shall be feeble, and all
knees shall be weak *as* water.

<span id="xi.xviii-p3"></span>**17.** Omnes manus solventur, et omnia
genua ibunt aquae.  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159)

<span id="xi.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xviii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p7"></span>He confirms the last sentence, that such
should be the trembling, that those who were oppressed with all kinds of
evil, dare not utter their complaints freely. He says, *all hands should
be loosened, and all knees should be unstable as water* We know that
this doctrine frequently occurs with the Prophets, by which God shows
that men’s hearts were in his hands. But since profane men are fierce
against God, through trusting in their own wealth or fortitude, hence,
on the contrary, God pronounces that they should be timorous and
anxious, nay, almost vanishing away, and as it were lifeless, as if
their knees were flowing away amidst water, and their hands were
relaxed. It follows —

<span id="xi.xix"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p1"></span><span id="xi.xix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#018)<span id="xi.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p2"></span>**18.** They shall also gird *themselves*
with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame *shall be* upon
all faces, and baldness upon all their heads.

<span id="xi.xix-p3"></span>**18.** Et accingent se saccis, et operiet
ipsos formido, et super omnes facies,  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) probrum,  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) et in omnibus capitibus calvitium.

<span id="xi.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.xix-p7"></span><span id="xi.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p8"></span>He continues the same sentiment. He says,
such was the slaughter of the people that they should all gird
themselves with sackcloth. But it seems little in accordance with this,
that those who should be astonished should gird themselves with
sackcloth, so as not to bewail the dead. But the prophets so vary their
discourse because they cannot otherwise affect obstinate minds. Although
therefore these things do not seem at first sight to agree, *that they
should bind themselves in sackcloth, and upon all their heads should be
baldness:* then that all should perish without grief or sorrow: yet
these things suit well enough, because the Prophet does not express what
they should do, but what the event should be. Since, therefore,
slaughter shall occur on every side, at length God shall consume some by
pestilence, others by famine: therefore he adds, there should be
material for grief, although in consequence of the multitude of evils
they should be lifeless, and torpid, and omit all signs of sorrow.
Therefore *they shall gird themselves with sackcloth* We know that this
was a remarkable symbol of penitence, but it is often transferred to
common sorrow, and even profane men clothe themselves in sackcloth,
although they do not acknowledge God the author of evils. Hence when the
Prophet says, *all should take sackcloth in which to clothe themselves,*
he does not mean that they should feel punishments divinely inflicted
that they should repent; but he only expresses the common ceremony of
grief in distress which is also common to the wicked and to despisers of
God, Now he adds, *fear shall cover them,* and *disgrace,* or shame,
*shall be on all faces:* then *upon all heads shall be baldness* This
was forbidden by the law, (<span id="xi.xix-p8.1"></span>[De
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)<span id="xi.xix-p8.1"></span>;)
since we know that God restrained too much intemperance in sorrow, when
he forbids the people to fall upon their face, or to make themselves
bald; for that was preposterous affectation. And we know that men are
ambitious in grief. Hence that God may impose restraint upon sorrow, he
forbids his people to cut the skin, or to produce baldness. Hence we see
that the Prophet does not speak of the true sign of repentance, but only
marks, as I have said, that God’s vengeance should be so horrible, *that
dread should cover them,* and then *that shame and confusion of face
should come upon them:* then, that they should cut the skin like the
Gentiles, and put on sackcloth like men abandoned to destruction,

<span id="xi.xx"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast recalled
us to thyself, that we may not grow torpid in our sins, nor yet become
hardened by thy chastisements, but prevent in time thy final judgments,
and so humble ourselves under thy powerful hand, that we may seriously
testify and really prove our repentance, and so study to obey thee, that
we may advance in newness of life more and more, until at length we put
off all the defilements of the flesh, and arrive at the enjoyment of
that eternal rest which thine only-begotten Son has acquired for us by
his own blood, — Amen.

<span id="xi.xxi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture Twentieth.

<span id="xi.xxii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019)<span id="xi.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p2"></span>**19.** They shall cast their silver in the
streets, and their gold shall be removed: their silver and their gold
shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the LORD:
they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels: because
it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity.

<span id="xi.xxii-p3"></span>**19.** Et argentum suum per compita
projicient, et aurum ipsorum in disjectionem  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) erit: argentum eorum et aurum eorum
non poterit ad liber andum ipsos in die excandescentiæ Iehovae: animam
suam non satiaunt et viscera sua non replebunt, quia offendiculum
iniquitatis ipsorum fuit.

<span id="xi.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p7"></span>Now the Prophet threatens that the
desperation of the people would be so great that they would forget both
gold and silver: for we know that men are more anxious about those
possessions than about life itself. But gold, unless it be prepared for
use, has no value in itself: yet we see that the majority are so
inflamed with the desire of gold, that they cast themselves into the
certain danger of death. For how many neglect their own life to acquire
wealth: hence when men despise gold, they are assuredly astonished by
fear and anxiety so as to lose their natural senses. The Prophet means
this when he says, *they shall cast their gold into the streets,*
because if they thought they should survive, and if there were any hope
of life left, doubtless they would hide their gold and silver. But when
gold is cast away, it is certain, as I have said, that all things are
full of despair. *Their gold,* says he, *shall be cast away* I prefer
this interpretation to an unclean thing. <span
id="xi.xxii-p7.1"></span>נדה, *nedeh,* signifies pollution, defilement,
and separation. If any prefer-the translation *“*separation*,”* I do not
object, only let us understand that the Jews would treat their gold as
valueless, and so willingly separated from it. For we know that men are
so attached to their gold and silver that it grieves them to be torn
from what they so much love: no less than if you tore away their
entrails. But the word *“*a casting away” is clearer, and will answer to
the former member of the sentence better. He adds, *their gold and
silver will be unable to preserve them in the day of Jehovah’s anger*
Here the Prophet derides the perverse confidence of those who thought
themselves safe, because fortified with great wealth. For when men see
themselves protected by guards they fear nothing, and such security is
not easily wrested from them. For this cause also, Ezekiel pronounces
that gold and silver would be useless to the Jews when God was fierce
against them. And at the same time he obliquely reproves their sloth,
because they despised God’s judgments since they were spared at the
time. Hence he declares — *the day of God’s burning wrath shall come:*
then he says, *they shall not satisfy their souls,* and *they shall not
fill their bellies* Here he means that the richest even should be
famished. When any famine presses upon the people, yet those who have
money at home do not suffer; besides, the rich have all kinds of produce
in their barns and granaries. But the Prophet says, that the penury
shall be such as to involve the rich, so that they should not have food
to refresh themselves. Thus the reason is added, *because it was the
stumblingblock of their iniquity* Some take this clause generally, that
the Jews should stumble on account of their iniquity, that is, then
shall be the time of receiving their reward. For God had seemed to
pardon them, and not to notice so many iniquities with which they
provoked him. He says therefore, *in that day shall be a
stumblingblock,* if that sense pleases you, but I would rather restrict
it to money itself, since silver and gold shall profit nothing,
*inasmuch as it shall be a stumblingblock of iniquity,* that is, it
shall be the material or occasion of sinning: and the next verse
confirms this sense when it says —

<span id="xi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#020)<span id="xi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p2"></span>**20.** As for the beauty of his ornament,
he set it in majesty: but they made the images of their abominations
*and* of their detestable things therein: therefore have I set it far
from them.

<span id="xi.xxiii-p3"></span>**20.** Et decus ornamenti sui in
superbiam posuit ipsum, et imagines abominationum suarum, et
spurcitiarum suarum fecerunt ex illo: propterea posui illis  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) in projectionem.

<span id="xi.xxiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxiii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p7"></span>I doubt not that Ezekiel strengthens what
he had just taught by other words, namely, that the people’s silver
should be cast away, because it had been unworthily abused for luxury,
vain pomps and superstitions. Some explain <span
id="xi.xxiii-p7.1"></span>צבי עדיו, *tzebi-gnediu,* of the temple; and
certainly I confess that the temple was the chief glory of the Jews, so
that they might boast of it, if they had rightly and properly worshipped
God there. Hence God conveyed great glory to the Jews when he desired a
temple to be erected among them to himself, which should be as it were
his earthly dwelling-place. But I do not see why we should take these
words of the temple, because the Prophet explains his own discourse: for
he mentions gold and silver: he said, there should be no use for gold
and silver, because every one should cast it into the mud, since they
should cast away all hope of life and safety. He now continues the same
sentiment; he shows the lawful use of gold and silver: *it was,* says
he, *the glory of his ornament* For whatever God has given to men is a
testimony of his paternal favor: therefore God’s liberality is refulgent
in us when he enriches us with his gifts. If therefore riches are a
glory and ornament, so also are bodily health, and honors, and things of
this kind. Since therefore God wishes his favor to be conspicuous in all
his gifts, by which he adorns and marks men out, the Prophet properly
says that the Jews were adorned with gold and silver. But he accuses
them of ingratitude because they turned such glory to pride. For <span
id="xi.xxiii-p7.2"></span>גאון*, gaon,* I here take in a bad sense, as
in many other places: it sometimes signifies excellence, but I have no
doubt that the Prophet here blames the Jews, because they were proud of
their wealth, which they took as a testimony of God’s favor. Therefore,
says he, *he turned the beauty of their ornament, he turned it to pride*
It follows, *and the images of their abominations and of their
detestable things,* or of their idols, for the Hebrews thus speak
sometimes of idols, *they made therewith* Here <span
id="xi.xxiii-p7.3"></span>ב, is used as if it were <span
id="xi.xxiii-p7.4"></span>מ, as often in other places, and thus it
points out the material; for he says, that the Jews *made their images,*
which were so many abominations before God, *out of gold and silver*
This was a second profanation of God’s gifts: the former was in pride,
when the Jews through wantonness and abundance began to be insolent
against God, thus they profaned the glory with which they had been
adorned. But another pollution is also added, namely, that they made
their idols of gold and silver, and offered to them gifts and
sacrifices: as God complains in Hosea, (<span
id="xi.xxiii-p7.5"></span>[Ho 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008)<span
id="xi.xxiii-p7.5"></span>,) that they converted whatever he had
conferred upon them into impious worship. I had given, said he, my corn,
and wine, and oil: but they adorned their idols: this was forsooth their
thanksgiving, that blind to my liberality, they offered sacrifices to
their idols of my corn and oil and wine. Of which matter Ezekiel
discourses more fully in <span id="xi.xxiii-p7.6"></span>[Ezekiel
16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#000)<span id="xi.xxiii-p7.6"></span>.
But he now says: *that they made images of their abominations out of
that glory by which he had distinguished them* And at the end of the
verse he confirms what we have lately seen: *wherefore,* says he, *I
will appoint it,* namely, that beauty, *to them for a castaway* We see
the same sentiment repeated which he had used before: but he here
relates the reasons why the Jews should disregard their gold and silver
in the day of God’s wrath, since they had unworthily defiled these gifts
of God in which his grace and paternal favor shone forth. *I will make,*
therefore says he, *their gold or beauty as a castaway:* he had said the
same thing before, but had not yet expressed the reason of God’s wrath.
It follows —

<span id="xi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#021)<span id="xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p2"></span>**21.** And I will give it into the hands
of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil;
and they shall pollute it.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p3"></span>**21.** Et ponam  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) ipsum in manum alienorum ad
direptionem, et impiorum terrae ad spoliationem, et profanabunt ipsum.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxiv-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p7"></span>I have said that I do not approve of
twisting these words to the sanctuary, as some interpreters do. Hence I
do not doubt that the Prophet still speaks of the people. He changed
indeed the number in the former verse, for at the beginning he had used
the singular number: now he returns again to the singular number, and
designates the people. *I will deliver it,* says he, *into the hand of
strangers.* This was more severe than if they had been oppressed by any
domestic tyranny: nor do I doubt that by strangers the Prophet signifies
remote and barbarous nations, as we know that those with whom we have no
communication are more savage against us. First, therefore, he says,
*they shall be the slaves of strangers;* he adds, *the impious of the
earth:* he means that their enemies should be so cruel and wicked, that
no pity or equity was to be expected from them. The sum is, that God’s
wrath would be terrible since he had borne the iniquities of the people
so long. Hence we gather that wicked and abandoned men are God’s
scourges, and are governed by his will and hand. Since it is so, we
gather that God so works by them that he is pure from all alliance with
their faults, because he so exercises his judgments by means of them,
that he appears without blame with regard to them; but they are
condemned deservedly, because either their own avarice or ambition, or
other lusts destroy them. *I shall give them therefore into the hands of
strangers to destroy them:* then, *to the wicked of the earth for a
prey, and they shall profane them* By this word interpreters have been
induced to take this verse with reference to the sanctuary. But we know
that <span id="xi.xxiv-p7.1"></span>חלל, *chelel,* is taken in another
sense — to slay. This word therefore may be explained, that there shall
be a general slaughter of the people: because the enemies not content
with the booty and spoil, shall also slay the captives when they have
obtained the victory. But I willingly retain the sense “profane,” which
means the same as *“*render vile,” because the Prophet seems to me to
allude to all kinds of abuse, as when we do not consider for what
purpose things are intended, but rashly and thoughtlessly,
contemptuously, and even insultingly dissipate them. It means therefore
that such should be the insolence of their enemies, that they should
waste and lay in ruins not only the people’s substance, but also their
persons: although this may be here referred to the substance itself: for
a robber is said to prey upon a man when he takes away whatever he has
and leaves him naked: in this sense we may conveniently explain what the
Prophet now says. But that simple explanation satisfies me, namely, that
the enemy shall so disperse the people generally, that there shall be no
difference. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxv"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#022)<span id="xi.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p2"></span>**22.** My face will I turn also from them,
and they shall pollute my secret *place:* for the robbers shall enter
into it, and defile it.

<span id="xi.xxv-p3"></span>**22.** Et avertam faciem meam ab ipsis, et
profanabunt absconditum meum: et ingredientur in illud perruptores,
 <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) et profanabunt illud.

<span id="xi.xxv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxv-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p7"></span>As to the beginning of the verse there is no
ambiguity, for God pronounces that the Jews would be miserable, *because
he would avert his face from them* For in this was situated their
happiness, that God, as he had promised, would regard their safety. As
long, therefore, as God deigned to look upon them, their safety was
certain, so that there was no fear of danger. But when he no longer
cared for them, these wretched ones were exposed to all calamities;
hence they are said to be deprived of all protection, when alienated
from God. This, then, is one clause. As to what follows, expositors
interpret it of the sanctuary; and I do not greatly object to this, if
any one approves of this sense, but I take it in a wider sense. For God
in my view calls the land *his hidden place,* which was safe under his
protection. For he says, that he had extended wings, under which he
could hide the people, (<span id="xi.xxv-p7.1"></span>[Ex
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004)<span id="xi.xxv-p7.1"></span>;)
and David prays that God would *receive* him within the hidden place of
his tabernacle. (<span id="xi.xxv-p7.2"></span>[Ps
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005)<span id="xi.xxv-p7.2"></span>.)
Since, therefore, the people was protected by the power of God, the land
is deservedly called *God’s hidden place,* as an asylum, and it will be
proper so to translate it. *Devastators, therefore, shall profane my
asylum, because they shall enter in there, and shall profane it.* He
repeats the same word. Those who take it for the sanctuary restrict it
to the holy of holies, for so they call the shrine or oracle whence the
answers were given; and they call it an oracle, not from praying, but
because they enquired there of secret things. But as I have said, that
seems to be forced, though I will not quarrel with it, but show what I
like better. The meaning is, however God had spared the Jews for a long
time, nay, had them hidden, as it were, under his wings, and the land
was as it were a sacred asylum, since they were so hidden that they felt
no injury from foreign enemies: yet this should profit them nothing,
because God would throw down all bulwarks, and give easy access to their
enemies, so that they might break through, and then profane and confuse
all things. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#023)<span id="xi.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p2"></span>**23.** Make a chain: for the land is full
of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.

<span id="xi.xxvi-p3"></span>**23.** Fac cathenam: quia terra repleta
est judicio sanguinum, et urbs repleta est violentia.

<span id="xi.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="xi.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvi-p6"></span>Interpreters refer the Prophet’s being
ordered to make a chain to the captivity; for we know that captives are
accustomed to be bound with chains and fetters, or manacles. Hence they
explain it that God threatens the people with exile. But the Spirit
seems rather to allude to criminals, who plead their cause in chains.
For the Jews had long reveled in their vices, and the absence of
punishment had rendered them very audacious. Now the Prophet says, the
time had come in which they were to be brought to the tribunal of God,
and there to be dealt with most justly as criminals. Since, therefore,
they bound criminals with chains, that they might plead their cause
ignominiously — criminals, I say, who were already, as it were, half
condemned; hence the Prophet is ordered *to make a chain,* so that not
only the people should be called upon to render all account of their
wickedness, but should also be drawn, whether they wished it or not, to
God’s judgment-seat. And he explains himself when he says, *since the
land is full of the judgment of bloods* The Hebrews call *judgment of
bloods* the material of death, when the cause is capital, and the
criminal is so convicted that he cannot escape final punishment; so any
capital conviction is called a judgment of blood. He says, therefore,
*the earth is full of a* *judgment of bloods,* that is, is guilty of so
many crimes, that it cannot escape the final vengeance. And afterwards
he adds *the city,* which, in the general corruption of the land, ought
to retain something of its purity; but he says, *the city also is so
full of violence,* under which word are doubtless embraced all unjust
oppressions — rapines, pillage, unlawful gains, robberies, and whatever
opposes justice and equity. The result is, that the people’s impiety and
wickedness had come to such a pitch, that they were no longer endurable
by God; and hence God ascends his tribunal to exact punishment from
them; and this is the chain of which he speaks. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#024)<span id="xi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvii-p2"></span>**24.** Wherefore I will bring the worst
of the heathen, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make
the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.

<span id="xi.xxvii-p3"></span>**24.** Et venire faciam improbos gentium,
 <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) et possidebunt domos eorum: et
cessare faciam superbiam fortium, et polluentur sanctuaria ipsorum.

<span id="xi.xxvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxvii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvii-p7"></span>He repeats what he had said, that enemies
would come who should be ministers of God’s vengeance. And again we
learn from this place, that even the impious are impelled by the hand
and secret direction of God, so that they cannot move a finger but by
his will. He had formerly said that he would give the Jews into the
hands of strangers; but what now? *I will cause them to come,* says he,
as if he would stretch out his hand to them, and induce them. We see,
therefore, that God holds the impious under his guidance, as it were,
for executing his judgments; but we must consider the difference which I
have lately laid down; for God so works by them, as still to have
nothing in common with them. For they are carried on by a depraved
impulse; but God has a method, wonderful and incomprehensible by us,
which impels them hither and thither, so that he does not involve
himself in any alliance with their fault. For he calls them *the
perverse nation,* that the Jews might know that the last slaughter was
approaching, since they should have to do with the most cruel enemies.
He says, *shall possess their homes,* and because the pride of the
people might seem an obstacle to God’s exacting the deserved penalty,
therefore he adds, *I will make the pride of the powerful to cease,*
says he; for as long as the Jews were swollen with haughtiness and
self-confidence, the Prophet could not profit them at all. Therefore he
says, that God would make their haughtiness to cease, by which they were
vainly puffed up as long as God sustained or bore with them. At length
he adds, *their sanctuaries shall be polluted* This passage confirms the
opinion which I formerly approved. For Ezekiel speaks of the *pollution
of the sanctuary* as of a new thing. For he here draws away from them
the vain hope by which they deceived themselves, when they boasted that
they dwelt under God’s guardianship, since the temple protected
themselves and the city. Jeremiah reproves them for trusting in lying
words, while they declare that they have the Lord’s temple —

<span id="xi.xxvii-p8"></span>“The temple of the Lord, The temple of the
Lord.” (<span id="xi.xxvii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="xi.xxvii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.xxvii-p9"></span>Our Prophet does not speak openly, but he
doubtless shows that their security was false, while they oppose the
temple to God, as if the temple were a shield to repel his vengeance.
God, indeed, dwelt in the temple, but this condition was added, that he
was to be purely worshipped there. But when the temple was polluted, God
departed from it, as we shall afterwards see. For this reason the
Prophet says, *the enemies should come who should pollute and
contaminate the holy places of the people* Hitherto he had not spoken of
the temple, but he now adds, *the temple,* that the Jews should not
rashly boast in the name of God, as if they held him fixed to
themselves. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#025)<span id="xi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p2"></span>**25.** Destruction cometh; and they
shall seek peace, and *there shall be* none.

<span id="xi.xxviii-p3"></span>**25.** Excidium venit, et quaerent pacem
et non.  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)

<span id="xi.xxviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxviii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p7"></span>He confirms the same doctrine. He says
therefore, *destruction is come* He now adds, *there shall be no peace*
This confirmation was not in vain. For men always hope they shall obtain
some advantage by turning their backs; hence they seize on hiding-places
whence God draws them into light. Then they form for themselves many
hopes of safety when God holds them bound down. Since, therefore, men
are so slippery, and, by catching at refuges, think to elude God and his
judgments, the Prophet says, though they seek peace they shall find
none, that they may not doubt about that destruction and cutting off
which he mentions. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxix"></span>

<span id="xi.xxix-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026)<span id="xi.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxix-p2"></span>**26.** Mischief shall come upon mischief,
and rumour shall be upon rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the
prophet; but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the
ancients.

<span id="xi.xxix-p3"></span>**26.** Calamitas super calamitatem veniet,
et rumor super rumorem erit: et quærent visionem a propheta,  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) et lex transibit  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) sacerdote, et concilium a senibus.

<span id="xi.xxix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxix-p7"></span><span id="xi.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxix-p8"></span>The Prophet here explains more at length
the nature of that slaughter of which he was a herald. And again he
deprives the Jews of all ground for hope, and shows that they should
look around on all sides in vain, because God would deprive them of all
help. This is the meaning of the passage. Hence he says, *calamities
shall come,* and that some shall follow one portion, and others another.
In this way he advises the Jews that they should catch at security in
vain, as if, at the passing away of one evil, they were already free.
For the wicked as soon as God with-draws his hand, think themselves
escaped from all trouble, and so despise God more carelessly: for they
fancy that God has done with them just like a debtor who has paid a
small sum to his creditor, and thus has obtained a relaxation, is
careless; so the reprobate harden themselves when God grants them some
respite: for they think that they have an agreement with him that he
should not trouble them more. But the Prophet denounces that there would
be such a heap of evils *that one calamity should have many companions,*
because God would not cease to add evils to evils. He adds, *rumor upon
rumor* This is referred to the object of fear, because rumors of wars
and of the cruelty of enemies would be spread abroad. Since, therefore,
the Jews are deaf and stupid, the Prophet announces that God would
continue exercising his vengeance, so that one calamity should be only
the forerunner of another, until they should perish a hundred times
rather than that God would suffer them to escape with impunity.

<span id="xi.xxix-p9"></span>Afterwards he adds, *they shall seek a
vision* Here the Prophet again shows that the Jews should be stripped
bare of every help. For although they boldly despised God, yet we know
that they wickedly abused his name. For they so threw aside all modesty
that. they did not hesitate to ridicule God and all his gifts. Hence
their last refuge in their calamities was to *seek a vision,* that is,
to enquire what God was about to do. Hence he says, *they shall seek a
vision from the Prophet.* It seems to me that the expression is too
abrupt, *that they shall seek a vision from a Prophet,* because nothing
is added except concerning the priest and elders. <span
id="xi.xxix-p9.1"></span>מ is sometimes taken negatively when words are
united: I know not whether the language will properly bear our saying,
*they shall seek a vision, but there shall be no Prophet* And yet the
sense would flow better, if Ezekiel denied there should be any Prophets:
for this is a sign of desertion, when no consolation occurs which
assists us in our wars. Thus the Church complains in the Psalms, (<span
id="xi.xxix-p9.2"></span>[Ps 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009)<span
id="xi.xxix-p9.2"></span>,) that it was reduced to the greatest straits,
and that no Prophet appeared: we do not see our signs, nor is there a
Prophet among us. And, in truth, Ezekiel meant that the Jews would seek
a Prophet in vain, because God would take away that gift from them. As
far then as the sense is concerned there is no ambiguity, though the
diction is, as I have said, rather obscure. The meaning is, when they
think God so bound to them that he will never deprive them of visions
which are prepared for their comfort, yet they are already deprived of
this good, and since they are destitute nothing remains except that
utter destruction which he has mentioned. We must leave the rest for
to-morrow.

<span id="xi.xxx"></span>

<span id="xi.xxx-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xi.xxx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast
hitherto deigned to guard us safely by thy power, and hast driven away
so many violent assaults from us, and turned away so many perverse
counsels of our enemies, and snatched us from numberless evils, — grant
that we may so value thy benefits towards us that we may be grateful in
return, and so devote ourselves obediently to thee, that thy holy name
may be glorified through our whole life in thy only-begotten Son our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxxi-p1"></span>Lecture twenty first.

<span id="xi.xxxi-p2"></span>We yesterday began to expound the Prophet’s
language when he denounced what the Jews little feared, that a time
would come when God would deprive them of their Prophets. Since
therefore God was accustomed to rule his people by counselors, and
priests, and prophets, hence he says, *counsel should perish from the
elders, and the law from the priests.* As to the Prophets, he says, the
Jews would enquire of them in vain the will of God. The result is, since
God always governed his people, there would be miserable dispersion,
because no more teaching should shine forth, but they would be immersed
in the darkness of ignorance. But this was the most grievous threat,
because in extreme evils it is no common consolation to have God shining
upon us by his word. For by this we are stirred up to patience, then our
sorrows are mitigated when we taste some hope of pardon, and God bears
witness that he will be propitious to us. But when this comfort is
withdrawn, we are easily overwhelmed by even the smallest evils. Yet God
sustains us by his word in the deepest afflictions as upon a vast sea,
and as long as his teaching remains to us we have as it were a chart of
guidance which will bring us safely into harbor. But when God nowhere
appears, the lightest trial buries us in the deepest abyss. So this was
the sign of God’s fearful vengeance when the gift of prophecy was
extinct among the Jews, and the priests and elders had no counsel. For
we know how mightily they boasted that were powerful in wisdom. For
while Jeremiah blames them, (<span id="xi.xxxi-p2.1"></span>[Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018)<span id="xi.xxxi-p2.1"></span>,)
we see that they rose up against him, relying on this confidence, that
the law could not pass away from the priests, nor prudence from the wise
men and counselors, nor yet a vision or utterance from the prophets.
“Come ye, let us take counsel against Jeremiah, and let us strike him
with the tongue; for counsel shall not *perish,”* etc. Being excited by
this diabolical fury they dared to raise their crests against *God,* and
boldly claimed for themselves what God here denounces that he would take
from them: for the vision they asserted must remain with the prophets
and the teaching of the law with the priests. But we see that God averts
that perverse boasting when he denounces that there should be no counsel
to the old men, no teaching with the priests, and no vision among the
prophets. And hence also we gather that we can this day refute the
Papists by the same argument. For in the strength of what weapons do
they so proudly rage against the clear and certain doctrine of the law
and the gospel? Namely, that they are the representative Church, as if
they openly declared to God that his doctrine could not possibly perish
from their priests. I omit to no*tice* that this priesthood is not from
God, since priests are created for sacrificing Christ, and that without
any command. But suppose we grant them to be ordinary pastors of the
Church, of what advantage is that title when God deprived of all light
of doctrine the Levitical priests, who were created by him and not by
human suffrages?

<span id="xi.xxxi-p3"></span>Let us learn therefore from this passage,
that the gift of prophecy and all teaching is God’s peculiar gift: let
us learn that this gift is withdrawn when God wishes to exact punishment
for man’s ingratitude. For if the doctrine is received less reverently
than becomes us, and God himself is despised, as is often the case, he
throws men into darkness, and causes them to err through blindness, and
deprives them of the least spark of light. when the priests themselves
forget their office God infatuates them, as we see has happened in the
Papacy. Nothing is more to be despised than those beasts, and yet they
claim to themselves the spirit of revelation. But God repays them the
just reward of their madness, because they have ruled tyrannically, and
so have utterly abused the sacred name of pastors: then because they
have mingled their fictions with the law and the gospel, and so have
corrupted all purity of doctrine by their comments. God therefore has
revenged their pride, as we see; but when God shows us the way of life
by his servants, and shines upon us with heavenly doctrine, let us not
blindly wander in darkness, let us know that this inestimable treasure
is not to be despised, lest we should be deprived of it. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxxii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#027)<span id="xi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxxii-p2"></span>**27.** The king shall mourn, and the
prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of
the land shall be troubled: I will do unto them after their way, and
according to their deserts will I judge them; and they shall know that I
*am* the LORD.

<span id="xi.xxxii-p3"></span>**27.** Rex lugebit, et princeps induetur
desolatione:  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) et manus populi
terrae turbabuntur: secundum vias ipsorum faciam iis, et pro judiciis
ipsorum judicabo ipsos, et cognoscent quod ego Iehovah.

<span id="xi.xxxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxxii-p6"></span><span id="xi.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxxii-p7"></span>In this verse the Prophet affirms that
God’s vengeance should be so common that it should alight equally upon
the highest and the lowest. He begins with the king, then he descends to
his counselors, then he comprehends the whole people. *The king shall
lament,* he says. But it is his duty to give life to others, and then to
devise a remedy for all evils; but when the king has nothing left but
grief and sorrow, it is a sign of despair. He metaphorically clothes the
elders in a garment of desolation. We know that a garment has two uses;
since it fortifies us as a defense against the cold, and then it hides
whatever is dishonorable in us. In the opposite sense the Prophet says,
shame shall be as a garment to the elders, and then he goes down to the
common people. At the same time, he assigns the reason, I, says he,
*will do to them according to their ways* <span
id="xi.xxxii-p7.1"></span>מ is here taken causally, *according to their
ways,* therefore, *will I do unto them:* and in the same sense he adds*,
in their judgment will I judge you* The word *“judgment”* is used
peculiarly here, and contrary to its ordinary sense. For judgment means
the same as righteousness; but it is often transferred to
transgressions, as if he had said, they shall feel me a just judge
though I avenge their sins. Hence *their judgments* mean perverse
abuses, and comprehend not only superstitions but all kinds of
iniquities. By these words God intimates that though he should punish
the Jews severely, yet it would not be cruelty, because they deserved
such treatment. A confirmation follows in the next vision. The vision
is, indeed, separate, but as the Prophet had just asserted in God’s name
that the punishment was just under which the Jews would suffer, he
confirms this doctrine by the vision which follows, when he was seized
by the Spirit of God and transferred to Jerusalem, where he saw the
temple filled with various abominations; because there was no corner
which they had not defiled and violated with their idols. But let us
come to the words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc22010.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span> Some understand <span
id="xi.iv-p4.2"></span>אחר, *acher, and one* *evil more.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc22010.htm#fr_148) <span
id="xi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span> Meaning — the duration of the sinful pleasure
is worth the price paid for it.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc22010.htm#fr_149) <span
id="xi.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span> Or sound; some translate “of cutting off,” I
know not why — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc22010.htm#fr_150) <span
id="xi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span> Some translate “glory,” as if it had been
<span id="xi.vi-p5.1"></span>הד*, hed.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc22010.htm#fr_151) <span
id="xi.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p4"></span> Or, “has arisen ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc22010.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xi.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p4"></span> Or, “to the thing sold.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc22010.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xi.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p5"></span> That is, “although they are yet alive.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc22010.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p6"></span> Or, “shall not strengthen his life.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc22010.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xi.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p4"></span> Or, “Blow ye the trumpet, and make ready, as
others translate, in the imperative mood, but I prefer the perfect tense
— they have blown and prepared all things.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc22010.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p4"></span> That is, “those who are to escape of them
shall escape.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc22010.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xi.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p5"></span> Or, “murmuring or shouting ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc22010.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xi.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p6"></span> That is, “each one ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc22010.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xi.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p4"></span> A mark of similitude must be understood —
shall flow like water; for here ‘to go’ is taken for ‘to flow.’

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc22010.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xi.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p4"></span> Or, “countenance.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc22010.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xi.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p5"></span> Or, “shame.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc22010.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xi.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p4"></span> Some translate, “as an unclean thing.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc22010.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xi.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p4"></span> Or, “I have appointed to them ” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc22010.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xi.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p4"></span> Or, “I will deliver.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc22010.htm#fr_165) <span
id="xi.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxv-p4"></span> Or, “devastators.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc22010.htm#fr_166) <span
id="xi.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxvii-p4"></span> That is, “the wicked and perverse among
the Gentiles.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc22010.htm#fr_167) <span
id="xi.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxviii-p4"></span> That is, “there shall be no peace.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc22010.htm#fr_168) <span
id="xi.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxix-p4"></span> Or, “since there is no prophet.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc22010.htm#fr_169) <span
id="xi.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxix-p5"></span> That is, “shall vanish away.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc22010.htm#fr_170) <span
id="xi.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxxii-p4"></span> Or, “laying waste.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc22011)
