[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22005)  [Next](cc22007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Moreover he said unto me, Son of man,
eat that thou findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of
Israel.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixit mihi, Fili hominis, quod
inveneris, comedendo *comede,* volumen hoc, et vade loquere ad domum
Israel.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** So I opened my mouth, and he caused me
to eat that roll.

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et aperui os meum, et pavit me
volumine isto.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span><span id="vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>When the Prophet is ordered to eat whatever
he receives, this ought not to be extended to everything which he meets
with, but, whatever may be the taste of the book, he is forbidden to
refuse it: for its bitterness might possibly cause him to reject the
threats of God. Lastly, the quality of the book is noted, because it
contained nothing but the material for sorrow. He adds, *that he opened
his mouth,* for the sake of obedience; by which he signifies that he was
not curious or dainty in seeking to taste it, but that he took what was
divinely offered him, without the slightest hesitation. Now he adds —

<span id="vii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#003)<span id="vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And he said unto me, Son of man,
cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give
thee. Then did I eat *it*; and it was in my mouth as honey for
sweetness.

<span id="vii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et dixit mihi, Fili hominis, ventrem
tuum pasce, et viscera tua reple  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)
volumine isto, quod ego do tibi, et comedi, et fuit in ore meg tanquam
mel in dulcedine.

<span id="vii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.ii-p6"></span><span id="vii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p7"></span>Ezekiel, as we have just seen, proceeds to
say, that a book was given him to eat, because God’s servants ought to
speak from the inmost affection of their heart. We know that many have a
tongue sufficiently fluent, but use it only for ostentation: meanwhile,
God treats their vanity as a laughing stock, because their labor is
fruitless. Hence we must observe the passage of Paul already quoted,
“the kingdom of God is with power.” (<span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020)<span id="vii.ii-p7.1"></span>.)
But the efficacy of the Holy Spirit is not exerted unless when he who is
called to teach applies his serious endeavors to attain to the discharge
of his duty. For this reason, then, Ezekiel is commanded to *eat the
roll* Next he says, *it was as sweet as honey;* and, but a little
before, he said it was filled with curses: therefore, either he had put
off all humanity, or ought to be grieved, when he found himself
appointed to be the herald of God’s vengeance. But, in other places, we
saw that the servants of God were endued with feelings of an opposite
kind; for, as they were often rough and stern like their work, so they
condoled with the miserable people: but, their grief did not hinder them
from proceeding in the discharge of their duty. For this reason Ezekiel
now says, *the book was sweet,* because he acquiesced in God’s commands,
and although he pitied his own people, yet he acknowledged that it could
not happen otherwise, and subscribed to the just judgment of God.
Therefore, by the word *sweetness,* he signifies his acquiescence in
embracing the office enjoined upon him, and he so obeyed God that he
forgot all the material for sorrow in the book, because the justice of
God prevailed and thus extinguished the feeling of too great humanity
which might otherwise have delayed him. Jeremiah uses the same
expression. (<span id="vii.ii-p7.2"></span>[Jer
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016)<span id="vii.ii-p7.2"></span>.)
He says, that he found the words of God, and that they became to him
gladness and joy of heart. For we saw, that he was only anxious but very
sorrowful when he thought that utter destruction was impending over the
people. But, as I have just said, these two things are not discordant:
that Prophets should desire the safety of the people, and use their
utmost endeavors to promote it, and yet manifest a firm constancy, and
never hesitate, when necessity demands it, to condemn the people and to
utter God’s threats which are enjoined ‘upon them. Thus shortly
afterwards Jeremiah says, that he was filled with anger; thy words were
found, says he, and I did eat them, and they afforded me joy and
gladness of heart, because thy name has been called over me, O Jehovah
God of hosts: that is, because I have been taught by the power of thy
Spirit, and as I have been called to this office, so thou hast stretched
forth thy hand unto me that I may fulfill thy commands with good faith
and constancy: therefore thy words were my delight. Afterwards he adds,
(<span id="vii.ii-p7.3"></span>[Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017)<span id="vii.ii-p7.3"></span>,)
neither have I sat in the council of scorners, nor have I exalted myself
for the sake of throwing off the *yoke;* for since I perceived that thou
must be *obeyed,* I was, as it were, overpowered, yet I did not sit with
the scorners, but I sat alone, says he, because thou hast filled me with
indignation. Hence we see, that in one person were two feelings very
different and contrary in appearance, because he was filled with
indignation, and yet received joy through the words of God.

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#004)<span id="vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** And he said unto me, Son of man, go,
get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et dixit mihi, Fili hominis, vade
(ingredere) ad domum Israel, et loquere ad eos in sermonibus reels.

<span id="vii.iii-p4"></span>**5.** For thou *art* not sent to a people
of a strange speech and of an hard language, *but* to the house of
Israel;

<span id="vii.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Quia non ad populum profun-dos
 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) labiis et gravem lingua, tu missus
es ad domum (Israel scilicet.)

<span id="vii.iii-p7"></span>**6.** Not to many people of a strange
speech and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not understand.
Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee.

<span id="vii.iii-p8"></span>**6.** Non ad populos multos pro-fundos
labio et graves lingua quos non intelliges;  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) si non ad eos misis-sem to, ipsi
audissent to.

<span id="vii.iii-p10"></span>**7.** But the house of Israel will not
hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto me: for all the house
of Israel *are* impudent and hardhearted.

<span id="vii.iii-p11"></span>**7.** Atqui  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) domus Israel non volent ad audiendum to,
quia si non volunt audire me, quia tota domus Israel duri fronte (vel
proefracti) et robusto corde ipsi.

<span id="vii.iii-p13"></span> 

<span id="vii.iii-p14"></span><span id="vii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p15"></span>Now at greater length God explains why he
wished his servant to eat the volume which he held forth in his hand,
namely, that when instructed by it he might approach the children of
Israel; for he ought not to come empty, and we know that man of himself
can bring forward nothing solid: hence Ezekiel must receive from God’s
hand what he delivers to the Israelites. Let us then preserve this
order, as the volume is first given to the Prophet, and then transferred
to the people. God orders him, *to offer or speak his own words,* which
is worthy of remark, as having the same meaning. But if Ezekiel ought to
bring forward nothing but what he had received from God, this rule ought
to prevail among all God’s servants, that they should not heap up their
own comments, but pronounce what God teaches them as if from his mouth:
lastly, that passage of Peter (<span id="vii.iii-p15.1"></span>[1Pe
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011)<span id="vii.iii-p15.1"></span>)
ought to guide us, he who speaks in the Church ought to speak the words
of God. Now he adds, *I do not send thee to a people strange in speech
and hard in language, but to the house of Israel* Stone think that the
prophet is here animated to his duty, because God demanded nothing from
him which was too difficult. For if he had been sent to remote nations
with whom there was no interchange of speech, he might object that a
greater burden than he could bear was imposed upon him. The difficulty
would then have been a complete obstacle. They think that remote and
foreign nations are here compared with the people of Israel, that he may
discharge his duty with alacrity, as if it had been said, *“I* do not
send thee to strangers. For neither could they understand thee, and they
also would be barbarians to thee, but because thou art familiarly
acquainted with thine own people, thou canst not turn thy back when I
send thee unto them.” But this opinion does not approve itself to me,
because I read these three verses in the same context, as they are
united. It is by no means doubtful, that, by this comparison, God
aggravates the impiety of the people. For this sentence is first in
order, that the Israelites would be deaf, although the Prophet should
use among them the common and vernacular language: this is the first
point: now he shows the reason, because *they were a bitter people* Here
God signifies, that nothing prevented the Israelites from obeying the
doctrine of the Prophet but their malice and impiety. For this reason he
says, *I do not send thee to a people profound in speech* I know not how
some have conjectured that this epithet means learned or clever; for it
is the same thing for a people to be of a strange speech and of a hard
language. For what is a *“hard”* but a barbarous language? Now we
perceive the genuine sense, that the Prophet is not sent to men of an
unknown language because he would have been a barbarian to them and they
to him. *I do not send thee to them, therefore, but to the house of
Israel.*

<span id="vii.iii-p16"></span><span id="vii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p17"></span>Now he adds, *not to many peoples* Those
who translate *“many”* by *“great,”* do not understand the Prophet’s
meaning, for God had spoken in the singular number concerning all
people, but now he uses the plural, as if he had said, I send thee
neither to Egyptians, nor to Chaldeans, nor to any other remote nation,
since the world is on all sides of thee, inhabited by peoples whose
language thou dost not understand: to those therefore I do not send
thee. The particle, *if not,* follows, and Jerome translates, “If I had
sent thee unto them,” although the negative particle is interposed,
literally, *if not,* but because this phrase appears harsh, some have
supposed <span id="vii.iii-p17.1"></span>אם-לא, *am-la, to* have the
sense of swearing, and interpret it affirmatively for <span
id="vii.iii-p17.2"></span>כאמת*, cameth, “truly,”* or “surely.” But if
we receive it so, the passage will be defective; for they understand
<span id="vii.iii-p17.3"></span>אם*, am, “again,” “afterwards:”* for
these two words, <span id="vii.iii-p17.4"></span>אם-לא, *am-la,* have
the force of an oath interposed. What sense then shall we extract from
the words, *“truly* I will send thee unto them, and they shall hear
thee?” We see then this sense to be too forced. Some explain the passage
thus: “If I had not sent thee unto them, they would have heard thee,” as
if God here blamed the disposition of the people, because they rather
sought vain and foolish prophecies:, than submitted themselves to the
truth; just as if he had said, if any impostor should pour darkness upon
them, they would immediately embrace his fables and lies, as they are so
prone to foolishness. Since, therefore, I send thee, therefore they do
not hear. But this explanation does not suit, because a little
afterwards we shall see it in its own place. To me therefore this
context is most probable, *if I had not sent thee to them, these also
would have heard thee,* as if it had been said, unless a difference of
speech had interposed, I had rather have used thine assistance with
reference to foreign nations. In this way God signifies his displeasure,
when he says, that he would rather send his Prophet hither and thither
than to the Israelites, except through the want of a common language;
for this difference of language presented the only boundary to the
Prophet, so that he was confined to his own people. In this sense there
is nothing forced. I *do not,* therefore, *send thee to many peoples,
profound in speech and strange in tongue, because thou wouldst not
understand their language* But if this had not been an obstacle, I would
have sent thee, and they would have heard thee. We see then what I have
just touched upon, that the Israelites are compared to foreign or
uncircumcised tribes, because they rejected the instruction offered
them, not through ignorance of the language, but through the hardness of
their heart. Isaiah also says, (<span id="vii.iii-p17.5"></span>[Isa.
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#013)<span id="vii.iii-p17.5"></span>,)
that the word of God would be deep and obscure to even the Jews
themselves, but in another sense; he also compares his prophecies to a
sealed book, since God had blinded them according to their deserts.
Since therefore they were so given over to a reprobate mind, and were
destitute of sound understanding, therefore he says, that his teaching
would be like a closed and sealed book: then he says, that he would be a
barbarian, as if he was using an unknown language. So God in this place
clearly shows that the house of Israel were suffering no impediment in
profiting by his word, except their own unwillingness to hear. (<span
id="vii.iii-p17.6"></span>[Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span id="vii.iii-p17.6"></span>;
<span id="vii.iii-p17.7"></span>[Isa
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#011)<span
id="vii.iii-p17.7"></span>.) For he says, that the heathen would be
obedient, if they could be partakers of such a benefit. Unless therefore
the language of the Prophet had been unknown to the profane and
uncircumcised heathen, he had there found attentive and obedient
disciples, as God testifies. How then comes it to pass that the house of
Israel cannot hear! It now follows, *But the house of Israel are
unwilling to hear,* that is, the house of Israel is unwilling to hear
thee, because it will not hear me, says he.

<span id="vii.iii-p18"></span><span id="vii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p19"></span>Now, therefore, we clearly see the sloth
of the people assigned as a reason why they purposely rejected the Word
of God, and hardened themselves in obstinacy. He also ascends higher,
and says, that the people were not only disobedient to the Prophet but
to God himself, as Christ also when he exhorts his disciples to
perseverance in teaching. Therefore, says he, they will not hear you,
because they will not hear me, and why am I and my teaching hated by
them, unless because they do not receive my Father? (<span
id="vii.iii-p19.1"></span>[Joh
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018)<span
id="vii.iii-p19.1"></span>.) For this stumblingblock is likely to break
the spirits of the pious, when they see their teaching so proudly
rejected. This reproach alone, therefore, is often accustomed to recall
the servants of God from their course: but this admonition is proposed
to them in the midst, that God himself is despised. Why then should they
take it ill, that they are held in the same estimation as God, who is
himself rejected? They think themselves undeserving of such contempt and
haughtiness being thrown upon their labor. But is not God worthy of
being listened to before all angels? Since, then, they are proud and
unbelieving towards God himself, it is not surprising that they do not
reverently receive what is proposed to them by mortal man. Now,
therefore, we see what the intention of God is when he says, *the house
of Israel will not hear thee, because they do not hear me:* lest it
should be vexatious to the Prophet to see his labor profitless, nay,
even the children of Israel rising against him: because he ought to bear
it patiently, if he should suffer the same obloquy which they did not
hesitate to display against the Almighty himself. It follows, *Because
the whole house of Israel is of a bold or a daring aspect, and of a hard
heart* He repeats what we saw before, but in other words — namely, that
the people’s hardness of heart was untameable, and that they were not
only obstinate in heart but brazen in countenance, so that they cast
aside all modesty; and lastly, he implies that their obstinacy was
desperate, when he joins a brazen countenance with a hard heart.

<span id="vii.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008)<span id="vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p2"></span>**8.** Behold, I have made thy face strong
against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads.

<span id="vii.iv-p3"></span>**8.** Ecce posui facies tuas (faciem tuam)
duram contra facies ipsorum, et frontem tuam duram contra frontem
ipsorum.

<span id="vii.iv-p4"></span>**9.** As an adamant harder than flint have
I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks,
though they *be* a rebellious house.

<span id="vii.iv-p5"></span>**9.** Tanquam adamantem fortiorem lapide
(vel saxo) posui frontem tuam, ne timeas ipsos, et non frangaris a fade
(vel a praesentia ipsorum) quia domus rebellionis sunt.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69)

<span id="vii.iv-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.iv-p8"></span><span id="vii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p9"></span>Ezekiel was forewarned of the obstinacy of
the people, yea, even of their desperate *wickedness.* Now God
strengthens him lest he should despair when he saw that he must contend
with such abandoned and reckless men; for what else was it than
contending with stones? If Ezekiel had been commanded to strike a
mountain, it would have been just the same as contending with such a
people. He had need then of this strengthening, viz., *his forehead
should be adamant against the hardness of the people* If he had hoped
for more fruit from his labor, perhaps that facility had been the cause
of negligence: for confidence makes us more remiss when the work in hand
is neither laborious nor difficult. The Prophet, therefore, would have
been colder, if, certainly persuaded that the people would be docile, he
had approached them more carelessly. God, therefore, excites him when he
speaks of their obstinacy. As then it was useful that the Prophet should
comprehend how arduous was the duty to the discharge of which he was
called, so also he ought to be armed with the strength of God, for
otherwise he would have been easily overcome by its difficulty. This is
the reason why God adds, *that he had given him a stout front and a
brazen aspect against the face and front of the people* Besides, in this
way he was admonished that fortitude was to be hoped for from some other
quarter, that he might not spend his strength in vain, but allow himself
to *be* governed by the Spirit of God. For when we think only on the
quality and quantity of our own powers, they may easily flow away, and
disperse, and even become vapid, unless we discharge our duty with
manliness. God, therefore, recalls his Prophet when he says, *that he
had given him a face,* as if he would say, that the Prophet did not make
war in his own strength, but was armed with celestial virtue. Although,
therefore, this seems to have been spoken once for Ezekiel’s private
use, yet it belongs to us all. Let us learn, then, when God calls us to
the office of teaching, never to measure the effect of our work by the
standard of our own capacity, nor yet to consider our own powers, but to
repose on some communicated strength which God here extols in no empty
praises. Whoever, therefore, shall acknowledge that God is sufficient
for overcoming all obstacles, will gird himself bravely for his work;
but he who delays for calculating his own strength is not only weakened
but is almost overcome. Besides, we see that we are here instructed in
humility and modesty, lest we should claim anything as due to our own
strength. Hence it happens, that many are so full, yea so puffed out
with confidence, that they bring forth nothing but wind. Hence, let us
learn to seek from God alone that fortitude which we need: for we are
not stronger than Ezekiel, and if he needed to be strengthened by the
Spirit of God, much more do we at this time need it.

<span id="vii.iv-p10"></span><span id="vii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p11"></span>Lastly, we gather from this passage that
although the whole world should rise up against the servants of God, yet
his strength would be superior, as we saw it was with Jeremiah: They
shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail. (<span
id="vii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Jer
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#019)<span id="vii.iv-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.iv-p11.2"></span>[Jer
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020)<span id="vii.iv-p11.2"></span>.)
Hence there is no reason why we should be afraid of the violent attack
of any enemy, and although the whole world should be in a tumult, yet we
need not tremble, because God’s strength in us will always be more
powerful. Therefore it is added, *as an adamant, harder than flint, have
I placed thee; therefore do not fear them.* God says *I have placed the
forehead of the Prophet like adamant;* not that he strove with the
people by either injustice or audacity, but *because* God opposed the
confidence with which Ezekiel was endowed to the furious impudence of
the people. In this sense then *the forehead of the Prophet* is said to
be *adamant* Now he adds — *do not fear, then, and do not be broken by
their face or presence* These phrases, that the Prophet *be not broken,*
and *yet fear not,* seem to be opposed to each other, since he excels in
unconquered fortitude. But God so tempers his favor, that the faithful
always have need of excitements, even when he animates them, and
supplies them with strength. God, therefore, so works within his
servants, that they do nothing except as they are ruled by his Spirit;
and yet they have need of his teaching, since his exhortations to them
are never superfluous. Profane men think that there is no use in
teaching, and that all exhortations are frivolous, if God, when he acts
upon us by his Spirit, not only begins, but continues and perfects his
own work. But the Scripture shows that these two things mutually agree;
for while God strengthens us and renders us unconquerable by his Spirit,
at the same time he breathes virtue into his exhortations, and causes
them to flourish within us, and to bring forth fruit In this way God on
his part confirms his Prophet, by giving him an adamantine forehead and
more than stony, and by giving him an unconquered spirit, and yet he
exhorts him to fear not. We see, then, how God governs his own people
within them, and yet adds teaching as an instrument of his Spirit. Then
he adds, *because they are a rebellious house,* or although they are;
for the particle <span id="vii.iv-p11.3"></span>כי, *ki,* is often put
adversatively, as we have said elsewhere. If we take it in its proper
sense, it will suit very well, *because they are a rebellious house;* as
if it had been said, the Prophet has no cause for fear, because he was
carefully admonished beforehand, and nothing new could happen; for we
are accustomed to be very much frightened by novelty; but when we have
meditated on what happens, we are not disturbed, neither do we stand
still nor hesitate; for although the Prophet had already learnt that
*the house of Israel was rebellious,* yet he perseveres, because he
experiences nothing new or unusual. It follows —

<span id="vii.v"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p1"></span><span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#010)<span id="vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p2"></span>**10.** Moreover he said unto me, Son of man,
all my words that I shall speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and
hear with thine ears.

<span id="vii.v-p3"></span>**10.** Et dixit mihi, Fili hominis, omnes
sermones meos quos loquor ad te sume in corde tuo, et auribus tuis audi.

<span id="vii.v-p4"></span>**11.** And go, get thee to them of the
captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and
tell them, Thus saith the Lord GOD, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear.

<span id="vii.v-p5"></span>**11.** Et vade (ingredere) ad
transmigrationem,  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) ad filios populi
tui, et loquere ad ipsos: et dic illis: sic dicit Dominator Iehovah,
sive audiverint sire cessaverint.

<span id="vii.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.v-p8"></span><span id="vii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p9"></span>This is a repetition of the same doctrine;
for we said that our Prophet is more verbose than Isaiah, and even than
Jeremiah, because he had accustomed himself to the form of speech which
was then customary among the exiles, he is not, therefore, either so
restricted or so polished; but we must understand that he accommodated
his language to learners, because he had to do with a people not only
rude and dull, but also obstinate. And then they had degenerated as much
from the purity of their language as from that of their faith; hence the
Prophet purposely bends aside from elegance of language. Whatever
repetition he might use with men so dull and slothful, it was not
superfluous. He says, therefore, what we have formerly seen, *that he
was commanded to speak all the words,* but he previously says, *that he
was commanded to receive them in his heart, and to perceive them with
his ears* The order is inverted, because we must perceive with the ear
before we receive in the heart. And they philosophize with more subtlety
than truth who say, that the interior hearing precedes, inasmuch as the
ears are struck by the sound in vain, unless the heart was already
docile. For although God prepares his elect for hearing, and gives them
ears for that purpose, yet his teaching does not penetrate to their
minds before it has been received by the car. There is no doubt, then,
that here one thing is put before the other, by what we call a <span
id="vii.v-p9.1"></span>ὕστερον πρότερον The result is, that; the
Prophet, as he is sure of his calling, hears God speaking to him. But
this was not said for his sake, but that he might securely boast himself
to be a servant of God, and bring forward nothing but what he had heard
from the mouth of God himself. As, therefore, in this confidence, he was
to contend against the people’s impiety, so he was commanded *to hear
the words of God* We hear, then, a repetition of what we formerly saw,
namely, that the Prophet freely boasts that he did not bring forward
merely windy eloquence, as profane men do, who have no other object than
to obtain the applause of men.

<span id="vii.v-p10"></span>The Prophet, therefore, here says, that he
was commanded *to receive the words of God in his heart.*

<span id="vii.v-p11"></span><span id="vii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p12"></span>Now it is added, *that he may go and proceed
to the captivity, to the children of his own people* We see, then, that
God does not regard the Prophet so much as the Israelites, because they
had never willingly yielded to the Prophet when he brought a message by
no means pleasing. For nothing could be more sad and hateful to them
than to hear threats and curses. Because, then, they had never willingly
bent to obedience, he is sent with a testimony that he had learnt what
he uttered in God’s school; then that he had so learnt from God, that he
adds nothing of his own; lastly, that he so speaks, that; the obstinacy
of the people is not *overcome: Whether they will hear, or whether they
will forbear, do thou nevertheless go forward* Wherefore? *Thou shalt
say, thus saith the Lord.* We have already explained the meaning of this
phrase, namely, where we are persuaded that our labor is pleasing to
God, although it be useless to men, yet this ought to suffice us, that
God has sent us. Then he wishes to try our constancy, lest when we see
ourselves laboring in vain, we should cease on that account, instead of
being prepared to obey, whatever may happen.

<span id="vii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou art desirous
that the teaching of thy Prophet should be set before us, so many ages
after his death, that we be not either obdurate or rebellious; but may
we submit ourselves to thee in all becoming reverence and obedience,
that the labor which ended in the condemnation of thine ancient people,
through their contumacy, may this day be salutary to us, and may we so
follow what thou teachest through him, that we may tend to the goal to
which thou callest us, until after finishing our course with
perseverance, we may be at length gathered together within thy celestial
kingdom, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="vii.vii"></span>

<span id="vii.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Ninth.

<span id="vii.viii"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span><span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012)<span id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span>**12.** Then the Spirit took me up, and I
heard behind me a voice of a great rushing, *saying,* Blessed *be* the
glory of the LORD from his place.

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span>**12.** Et sustulit me Spiritus: et audivi
post me vocem strepitus magni Benedicta gloria Iehovae e loco suo.

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span><span id="vii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet again affirms what we have
formerly seen, that God had worked upon his mind by the secret instinct
of his own Spirit. Although, therefore, God had exhorted him to
fortitude, yet the Prophet shows what he demanded of himself. In short,
the Prophet was strong in God, because God implanted his virtue within
him. He says, therefore, *that he was raised up by the Spirit,* which
only means that the agitation within him was of no avail, unless through
heavenly inspiration; so also he ought to be carried beyond himself for
the time, that nothing human should appear within him. But more will be
said about this hereafter.

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span>He adds, *that he heard a voice of a great
rushing,* that is, a sonorous voice, and one different from the usual
voice of men: for the, Prophet, by the noise or tumult of the voice,
could distinguish it from the usual voice of men. *Blessed,* said it,
*be the glory of Jehovah from his own place* We cannot doubt that this
benediction was suitable to the occasion of its utterance: when,
therefore, this voice was heard, God wished to refute the clamorous
voices of the people who thought themselves injured. For we know that
the people were querulous, and murmured because they thought themselves
treated with greater harshness than they deserved. Hence the glory of
God is opposed to all impious and sacrilegious blasphemies, which the
Israelites were in the habit of vomiting forth against God, as if he
treated them cruelly. In short, this voice restrained all calumnies, by
which the impious then endeavored to overwhelm the glory of God. He says
*that glory is blessed,* because although men dare not utter gross and
open reproaches against God, nevertheless they curse his glory as often
as they detract from his justice, and accuse him of too much rigor.
Hence, in opposition to this, *a voice is heard, saying, the glory of
God is blessed*

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>By *God’s place,* I understand the Temple.
I confess that in many passages of Scripture heaven is so called; not
that God’s essence, which is immense, can be included within any place;
for as heaven is called his throne or seat, so also the earth is his
footstool, because he fills all things with his immensity. So here, as
often in other places, the Temple is called God’s place, because he
dwelt there with respect to men. Besides, this is said as well with
reference to the exiles as to the rest of the people yet remaining at
Jerusalem. For the exiles did not sufficiently consider that they were
banished from their country, and dragged into a distant region, through
the just vengeance of God. Since, therefore, this captivity did not
sufficiently subdue them, the name of God ought to be set before them,
that they might know that they were not banished from their country by
the cruelty of their enemies, but by the judgment of God. The Prophet,
doubtless, regards also those Jews who as yet remained at home: for they
boasted that God was seated in the Temple, and so fancied that they
should be always safe under his protection. But the Prophet, as we shall
afterwards see, denounces on those who remained a punishment similar to
that of those who were in captivity. It is then just as if he had said
that God remained in his Temple, that he might shine there with
conspicuous glory. Now as he wished to humble the ten tribes as well as
the other two, so he wished to alleviate the grief of them all, that
they should not cease to hope for the promised return. For calamity
itself might lead them to despair, and to suppose their salvation
impossible: nay, to think that God was as it were dead, and his virtue
extinct. To what purpose, then, was the worship of God? to what purpose
the splendor and dignity of the Temple, unless that God should protect
his own? But they had been deserted by him; here then was matter for
despair, unless it had been met: the Prophet now treats this, since on
one side he reminds them that God was the just avenger of wickedness,
when he suffered the ten tribes to be dragged into exile, yet that he
would be their deliverer, because he does not cease to reign in his
Temple, although profane men think him conquered, and treat with wanton
insolence their own triumphs over him. Now therefore we perceive the
sense of the Prophet: for this sentence would be cold if it were merely
general; but when it is accommodated to the state of things at the time,
we see that the glory of God is not extolled by any vain eulogium, and
that the Temple is not mentioned in vain. (<span
id="vii.viii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004)<span id="vii.viii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.viii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019)<span
id="vii.viii-p8.2"></span>; <span id="vii.viii-p8.3"></span>[Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="vii.viii-p8.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p1"></span><span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#013)<span id="vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p2"></span>**13.** *I heard* also the noise of the
wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of
the wheels over against them, and a noise of a great rushing.

<span id="vii.ix-p3"></span>**13.** Et vocem  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) alarum animalium osculantium cujusque ad
sociam: et vocem rotarum e regione ipsorum, vocem (inquam) strepitus
magni.

<span id="vii.ix-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.ix-p6"></span><span id="vii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p7"></span>The Prophet now seems to express from whence
the voice which he heard proceeded: for I do not think that the voice
proceeded from any other quarter, and that afterwards the living
creatures moved in unison with the wheels, but it seems to me to explain
what would otherwise have been doubtful, namely, that God’s glory was
celebrated by the living creatures and the wheels. It is not wonderful
then that a voice should be attributed to the living creatures, because
we saw them to be cherubim or angels, as by the wheels God wishes to
mark all actions and motions; motions, I say, which seem fortuitous, but
yet are governed by the living creatures, whom God inspires with his own
virtue, while he wishes to execute his designs, and so exercises his
dominion over all creatures; for nothing happens which is not governed
by his will. Hence a voice proceeds as well from the living creatures as
from the wheels, which extolled the glory of God, and proclaimed him, in
the midst of that sad and wretched slaughter of the people, still
reigning in his own Temple; then, indeed, especially exercising his
power, because he was a judge, in punishing their wickedness; then
because he was about to become the deliverer of his own people, as he
had promised them restoration after seventy years. He says also, *I
heard the voice of wings when they mutually embraced each other;* for
<span id="vii.ix-p7.1"></span>נקש*, nekesh,* signifies to embrace:
others translate, when they struck or engaged in conflict with each
other: but by the word osculating, conjunction is metaphorically
signified. When, therefore, *each wing embraced its fellow,* then the
voice emerged: he adds also the same thing concerning the wheels, and at
length he repeats what he had said, *that there was a sound of a great
rushing* It follows —

<span id="vii.x"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p1"></span><span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014)<span id="vii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p2"></span>**14.** So the Spirit lifted me up, and took
me away, and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the
hand of the LORD was strong upon me.

<span id="vii.x-p3"></span>**14.** Et Spiritus sustulit me, et sumpsit
me: et profectus sum amarus pro indignatione spiritus mei, et manus
Iehovae super me fortis.

<span id="vii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.x-p5"></span><span id="vii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.x-p6"></span>He confirms what we have formerly seen,
namely, that he was acted upon by the Spirit of God, so that it was in
some way without himself, and not as profane men have invented,
enthusiastically: for their Prophets were deprived of self-control, and
the devil so dealt with them, that they were not of sound mind. Hence
the Prophet does not understand that he was deprived of self-control,
because God’s Prophets were of a sedate and composed mind; but he
understands that he was so governed by the Spirit of God, that he was
unlike himself, and did not breathe a terrestrial air; lastly, he
understands that visible marks were graven upon him, which obtained for
his doctrine authority with all the people. And it was the more
necessary that the Prophet should be adorned with his own proofs, on
account of the dullness of the people, and also because his message was
distasteful to them, and he had not previously discharged the duty of a
teacher. It was needful, therefore, that he should be so renewed that
the *people* should acknowledge him as inspired. He had lived familiarly
among his friends, and was sufficiently known both by appearance and
character. Meanwhile God, as I have said, separated him from common
life, that he should represent something celestial; and the object of
this was, as we have shown, to *conciliate* confidence and reverence
towards his teaching. He felt indeed the agitation of the Spirit, and it
is scarcely to be doubted that the people also knew it, otherwise they
would scarcely have had *confidence* in him when speaking of himself.

<span id="vii.x-p7"></span>The object of this remarkable government of
the Spirit was, that the Israelites, if only awake and attentive to the
miracle, might know the Prophet to be in some manner renovated. But what
follows seems opposed to the former sentence; for he says (<span
id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>[Eze 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#003)<span
id="vii.x-p7.1"></span>) the volume was sweet as honey, but now *that he
departed in the bitterness of his spirit;.* but as I briefly explained
yesterday, this is easily reconciled; for the Prophet was not deprived
of all sensation. Although he was entirely consecrated to God, and in no
degree remitted his diligence and alacrity, yet he retained some human
feelings: hence the spirit of bitterness of which he speaks, which he
calls *his own spirit* Whence we perceive an implied contrast between
that motion by which he was caught up and that feeling, which, although
not sinful, was in some way different from the grace of the Spirit,
because the Prophet so burnt with zeal that he performed the commands of
God almost in forgetfulness of self: yet, at the same time, he felt
within him something human, since the power of the Spirit had not
extinguished all sorrow. We hold, therefore, that the Prophet was in
some degree inspired by the Spirit, and yet that *his own spirit was
bitter* He adds, *and the hand of Jehovah was strong upon me* By “hand,”
some understand prophecy, but in my opinion ignorantly: I do not doubt
that its meaning is power or authority. He says, *the hand of God was
strong,* because he ought to obey God, although the bitterness of which
he spoke should draw him in a contrary direction. As Paul says, (<span
id="vii.x-p7.2"></span>[2Co 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)<span
id="vii.x-p7.2"></span>, and <span id="vii.x-p7.3"></span>[Php
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="vii.x-p7.3"></span>,)
that he was constrained by a zeal of God, so also the Prophet signifies
that he was constrained by the secret instinct of the Spirit, so that he
did not act from human motives, nor yet obey the wishes of his own mind,
nor follow his own individual will, but was only intent on rendering
obedience to God. In this sense, then, he says, *that the hand of God
was strong upon him* Otherwise it might be objected — why did he not
fall away when he was so oppressed with grief, and anxiety so
overwhelmed his spirit? he replies, the hand of God was strong and
prevailed, since otherwise he would have failed a hundred times, had he
not been supported by the power of God. And thus we see that there was
some repugnance in the Prophet, since as man he was affected with
sorrow, but the power of the Holy Spirit ruled over him, so that he
denied himself and all his human affections.

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span>**15.** Then I came to them of the captivity
at Telabib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat,
and remained there astonished among them seven days.

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>**15.** Et veni ad transmigrationem  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) in Thelabib: sedebant  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) autem prope flumen Chebar: illic ipsi
sedebant; et sedi etiam illic septem diebus, obstupescens  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) in medio ipsorum.

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span><span id="vii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p9"></span>Now he says, that he had returned to his own
people, not that he had ever removed from them, but had been drawn by
the vision from the intercourse with men. For God revealed himself to
him on the bank of the river Chebar, but he was solitary: and that this
was done by vision, is by no means doubtful, since he was always among
his own people. How then does he say, *that he is now returned?* Why,
because the vision had vanished, and so he was entirely occupied with
the other captives. What some affirm with subtlety, that he was like a
monk, is frivolous: for they say, that he abhorred the wickedness of the
people, and, that he might not contract any stain of impurity, had
sought solitude: but this is not probable. Without doubt., the Prophet
means that he returned to his former mode of life from the time when he
heard God speaking and saw the vision. He then says — *I sat seven days*
in some way absorbed in either admiration or sorrow, for <span
id="vii.xi-p9.1"></span>שמם, *shemew,* signifies *“to* be desolate,”
*“to* be astonished,” *“to* wonder.” But as to the Prophet *sitting
quiet and silent for seven days,* there is little doubt but that in this
way God prepared him for beginning to speak afterwards to the greater
surprise of the whole people. Nor ought it to seem absurd that he was
dumb although sent by God:: for this did not occur through any
negligence or delay which can be accounted a fault, but the office of
teaching had been so imposed that he was not yet instructed by any fixed
commands; as if any one were chosen ambassador either by a king or a
senate, and were afterwards furnished with his instructions, so the
Prophet was called to the prophetic office., but knew not yet what he
was to say. He had indeed eaten the roll, but God had not yet suggested
whence he ought to begin, nor how he ought to temper his doctrine. Hence
Ezekiel had not yet been drawn forth: therefore he says, that he sat
with either great stupor or great desolation, as they say. For his very
appearance would rouse the attention of men, that they should enquire
the meaning of this unusual sorrow. Whatever it was, we see that this
silence was a preparation for the discharge of his duty with greater
fruit and efficacy, since his speech ought afterwards to be received
with greater reverence *when he had been silent for seven days*

<span id="vii.xi-p10"></span>Then he says, *I came to the exiles who sat
in Thelabib* I willingly accord with the opinion of those who take this
for the name of a place, and ancient interpreters even have left these
two words. Their Septuagint version has <span
id="vii.xi-p10.1"></span>μετέωρον*,* as if it meant “lofty.” <span
id="vii.xi-p10.2"></span>תלל, *thelel,* signifies to elevate, but it
ought to be <span id="vii.xi-p10.3"></span>תלול, *thelol,* if the
Prophet meant that he was exalted, but this is not suitable, since he
rather asserts that he was like the rest of mankind after the vision was
withdrawn. Some render it *“skillful,”* but I am not aware of their
reason: but as I have already said, their opinion is probable, who
suppose it the proper name of a place. Jerome translates, *“a* heap of
fruit,” and not badly; for this was probably the origin of the place’s
name, as cities and villages and mountains often receive their name from
their situation and other circumstances; so also this place was called
Thelabib. For <span id="vii.xi-p10.5"></span>תל, *thel,* signifies “a
heap,” and <span id="vii.xi-p10.6"></span>אביב, *abib,* means a “stalk,”
or “straw of corn,” and it may, therefore, be that the place was called
Thelabib on account of its fertility, since the harvest there is very
plentiful. But this is of no great moment. What we have mentioned must
be especially remembered, that the Prophet was beheld in that sad and
sorrowful countenance, *and was silent for seven days*

<span id="vii.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016)<span id="vii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p2"></span>**16.** And it came to pass at the end of
seven days, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

<span id="vii.xii-p3"></span>**16.** Et accidit a fine septem dierum
 <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) factus  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) sermo Iehovae ad me, dicendo.

<span id="vii.xii-p6"></span>**17.** Son of man, I have made thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth,
and give them warning from me.

<span id="vii.xii-p7"></span>**17.** Fili hominis, speculatorem posui
 <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) to domui Israel: audies ergo ex
ore meo sermones, et admonebis illos ex me.

<span id="vii.xii-p9"></span> 

<span id="vii.xii-p10"></span><span id="vii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p11"></span>Now the Prophet shows more clearly why he
continued in silence for seven days, because, indeed, he had been
appointed a teacher, but the time had not fully arrived in which he was
to utter the commands of God. He waited, therefore until he should
receive a distinct message. Hence he says, *at the end of seven days I
received a word from the Lord* Whence we gather, that he had been chosen
before, and that the burden of an embassy was imposed upon him:
meanwhile he stood, as it were, in suspense, because he did not
distinctly understand what he was to say, and where he ought to begin.
Hence it appears, that God acts by degrees towards his servants, so that
he claims them for his own, then he shows them generally what duties and
labors they have to discharge, and at length he sends them forth to the
performance of their work, and the execution of their office. This we
see was done in the case of our Prophet. For first he learned that he
was chosen by God, afterwards he was admonished generally to behave
himself courageously, and not to yield to any threats or terrors: at
length God explained to him what commands he wished him to bear to the
people. As yet God seems to speak but generally, but it is as if he
announced that the time had come when the Prophet must gird himself to
his work: hence he says*, Son of man I have appointed thee a watchman of
the house of Israel*

<span id="vii.xii-p12"></span><span id="vii.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p13"></span>What Ezekiel heard belongs to all teachers
of the Church, namely, that they are Divinely appointed and placed as on
watch-towers, that they may keep watch for the common safety of all. It
was the duty of those who have been appointed from the beginning
ministers of the heavenly doctrine to be watchmen. And would that in the
Papacy, as this name has been imposed on idols, dumb and blind and deaf,
those who with swelling cheeks call themselves Bishops, had been
admonished of their vocation. For we know that the word Bishop means the
same as watchman. But when they were boasting themselves to be bishops,
they were drowned in the darkness of gross ignorance: then also they
were buried in their pleasure, as well as in sloth, for there is no more
intelligence in these animals than in oxen or asses. Asses and oxen do
spend their labor for the advantage of man, but these are not only
destitute of all judgment and reason, but are altogether useless. But
what I have said is to be remembered, when God chooses Prophets, that
they are placed, as it were, on watch-towers, that they may keep watch
for the safety of the whole Church. This ought now to have its force,
that pastors may acknowledge themselves placed in stations whence they
may be watchful: and this, indeed, is one point. Now this cannot be done
unless they are endued with superior gifts and prevail in the grace of
the Spirit above the commonalty. Nor is it sufficient that pastors
should live as private men, but they ought to wait longer, as if they
were placed on a lofty watchtower, which demands both diligence and a
power of observation: this is a second point.

<span id="vii.xii-p14"></span>It is now added, *thou shalt hear words
from my mouth, and shalt announce them to the people from me.* Here a
general rule is prescribed to all Prophets and pastors of the Church,
namely, that they should hear the word from the mouth of God: by which
particle God wishes to exclude whatever men fabricate or invent for
themselves. For it is evident, when God claimed to himself the right of
speaking that he orders all men to be silent and not to offer anything
of their own, and then, when he orders them *to hear the word from his
mouth,* that he puts a bridle upon them that they should neither invent
anything, nor hanker after their own devices, nor dare to conceive
either more or less than the word: and, lastly, we see that whatever men
offer of their ownselves, is here abolished, when God alone wishes to be
heard, for he does not mingle himself here with others as in a crowd, as
if he wished to be heard only in part. He assumes to himself, therefore,
what we ought to attribute to his supreme command over all things,
namely, that we should hang upon his lips. But if this was said to
Ezekiel, how is it that men of no authority now dare to spread abroad
their own fictions, as we see done in the Papacy? for what. is such a
religion but a confused jumble of the numberless fictions of men? dray
have heaped together, from many brains, an immense chaos of errors; ‘for
they wish us to adore as the oracles of God whatever foolish men have
imagined. But who among them will boast himself superior to Ezekiel?
nay, if they were all put together will they dare to assert that they
can be compared with him alone? And if they dare, who will admit their
arrogance? We see then, that Ezekiel with the other Prophets is reined
in, that he should not say anything but what he has heard from God’s
mouth.

<span id="vii.xii-p15"></span>Now it follows, *thou shalt admonish them
from me* The word which the Prophet uses, signifies as well to admonish
as to caution. There is no doubt that he means those admonitions by
which men are roused to caution, lest they should perish through any
error or thoughtlessness. Hence after God had subjected the Prophet to
himself, and commanded him to be a disciple, he appointed him a teacher,
because hearing was not sufficient, unless he who had been called to
rule the Church should deliver out of his hand what he had received from
God. God therefore commands his Prophet to speak, after he had ordered
him to hear. But he adds, *from me,* that the people may understand that
God alone is the author of instruction. False teachers, indeed, proudly
assume the name of God, as we see in the Papacy that this axiom sounds
through it, that the Church is ruled by the Holy Spirit immediately, and
therefore that it cannot err: but these two things are to be read
conjointly, namely, that he who is appointed a teacher should hear God
speaking, and afterwards should admonish in the name of God himself,
that is, should profess that he is the minister and witness of God, so
that his teaching should not be thought his own. For those who affect
the praise of ability, or learning, or eloquence, often obscure the name
of God, and therefore although they professed that they had their
teaching from God, yet afterwards they speak from themselves: that is,
they puff themselves up with vain ostentation, so that the majesty of
God does not appear, nor the efficacy of the Spirit in that profane
method of teaching. Hence God afterwards imposed a law upon his Prophet,
that he should utter nothing but what he had heard: now he adds another
clause: *that he should admonish the people;* but he must admonish them
not from himself, but must always have in his mouth that sacred name of
God, and show that he is in reality sent from him. For after this manner
spake Moses, What am I and my brother Aaron? (<span
id="vii.xii-p15.1"></span>[Nu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xii-p15.1"></span>.) Here we see that Moses spake from God; that
is, professed himself to be God’s minister, when he bore witness that he
was nothing, that he assumed nothing to himself, and acted in nothing by
his own peculiar counsel or motion.

<span id="vii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vii.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou
condescendest to interest thyself in our salvation, and stirrest up thy
servants to be to us instead of eyes, that we may know thy watchfulness
over us lest we perish, — grant, I pray thee, that we may be so roused
by the holy admonitions which flow from thee through their ministry and
service, that if we have turned aside from the right way we may speedily
return to it, and so go forward in our course, and be endued with such
perseverance, that we may at length arrive at the fruition of that
blessed rest, which has been obtained for us by the blood of thy Son.
Amen.

<span id="vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture Tenth.

<span id="vii.xv"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018)<span id="vii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p2"></span>**18.** When I say unto the wicked, Thou
shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn
the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked *man*
shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

<span id="vii.xv-p3"></span>**18.** Cum dixero impio, morte morieris, et
non admonueris ipsum, et non locutus fueris ad eum, admonendum impium a
via sua impia, ad vivificandum ipsum: impius ipsc in iniquitate sua
morietur: sanguinem vero ejus e manu tua requiram.

<span id="vii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xv-p5"></span><span id="vii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet is now taught how difficult and
dangerous an office he has now to undertake. God had previously laid it
down as a law that he should utter nothing of himself: now he adds,
that, the watchman is so set over the people that he must render an
account of the diligence with which he goes through his watches. It is
just as if it had been said that souls were committed to his care and
fidelity, so that if they should perish he must undergo punishment
before God. But it is better to explain the words — if *when I say to
the impious, “Thou shalt surely die,” and thou dost not admonish him,
and he perish, then from thee will I require his blood* In the first
place, God confirms what we saw yesterday, that it is not. permitted to
any mortal to condemn or absolve at his own discretion. When, therefore,
God sends forth his servants, he does not resign that power, for still
the supreme authority remains with himself: because there is one
lawgiver, as James says, who can save and destroy. (<span
id="vii.xv-p6.1"></span>[Jas 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xv-p6.1"></span>; <span id="vii.xv-p6.2"></span>[Eze
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)<span id="vii.xv-p6.2"></span>.)
And elsewhere Ezekiel reproves the false prophets, because they keep
alive the souls which were dying, and slay the souls not devoted to
death. For we know that proud men always tyrannize over the conscience
when they take upon themselves the prophetic name, and substitute
themselves in the place of God, as their practice is in the Papacy. For
the Pope indeed pretends that he does nothing in his own proper name,
but meanwhile he claims the prerogative of God, and sits in the temple
as an idol, because nothing is more peculiar to God than ruling our
minds with celestial doctrine; but the Papists themselves heap on their
own comments, and so it comes to pass that they miserably distort and
drown their own consciences even to utter destruction. They enact laws
according to their pleasure, then they always add the condition, that
they must be kept under pain of eternal damnation, or of mortal sin, as
they say. This place, then, must be diligently marked, where God claims
to himself alone the power and right of condemning: *if, says he, when I
say to the impious.* From this we infer, that all those are sacrilegious
who bind consciences with their own laws, decrees, and enactments,
enforcing one thing and forbidding another, because they take away from
God what here he wishes to be assigned to him, for it is his office
alone to pronounce sentence, for Prophets are only his heralds.

<span id="vii.xv-p7"></span>Meanwhile those fanatics are to be rejected,
who, under pretext of this place, wish to give license to sin, and
assert there is no difference between good and evil, because it is not
our duty to condemn. For, properly speaking, we do not assume anything
to ourselves when we recite what has proceeded from the mouth of God.
God condemns adulterers, thieves, drunkards, murderers, enviers,
slanderers, oppressors: if one inveigh against an adulterer, another a
thief, a third a drunkard, shall we say that they take upon themselves
more than they ought? By no means, because they do not pronounce of
themselves as we have said, but God has said it, and they are but
witnesses and messengers of his sentence. Yet this moderation must be
maintained, not to condemn any one through moroseness, since many
immediately abominate whatever displeases them, and cannot be induced to
use diligent inquiry. Inquiry, therefore, should precede our sentences;
but when God has spoken, then we must follow the rule which was given to
the Prophet, *if thou hast not admonished him, and spoken for his
admonition* Here the character which was imposed upon Ezekiel is
referred to: for the same duty does not devolve upon private individuals
who do not bear the prophetic name. For we must remark that this is not
a general declaration which concerns all men at large, but it concerns a
Prophet who had already been called to be a watchman: for unless those
who sustain such a burden admonish mankind, no excuse remains for them
but the necessity of sending an account to God for those who are lost.
And the repetition shows that this ought not to be done as a matter of
course, but that Prophets ought to be anxious and even zealous in
recalling sinners. This clause was clear enough: *if thou dost not
admonish the wicked after I have spoken:* but it is added, *and hast not
spoken for his admonition* This sentence seems to be repeated in vain,
but God signifies that. unless the Prophet admonishes sinners, he is not
absolved, because he spoke once in passing and uttered but a single
word. We should remember that sinners ought to be continually reproved
that they may return to the right way. And this is the tendency of
Paul’s doctrine to Timothy:

<span id="vii.xv-p8"></span>“be instant in season and out of season.”
(<span id="vii.xv-p8.1"></span>[2Ti
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span id="vii.xv-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xv-p9"></span>For if it had been sufficient to reprove
sinners mildly, and afterwards to spare them, Paul would have been
content with that courtesy, but he says, we must be urgent on every
occasion. The minister of the Church then must not cease to repeat these
admonitions, as Paul says elsewhere to the Philippians —

<span id="vii.xv-p10"></span>“I am not weary of repeating the same
things to you.”  
(<span id="vii.xv-p10.2"></span>[Php
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018)<span id="vii.xv-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xv-p11"></span>And we know what he professes in the Acts.
(<span id="vii.xv-p11.1"></span>[Ac
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#031)<span id="vii.xv-p11.1"></span>.)
I have not ceased day and night, publicly and privately, to admonish
each of you. That perseverance then which Paul shows that he used is
here enjoined on all the Prophets and servants of God.

<span id="vii.xv-p12"></span>He says, *to urge him to turn from his evil
way,* that is, to be cautious; as it was said yesterday, <span
id="vii.xv-p12.1"></span>זהר, *zeher,* means to be cautious; here it is
taken *actively* — *unless thou hast spoken, that thou mayest teach him
to be cautious, or to return from his evil way* Here it may be asked,
why does God touch only on one side of the teaching, and omit the chief
point? For why was the law given? and why were Prophets called forth,
unless to collect the people for God? Here we must exercise the
obedience of faith, since we know that God regards nothing as more
important than uniting miserable men in the hope of eternal life. This
is the chief end of the law and the gospel, that men being reconciled to
God, may worship him as a Father. Chastisements, threats, and terrors
follow afterwards, of which now there is only the mention; but we must
consider the condition of the people, as we have already seen it; for at
that time the prevalence of impiety, and contempt of God, and of all
kinds of wickedness, was so great, that the Prophet could not address
the people mildly and softly. Since, indeed, that passage of Paul must
be remembered, (<span id="vii.xv-p12.2"></span>[1Co
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span id="vii.xv-p12.2"></span>,)
what will ye? how shall I come to you? with a rod, or in the spirit of
mildness? When he gives the Corinthians the choice, whether they wish
him to come in a spirit of tenderness, or armed with a rod for their
chastisement — and why? For when they were self-satisfied with their
sins, Paul could not, according to his custom, treat them as sons, nor
deal freely with them, but he was compelled to assume, as it were,
another character, and to use pure austerity and rigor. Such, then, were
the Israelites, and hence we cannot feel surprise that God should lay
aside his pity, his promises of favor, and whatever is sweet and
pleasant to men; for they were not in a fit state to hear the paternal
voice of God, unless previously subdued; and this could not be done
without violence, because of their exceeding perverseness.

<span id="vii.xv-p13"></span>Hence we must remark, that the more
displeasing the Prophets’ embassy, the greater need they had of
excitements; because, if the grace of God only is to be set before a
people, and the hope of eternal life to be held out to them, since there
is nothing in such teaching which greatly offends them, or embitters
their feelings, hence it is easy to offer freely messages of this kind.
But when men are to be summoned, or rather dragged, to the tribunal of
God, when they are to be frightened by the fear of eternal death, when
the minister, in the armory of God, as Paul says, (<span
id="vii.xv-p13.1"></span>[2Co
10:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span
id="vii.xv-p13.1"></span>,) brings his vengeance before mankind, because
offense is thus stirred up, and this sometimes instigates men to fury,
because, they cannot bear thus to be pressed home with the word of God;
hence it is necessary that Prophets themselves should be animated, lest
they fail, or even hesitate in their duty. Now, therefore, we understand
why God speaks only of his own threats and terrors, for he mingles no
taste of pity, because, in truth, the Israelites were not capable of
profiting by any mildness, so that the Prophet would never have dared to
discharge his duty so courageously unless this threat had been added. In
other places we shall see the Prophet as God’s ambassador, for
reconciling the miserable exiles to God; for he will bring forward many
testimonies concerning the reign of Christ, and the restoration of the
Church, and will herald the mercy and pardon of God; but before he can
utter any message of grace, he must himself contend with the extreme
obstinacy of the people. Hence it is, therefore, that God only can say,
*that the impious must be admonished, that they may return from their
impiety*

<span id="vii.xv-p14"></span>It is added, *to give them life;* and this
may seem absurd, because all hope of repentance was taken away
beforehand; they are a rebellious house and a bitter one, thou wilt not
profit them. (<span id="vii.xv-p14.1"></span>[Ezek.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#008)<span id="vii.xv-p14.1"></span>.)
But it now seems that the fruit of his labor is promised, when mention
is made of the life of those who, when admonished, shall repent. But in
the first place we must remember, that some individuals always are
curable, even if the whole body of the people appears desperate. For
God, when he previously said that all the Israelites were rebellious and
intractable, referred to the body at large, but as he is accustomed to
preserve some small seed, there were a few remaining in that people who
might be converted by the Prophet’s labor. This is one point. Besides,
we must remember, even if no success from labor appears, yet it ought to
satisfy us, just as if we had succeeded better and according to our
wishes. For example, suppose our duty to be with the impious multitude,
where-ever we turn our eyes contempt of God meets us, and even such
wickedness, that we seem to lose all our pains. But yet, whilst the sin
of the people affords us only materials for despair, we ought,
nevertheless, to pursue our course, just as if the seed sown were
producing fruit. Although, therefore, Ezekiel had heard from God’s mouth
that the people would be rebellious, yet he ought to spend his labors
for God quite as much as if he either perceived or hoped for some good
result. In the meantime, what I have touched upon must be borne in mind,
namely, that God always has some seed as a remnant, although the people
as a whole may be lapsed into impiety.

<span id="vii.xv-p15"></span>It is now added, *the impious man shall die
in his impiety, but I will require his blood at thy hand.* God here
says, that he had called his servant under this condition, that he must
render an account if any one perished through his fault. This place,
although I have lately touched upon the subject, shows how dangerous an
office those sustain who are called to the duty of teaching. Nothing is
more precious to God than souls which he has created after his own
image, and of which he is both the Redeemer and Father. Since,
therefore, our souls and their salvation are so dear to God, hence we
infer, how anxiously Prophets and all pastors ought to discharge their
duties; for it is just as if God were to commit souls to their care,
under this condition of rendering an account of each. Nor is it
sufficient to admonish one and another, for unless they had endeavored
to recall all from destruction to life and salvation, we hear what God
here pronounces. Hence, also, Paul uses this expression, woe is me if I
preach not the gospel, for a necessity is laid upon me. (<span
id="vii.xv-p15.1"></span>[1Co
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)<span id="vii.xv-p15.1"></span>.)
In fine, that the Prophet may be roused to undertake his office, God
here announces that certain penalties hang over him, unless he
diligently endeavor to recall all wanderers into the way of salvation.
But, because men think that their ignorance will prove a sufficient
defense, this cavil is removed, because God says they shall perish,
although they were not admonished. This exception is added advisedly,
that men may not flatter themselves, and throw the blame upon their
pastors, if they perish in error. Although, therefore, any one has not
been admonished, yet he shall die, and although the pastor shall render
an account of his negligence, and shall spare himself while doing so,
yet he shall have no excuse before God. Now we perceive that negligence
in Prophets and pastors is allied to perfidy, when they knowingly and
willingly permit souls to perish through their own silence: meanwhile,
it is not surprising if God adjudges to death those who are not
admonished: for their conscience is a sufficient accuser, and however
they may now defend their error and ignorance, it is certain that they
perish of their own accord. Afterwards it follows —

<span id="vii.xvi"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019)<span id="vii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi-p2"></span>**19.** Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he
turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in
his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul.

<span id="vii.xvi-p3"></span>**19.** Et tu si (quod st) admonueris
impium et non fuerit conversus ab impietate sua, a via sua impia, ipse
in sua iniquitate morietur: tu vero animam tuam liberasti.

<span id="vii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="vii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet is here taught how usefully he
will lay out his labor, although he should appear to fail, for he ought
to be satisfied with this alone, that God approves his efforts.
Although, therefore, those who were to be brought back by holy
exhortations remain obstinate, yet God’s servants ought not, through
fastidiousness, to throw up their commission as if it were useless, for
they free their own souls. It has been formerly said, that a necessity
was imposed upon them, but if they are dumb dogs the destruction of
souls will be imputed to them, but when they have executed their duty
and satisfied the Almighty, ought not it to suffice them to be absolved
in his opinion? We see then, that the Prophet was animated by this
consolation, lest he should be weary of admonishing abandoned and
obstinate men, because, if they were not profited by his teaching, yet
its fruit should return to himself. That expression of Christ’s is well
known, “Into whatsoever house ye enter, salute it: if the house be
unworthy, your blessing shall return to yourselves.” (<span
id="vii.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Matt. 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)<span id="vii.xvi-p6.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.xvi-p6.2"></span>[Luke
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#006)<span id="vii.xvi-p6.2"></span>.) So
also when the Prophets anxiously desired to reclaim the wandering sheep
and to collect them within the fold, if they experienced such petulance
that their labor did not profit them, yet their usefulness shall return
to themselves. Now we understand the counsel of God in these words,
*Thou, therefore, hast freed thy soul.* Here he does not put *impiety*
only, but *impious way,* for the sake of explanation: unless any one had
rather distinguish that impiety is the interior wickedness of the heart,
but an impious way is the outward life and comprehends all actions,
which is perhaps more probable, although there is no reason to object to
add *impious way* as an explanation after the mention of impiety. Now it
follows —

<span id="vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#020)<span id="vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p2"></span>**20.** Again, When a righteous *man* doth
turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a
stumblingblock before him, he shall die: because thou hast not given him
warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteousness which he hath
done shall not be remembered; but his blood will I require at thine
hand.

<span id="vii.xvii-p3"></span>**20.** Et si justus aversus fuerit a
justitia sua, et fecerit iniquitatem, et posuero offendiculum coram
facie ejus,  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) ipse morietur; quia
non admonueris, in scelere suo morietur, et in memoriam non venient
justitiae ejus, quia (quas) fecit, sanguinem vero ejus e manu tua
requiram.

<span id="vii.xvii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xvii-p6"></span><span id="vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p7"></span>Here God adds another part of duty which
is incumbent on all Prophets. For they are first sent to bring back into
the way those who had been alienated from God, then to retain those who
are already within the flock, and to lead those onward to the goal who
have already entered upon the course. We see, therefore, that Prophets
ought to be occupied with both duties, so that they may not only recall
to their obedience to God those who wander after their own lusts, but
also confirm those who are, of their own accord, teachable already, and
encourage them to persevere, and prevent them from failing away. Hence,
after God has spoken concerning the correction of sinners who had
strayed, he now adds another member. If, says he, *the righteous man be
turned aside from his righteousness, and thou hast not admonished him,
he shall ate, and I will require his blood at thy hand* Where in effect
God signifies, that Prophets are guilty, not only if they do not exhort
those who have withdrawn from the right way to retrace their steps, but
also if they do not retain within their duty those who have already
entered upon the right course. We must then have two objects in view, to
recall those who have fallen into various errors, and to take care that
those within the fold should not fall away, but be strengthened in
perseverance. Hence it is now added, *If the righteous shall turn aside,
he indeed shall die, but his blood will I require*

<span id="vii.xvii-p8"></span>Here it may be asked, how can the just
turn aside, since there is no righteousness without the spirit of
regeneration But the seed of the Spirit is incorruptible, (<span
id="vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>[1Pe
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span id="vii.xvii-p8.1"></span>,)
nor can it ever happen that his grace is utterly extinguished; for the
Spirit, is the earnest and seal of our adoption, for God’s adoption is
without repentance, as Paul says. (<span id="vii.xvii-p8.2"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xvii-p8.2"></span>.) Hence it may seem absurd to say, *that the
just recedes and turns aside from the right way.* That passage of John
is well known — if they had been of us, they had remained with us,
(<span id="vii.xvii-p8.3"></span>[1Jo
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xvii-p8.3"></span>,)
but because they have departed, that falling away proves sufficiently
that they were never ours. But we must here mark, that *righteousness*
is here called so:, which has only the outward appearance and not the
root: for when once the spirit of regeneration begins to flourish, as I
have said, it remains perpetually. And we shall sometimes see men borne
along with a wonderful ardor of zeal for the worship of God, and to be
urged to promote his glory beyond even the very best men; indeed we
shall see this, but, says Paul, God knows those who are his own. (<span
id="vii.xvii-p8.4"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="vii.xvii-p8.4"></span>.)
Hence it is not wonderful that God under the name of righteousness here
commends virtues which deserve praise before men, even if they do not
spring from a pure fountain. Thus we see it. often happens that the
righteous are alienated, *and turn aside from the right way.* This
passage, then, ought to stir us up to seek from God continually a spirit
of perseverance, because such is our propensity to sin, that we
immediately flow in different directions like water, unless God
strengthen us. When therefore we see the righteous themselves depart
from the way, let us lea4 and become sure of the constancy of our own
faith, only let our confidence be founded on the help of the Holy Spirit
and not. in ourselves. In the meantime, we see that Christ did not
pronounce this passage in vain: Happy are those who persevere unto the
end, (<span id="vii.xvii-p8.5"></span>[Mt
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xvii-p8.5"></span>,) because many fall away in the midst of
their course, or reversing their steps, turn their backs upon God.

<span id="vii.xvii-p9"></span>Now we must carefully remark what follows,
*his righteousness shall not be remembered,* because some desire to
bargain with God, so that if for a time they enter upon the pursuit of
piety, that may be taken into account and avail in their favor. But we
hear what God pronounces, *all their righteousness shall not be
remembered in the case of backsliders* There is no encouragement to
flatter ourselves into sloth and security, when God shows that unless we
continue to the end, even the goal of our career, whatever else we
attain unto, it is useless. He says, as clearly as words will express
it, *if he shall fall away,* or recede, or turn aside *from his
righteousness and shall commit iniquity* We must mark this diligently,
because we know that the very best men often fall away; but here a
falling away is intended, where any one casts himself headlong on
impiety: hence to commit iniquity is to give oneself up entirely to
impiety; as when John says, that those who are born again of the Spirit
of God do not commit sin, (<span id="vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>[1Jo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span id="vii.xvii-p9.1"></span>,)
he means, are not addicted to sin, even if as yet they dwell among many
infirmities and failings: as also Paul says, that sin dwells in us, but
does not reign. (<span id="vii.xvii-p9.2"></span>[Ro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="vii.xvii-p9.2"></span>.)
Hence to commit sin is to give oneself up to sin. But God says, *I will
place,* or for placing, or if I shall have placed, *a stumblingblock
before his face* Punishment is here called a stumblingblock, when God
demonstrates his vengeance against apostates. Although a stumblingblock
may also be called actual admonition, as the phrase is; but because that
is too far-fetched, I receive it simply, *if the righteous shall have
turned aside: but I shall have rendered the reward which he deserved,*
he shall die, *because thou hast not admonished him:* in his
unrighteousness shall he die: thus I point it off, for interpreters seem
to me improperly to have mingled together — he shall die, and — he shall
die in his iniquity. Now that threat which we have seen is repeated,
namely, that all prophets who have deserted their office are guilty
before God, because their sloth differs little from perfidy: for God
considered them worthy of the greatest honor, since he committed souls
to them, which, as we have said, he esteems so dear and precious. But if
they reject this trust committed to them, we see that they not only act
injuriously to man, but are also ungrateful to God; and their
sluggishness is not only united with perfidy, but also with sacrilege,
because they permit Satan to snatch from God what was his own. Just as
if any watchman should desert his post and betray it to the enemy;
because when they see some wander and others desert, it is clear that
this does not arise from ignorance, as we have said, but to the snares
of Satan and lust are those exposed whom Christ has redeemed with his
blood: hence as we have said, this their treachery is without excuse.

<span id="vii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER,

<span id="vii.xviii-p2"></span>O Almighty God, grant, that as thou dost
appoint the ministers of thy doctrine, whom thou dost raise up, watchmen
over us on this condition, that they be vigilant for our safety, — grant
that we also may be attentive to their instructions, and avoid a double
destruction through our own fault, by error and obstinacy; but if we
should happen to wander, may we be wise again immediately we are blamed,
and so return into the right way, as never to desert it again, but
persevere unto the end, that we may at length enjoy that eternal
blessedness which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

<span id="vii.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Eleventh.

<span id="vii.xx"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p1"></span><span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#021)<span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p2"></span>**21.** Nevertheless, if thou warn the
righteous *man,* that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he
shall surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy
soul.

<span id="vii.xx-p3"></span>**21.** Et tu si ipsum admonueris *nempe
justum* ne peccet justus, et ipse non peccaverit, vivendo vivet, quia
admonitus fuit: tu vero animam tuam liberasti.

<span id="vii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="vii.xx-p5"></span><span id="vii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p6"></span>We saw in our last lecture that the office
of pastors is twofold, that they collect the dispersed sheep, and retain
within the fold those whom they had gathered together. For as man’s
nature is inclined to many failures, it often happens that those who
have been gathered into God’s sheepfold are dispersed hither and
thither, through their own infirmity, unless they are strengthened. For
this reason constant admonitions are necessary; and hence God asserts
that those pastors will be guilty, if though their negligence the
righteous fall away. He now pursues the same sentiment, but adds another
clause — but *if the righteous is admonished the shepherd is guiltless*
The whole meaning is this, because Ezekiel had been called to the office
of teaching, he ought to be intent in recalling into the way those who
have erred, and also in retaining others. In the meanwhile we must
observe, that those who seem to have entered on the right way are daily
subject to error, unless God retains them by his servants, and urges
them to go forward. Now it follows —

<span id="vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p2"></span>**22.** And the hand of the LORD was there
upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will
there talk with thee.

<span id="vii.xxi-p3"></span>**22.** Et fuit super me illic marius
Iehovae et dixit mihi, surge et egredere in planiciem, et illic loquar
tecum.

<span id="vii.xxi-p4"></span>**23.** Then I arose, and went forth into
the plain: and, behold, the glory of the LORD stood there, as the glory
which I saw by the river of Chebar: and I fell on my face.

<span id="vii.xxi-p5"></span>**23.** Et surrexi, et egressus sum in
planiciem: et ecce illic gloria Iehovae stetit *stans* sicuti gloria
quam conspexeram super flumen Chebar: et cecidi in faciem meam.

<span id="vii.xxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxi-p7"></span><span id="vii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p8"></span>God seems in some way to play with his
Prophet, when he sends him about, and apparently changes his plan. For
the duty of teaching was previously imposed upon the holy man, but now
he is commanded to go abroad, and afterwards God orders him to shut
himself up at home. Hence this variety seems like a change of plan, when
God first commands his servant to speak, and afterwards to be silent.
But it is by no means doubtful that, by this method, the authority of
the Prophet was confirmed, when God evidently governed his tongue,
whether for speech or silence. For although he was created a teacher,
yet he restrained himself till God should suggest what he was to say.
Afterwards he was ordered to be silent, and obeyed God; then when God
dictated words, and commanded him to go forth in public, he began to
discharge his office. Now, if he had begun to speak directly upon his
appointment, too great levity might be objected against him; but when he
showed his alacrity, and yet remained silent during God’s pleasure,
greater weight was added to his teaching.

<span id="vii.xxi-p9"></span>Now we understand to what purpose *the hand
of God was upon him* By *the hand of God* his power is understood; for
that exposition is cold, as I have before observed, which interprets the
hand of God as the prophetic office. He perceives, then, that he was
impelled by the secret virtue of God. Lastly, the hand of God is nothing
else but the agitation of the Spirit, since the Prophet felt that he was
not carried forward by human power, or by any arbitrary impulse, tie
says, therefore, *the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he said to me
arise, and go forth to the plain, that I may speak there with thee.*
Ezekiel could not but suppose that he was led forth to proclaim
immediately God’s commands to the people. But in this opinion he was
mistaken, because, as we shall see, he was brought forth into the midst
that he should immediately shut himself up at home. But before he says
this, he says *that he went forth* We see hove submissive he was
whenever God sent him. And this is worthy of notice, because unless
God’s calling please us, and our sense approve  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) it, we fly back, or at least put it off.
But the Prophet had a just excuse, according to human judgment, for
turning his back with some color of reason; for God had often addressed
him already, and as yet without fruit. But now, although he is hitherto
held in suspense, yet God does not pronounce what he wishes him to do;
yet *he goes out into the plain,* because God commanded him. We are
taught by this example, even if the result of things is hidden from us,
that as soon as God issues any command, we must obey, even if our senses
refuse, yet we ought so to obey him as to follow whenever he calls, even
if our doing it seems not only in vain, but ridiculous. But God did not
address him in vain when he appeared in his glory, for the appearance of
the glory of God ought to satisfy a holy man, although all other things
should fail. *He saw the glory of God, as it were, near the river
Chebar;* whence we gather, that. the vision was not fixed to any
definite place. God, therefore, appeared once above the bank of the
river to his servant, and then in the plain. As to his saying *he fell
on his face,* I have previously explained what he means. It must
necessarily happen that the faithful, who are impressed with a serious
fear of God, should dread his appearance. The impious, also, are
compelled to fear God, but afterwards they grow hardened, and although
they are rendered almost lifeless, the stupor which follows extinguishes
all sensation. But the fear which the faithful feel from the appearance
of God is joined with reverence. *Thus also Ezekiel fell on his face,*
so as not to rise again until the Spirit raised him up, as it follows
afterwards.

<span id="vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#024)<span id="vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p2"></span>**24.** Then the spirit entered into me,
and set me upon my feet, and spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut
thyself within thine house.

<span id="vii.xxii-p3"></span>**24.** Et venit in me spiritus, et
statuit me supra pedes meos, et locutus est mecum, et dixit mihi, Vade
occludere in medio domus tuae.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)

<span id="vii.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxii-p6"></span><span id="vii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p7"></span>Here Ezekiel confirms what I have said:
whenever the faithful are frightened at the sight of God’s glory, they
cannot collect their mind unless the Lord prop them up by his strength.
But this state was peculiar to the Prophet, because he ought to
acknowledge himself, as it were, dead when he felt the Spirit of God
living and flourishing in his mind. Therefore this tends to confirm him,
because the Spirit restored him from a state of death to life: therefore
he says, *the Spirit came* In fine, as the soul gives life to the man,
so the Spirit of God is a supernatural life in man. We live after the
manner of men, because a virtue is implanted in our soul which has
faculties of its own. For in the soul is the seat of intelligence, and
the will, and the sensations, and it diffuses its vigor through all the
members. But the life which souls breathe into bodies is only earthly,
but the Spirit of God gives life supernaturally. And this distinction
must be held, because profane men boast only in outward appearances, as
they call it — that is, in outward splendor, which is nothing else but a
mask: and so with all their might they celebrate free-will and our
natural faculties, because they have never tasted what that supernatural
life is which is here mentioned. Ezekiel indeed was filled with the
Spirit of God after a peculiar manner, that he might be fit to undertake
the prophetic office, but this is common to the faithful for their
spiritual life.

<span id="vii.xxii-p8"></span>He says next, *that he was placed upon his
feet,* because he was lying prostrate, nor could he, as I have said,
raise a finger, unless he had been raised by divine power. Afterwards he
relates the command of God, which appears to be absurd. For why did God
appoint Ezekiel a Prophet unless that he should apply himself to the
office of teaching? But now he orders him not only to rest, but even to
he concealed at home. He uses the word “concealed” as if he had said,
remain at home as a captive. If he had been a private man, he had
enjoyed a free passage out, but now since God enjoins upon him the
prophetic office, he is held captive. But all this is opposed to his
mission. But first, God wished to prove the obedience of his servant;
then he wished specially to confirm his calling more and more, for this
was no common confirmation, because although the Prophet excelled in
singular virtue, yet he did not leap into the midst, but rested at home,
and became a voluntary captive, because it so pleased God. Hence the
whole people might know that the Prophet did not proceed rashly, or by
any sudden impulse, because he was often mute by the command of God.
Afterwards it follows —

<span id="vii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#025)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p2"></span>**25.** But thou, O son of man, behold,
they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou
shalt not go out among them:

<span id="vii.xxiii-p3"></span>**25.** Et nunc, Fili hominis, ecce
posuerunt super to vincula,  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) et
ligabunt to illis,  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) ideo non
egredieris in medium ipsorum:

<span id="vii.xxiii-p6"></span>**26.** And I will make thy tongue cleave
to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to
them a reprover: for they *are* a rebellious house.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p7"></span>**26.** Et linguam tuam adhaerere faciam
palato tuo, et obmutesces, et non eris illis in virum coarguentem  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) quia domus rebellionis  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) sunt.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxiii-p11"></span><span id="vii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p12"></span>Now God explains the reason why he
wishes the Prophet to cease for a time, and to remain at home as if
dumb. *They have placed,* said he, *ropes upon thee with which they may
bind thee.* The opinion of those who take the passage metaphorically is
not unsuitable, as if it had been said, the perverseness of the people
hinders Ezekiel in the discharge of his duty, just as if he had been
bound with ropes.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p13"></span>To make this clearer, we may call to
mind what Paul says to the Corinthians, (<span
id="vii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>[2Co
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>,) namely, that he was held in bondage,
because his teaching could not find access to them, nor penetrate to
their souls. “Our mouth,” says he, “is open towards you, O Corinthians!
Our heart is enlarged towards you:” that is, as far as lieth in me, I am
prepared faithfully to spend my labors upon you: but your bowels are
straitened. Since therefore men, by their own depravity, hinder the
course of doctrine, by reducing the servants of God to straits, it is
quite consistent to represent the malice of those who are not teachable
to be like ropes by which faithful teachers are bound, so that they
cannot proceed freely in the course of their duty. If any one, however,
prefers taking what is here said strictly and literally, the sentence
must thus be understood, that the Israelites were not as yet prepared
for instruction, because if the Prophet shall utter God’s commands
immediately, they would be like the furious who would lay hands upon him
and bind him with ropes. This sense also is very appropriate, and hence
we may choose freely between them. But as to the general purport, God’s
intention is by no means obscure, namely, that the Prophet ought not to
take it ill, if he be for a time apparently useless without obtaining
either hearers or fit disciples. We see then that this is said for the
Prophet’s comfort, that he should not murmur or take it ill that God
wishes him ‘to remain shut up at home; because the fit time had not yet
come, as if it had been said — “If you hasten now, you will approach
furious men who will by and bye rush against you and bind you with
ropes. Because, therefore, you see them not yet prepared for learning,
wait a while until I prepare their ears for you, that they may attend to
you; or at least, that they may be rendered the more excuseless, I will
send thee; and meanwhile, although they are as yet perverse, yet they
cannot rise violently against thee, but whether they will or not, they
shall be compelled to hear the commands which proceed from my mouth.”
And he afterwards confirms this at length, as we shall see.

<span id="vii.xxiii-p14"></span><span id="vii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p15"></span>But he now adds, *I will fix thy tongue
to thy palate* — or I will make thy tongue adhere to thy palate — *so
that thou shalt not be to them a reprover, because they are a rebellious
house* What God ascribed to the Israelites he now transfers to himself.
He had said, *They will bind thee with ropes:* he now says, *I will make
thy tongue cleave to thy palate* But these two things are easily
reconciled, because in truth the Israelites rejected prophecies through
their intemperance, and God thus deprived them of this benefit, because
he saw they were unworthy of it. But this place shows that it is a sign
of God’s vengeance, when all prophecies cease, and opportunity for
hearing is taken away. For as God shines upon us by his instruction, and
we have thereby a certain pledge of his fatherly grace and favor, so
also when instruction is removed, it is just as if God hid his face,
nay, even turned his back upon us. We must consider, therefore, what is
here said — *because the house of Israel was rebellious:* hence the
Prophet was dumb, and refrained from teaching those impious ones. God
therefore desists, when he sees that he is dealing with the stupid and
deaf; but. not on the first occasion of their wearying him, because he
rather contends with man’s ingratitude, and never ceases, as we see in
Jeremiah, to rise in the morning, and to keep watch even while it is yet
night; (<span id="vii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>[Jer
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.xxiii-p15.2"></span>[Jer
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p15.2"></span>; <span id="vii.xxiii-p15.3"></span>[Jer
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p15.3"></span>; <span id="vii.xxiii-p15.4"></span>[Ps
74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxiii-p15.4"></span>;) he never ceases to call to himself even
those who are slow and sluggish, nay, even the utterly rebellious: but
at length, when he sees that he does not succeed by long-suffering, he
takes away his instruction, as we have said. And therefore the Church
complains that it is destitute of Prophets, and places that slaughter
among the extreme signs of God’s anger: “We do not see our signs, and
Prophets do not appear among *us*.” In this way they understand that
they are alienated from God, and that no consolation remains to them,
when God does not give them any taste of his goodness by Prophets. The
ungodly indeed wish this, because nothing is more troublesome to them
than to hear God continually exclaiming. Hence, as far as they can, they
seek hiding-places, and think nothing better for themselves than to be
torpid amidst their vices, and to be deaf to every voice of reproach;
but yet nothing is more destructive to them, because God offers himself
as a physician who cures our diseases, while he exhorts us to wisdom.
But when he is silent, he deserts us as if abandoned to de-st, ruction,
and hence I said that nothing is more destructive than when no reproach
sounds in our ears, but we are sweetly flattered, because in this way
Satan deprives us of our senses, and this is his final poisoning, when
he so soothes us with his blandishments, that all reproach which may
alarm our security altogether ceases. Now it follows: —

<span id="vii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#027)<span id="vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p2"></span>**27.** But when I speak with thee, I will
open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
He that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear:
for they *are a* rebellious house.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p3"></span>**27.** Et quum locutus fuero, et aperuero
os tuum:  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) tunc dices ad eos, sic
dicit Dominator Iehovah: qui audit audiat: et qui desistit desistat:
quia domus rebellionis sunt.

<span id="vii.xxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="vii.xxiv-p6"></span><span id="vii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p7"></span>After a silence, God shows by what
commands he wishes to instruct his servant, namely, by such as would
exasperate the people, as we have formerly seen. His embassy therefore
was hateful, since the Prophet begins with this insult — “If ye wish to
hear, hear; but if not, I am not concerned.” Those who are sent as
ambassadors are usually ordered to try whether they can conciliate, by
courteous and friendly discourse, those with whom they have to deal. But
God here follows a method completely the contrary. For what is the
meaning of these words, *He who hears, let him hear: he who desists, let
him, desist?* namely, that the Israelites may understand that the
Prophet was sent to them, not because there was any hope of their
becoming wise again, since they had borne witness by experiments
sufficiently numerous that they were altogether desperate: but the Lord
sends the Prophet, that he may strike and wound them further, and at
length inflict a deadly blow. Now, therefore, we see that confirmed
which the Prophet previously brought forward, that the office of
teaching was enjoined upon him, not because his labor would be useful
and fruitful with reference to the common people, but that he might
inflame the Israelites to madness, if they were unwilling to grow wise
again, that he might break them if they would not bend, and if they
rejected him, that he should accuse them before God, who would be their
judge, and in the meanwhile the course of Prophetic teaching would be
free, however pertinaciously they might resist it. Now we understand the
intention of the Prophet. Hence also we collect what I have lately
touched upon: that God deals with the reprobate in various ways.
Sometimes he makes it doubtful whether they be curable, and destines
Prophets for them, who should exhort them to repentance. But when he
sees them in their ingratitude burying all the light, then he deprives
them of all doctrine; afterwards it shines forth again: at length other
and denser darkness succeeds: therefore let us hasten, as long as the
doctrine of salvation shines upon us, lest God darken all our minds and
senses, and deprive us of that singular benefit, when the image of his
paternal favor is engraven on us, as we have said. Let us go on —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc22006.htm#fr_65) <span
id="vii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii-p4"></span> “Thou shalt fill.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc22006.htm#fr_66) <span
id="vii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p6"></span> That is, “profound in speech:” it is a
collective noun, hence the number is changed: literally. “to a people
profound in Up.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc22006.htm#fr_67) <span
id="vii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p9"></span> That is. “whose language thou writ not
understand. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc22006.htm#fr_68) <span
id="vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p12"></span> The copula here is taken adversatively —
*“*but are unwilling to hear thee.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc22006.htm#fr_69) <span
id="vii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iv-p6"></span> <span id="vii.iv-p6.1"></span>מרו-המה
*meri-hemeh,* a word which we have formerly discussed. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc22006.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.v-p6"></span> That is, to the captives. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc22006.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ix-p4"></span> Jerome rightly shows us that it is repeated
— <span id="vii.ix-p4.1"></span>ἀπὸ τοῦκοινου “Therefore I heard a
voice.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc22006.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span> That is, to the captives. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc22006.htm#fr_73) <span
id="vii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span> Literally, the passing over of those
sitting — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc22006.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span> Or, desolate — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc22006.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p4"></span> That is, “after seven days.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc22006.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p5"></span> Happened or occurred, for the same word is
variously repeated. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc22006.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xii-p8"></span> Or. appointed. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc22006.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xvii-p4"></span> Or, “and then I shall put a
stumblingblock before his face.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc22006.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vii.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxi-p10"></span> Calvin’s Latin — “<span
id="vii.xxi-p10.1"></span>Quia nisi nobis arrideat Dei vocatio, et
sensus noster subscribat.” The French is — <span
id="vii.xxi-p10.2"></span>Pource que si la vocation de Dieu ne nons
vient a gre, et que nostre sens l’approuve.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc22006.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxii-p4"></span> That is, “within thy house.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc22006.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p4"></span> <span
id="vii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>עבותים*, gnebuthim, “ropes,”* “twisted and
perplexed *ropes.”* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc22006.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p5"></span> That is, “with which they bind *thee.”*
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc22006.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p8"></span> “One who reproves;” — “<span
id="vii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>Qui les repreuve;” — *Fr*. “<span
id="vii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>*vel* *Corripientem.”* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc22006.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vii.xxiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiii-p9"></span> Or, “of bitterness.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc22006.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxiv-p4"></span> Thus I interpret it: verbally *“I* will
open thy *mouth,”* but I read in one context — “when I shall have spoken
to thee, and shall have opened thy mouth.” — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc22007)
