[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22002)  [Next](cc22004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHARLES DE JONVILLER,

<span id="iv-p2"></span>TO ALL TRULY CHRISTIAN READERS. HEALTH.

<span id="iv-p3"></span>Although our most accomplished and faithful
Pastor Theodore Beza, with his singular dexterity and happy tact, seems
not to have omitted anything in his Dedication of these Lectures to that
most noble hero, and most pious Admiral or Francs, yet those who
attentively peruse my remarks, and look upon them with a candid mind,
will not judge my few observations superfluous; but I trust they will
admit them to be rather grateful and useful to all the pious. And, first
of all, no words can sufficiently express how severe a loss The Church
Of God has suffered, in the summons from this life to eternal rest,
which that illustrious and really divine man, our parent, John Calvin,
has received; whether you look at the perpetual consistency of his life,
or at his remarkable learning, combined with his exalted piety. For who
ever surpassed him in sanctity of morals, in incredible suavity, in
unbroken magnanimity, in singular tolerance, nay even in the highest
virtues? And as to his wonderful erudition, his multitudinous Writings
plainly bear witness to it; some of these being already published, and
the rest, with God’s permission, will shortly see the light, to the
manifest advantage of the pious. For many of his productions are extant,
either as extracted from his discourses or preserved by his friends, as
those Letters, in both French and Latin, sent to all classes of men,
from which it is very evident with what an acute and happy wit he was
endued, and with what a clear and sound judgment he was gifted. But I
will here say no more on this subject, lest I should seem to dwell upon
what is out of place. It will be enough just to touch on a few things
which belong especially to these Lectures.

<span id="iv-p4"></span>On the 20th of January 1563, when John Calvin
began to interpret Ezekiel, in the Public School, although he was
continually afflicted by various severe diseases, so that he was often
carried to his duties in a chair or on horseback, in consequence of the
weakness of his declining health; neither during the whole year did the
violence of his maladies prevent his discharging the duty of preaching
and reading. At length, about the first of February in the following
year, he had advanced as far as the end of the twentieth chapter, with
the exception of four verses, and then he was compelled to remain at
home, and to confine himself almost always to his bed. In the meantime,
during his illness, he was continually meditating, or dictating, or even
writing something: so that during the time of his confinement to the
house, through ill health, it is scarcely credible how much he
accomplished. Among other things, he yew diligently revised the greater
part of these Lectures, as is evident by the copy corrected with his own
hand, which I have carefully preserved with the rest.

<span id="iv-p5"></span>But we must all regret, most sincerely, that as
he was most skillful in explaining the teaching of the Prophets, he was
prevented by death from completing his Comments On Ezekiel; for no pious
man is ignorant that the following portion of this Prophet’s writings is
very necessary to the Church of God. How desirable, then, that they
should have been illustrated by such a man! That this loss may be in
some degree remedied, in deference to the wishes of some persons of
great weight and learning, that it would be more satisfactory to publish
these Lectures at once, than to suppress them any longer, since they
will prove so useful to all the pious, my beloved brother, John Buds,
and myself, have willingly undertaken the duty, relying on their
judgment. We have spared neither expense, nor trouble, nor labor, in
publishing the Lectures as soon as possible; and, God willing, we will
shortly take care to translate them into French, for the benefit of our
people, as our French Version of the Lectures On Jeremiah, put to press
nine months ago, is now just finished; so that, unless I am mistaken,
our people, who do not understand Latin, will reap great profit. And
that nothing should be omitted in this Latin edition, we have taken care
that whatever *errata* had occurred in printing, they are noticed at the
end. And since in this book a very great treasure is included, a very
copious Index has been compiled by a learned man, through whose guidance
its inexhaustible riches may be readily obtained, without any trouble.
Another Index is added, of those places of Scripture which are quoted
and explained.

<span id="iv-p6"></span>In editing these last Lectures, we have used the
same industry, diligence, and fidelity, which we exercised in the others
already published. There is no necessity for my explaining more at
length what I have previously made known with sufficient clearness, as
to the manner in which we have retained what are received from Calvin’s
extemporary pronunciation.

<span id="iv-p7"></span>It remains, therefore, most excellent Readers,
that you now enjoy the labors of so great a man, and acknowledge
whatever fruit you receive as springing from the Great and Good God, and
that to Him you render cordially immortal thanks. You will yourselves
judge better and more surely the profit which you receive from their
perusal, than I could express in many words. Farewell, then, and may it
always be appointed that your studies may all tend to the glory of God.

<span id="iv-p8"></span>\[CHARLES DE JONVILLER.\]  
GENEVA, January 18th, 1565.  
(August 1st, 1565. The date of the French Translation.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc22004)
