[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc22007)  [Next](cc22009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp
knife, take thee a barber’s razor, and cause *it* to pass upon thine
head and upon thy beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide
the *hair*

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et tu, fili hominis, sume tibi gladium
acutum, novaculum tonsorum, sume eum tibi, et transire fac,  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) super caput tuum, et super barbam
tuam: et sume tibi stateram ponderis,  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) et divide illa.  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md)

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**2.** Thou shalt burn with fire a third part
in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and
thou shalt take a third part, *and* smite about it with a knife: and a
third part thou shalt scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword
after them.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**2.** Tertiam partem igne combures in medio
urbis, ut completi fuerint dies  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md)
obsidionis: sumes tertiam partem, percuties gladio per circuitum ejus,
tertiam vero partem sparges in ventum: et gladium evaginabo post eos.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**3.** Thou shalt also take thereof a few in
number, and bind them in thy skirts.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**3.** Et sumes inde exiguum in numero, et
ligabis illa  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) in alis tuis.
 <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md)

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>**4.** Then take of them again, and cast them
into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; *for* thereof
shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>**4.** Et ex illis adhuc sumes, et projicies
illa in medium ignis mittes et combures illa igne, unde egredetur ignis
in totum domum Israel.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span><span id="ix.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>By another vision God confirms what he had
lately taught concerning the siege of Jerusalem. For he orders the
Prophet to shave the hairs off his head and his beard, then to
distribute them into three parts, and to weigh them in a balance. He
mentions a just balance, that equity may be preserved, and that one
portion may not surpass another. There is no doubt that by the hairs he
understands the inhabitants of Jerusalem, as by the head he understands
the seat itself of their dwelling-place. Then the application will
follow; but this I shall pass by today, because I cannot proceed
farther. It is sufficient to hold briefly, that men are here designated
by hairs, for hair can scarcely be counted, indeed that of the beard is
countless; such was the multitude at Jerusalem, for we know that the
city was very populous. We know, again, that it took occasion for pride
from this; when they saw that they were strong in the multitude of their
people, they thought themselves equal, if not superior, to all enemies,
and hence their foolish confidence, which destroyed them. God then
commanded the Prophet to shave off all the hairs of his head and of his
beard. Thus he taught that not even one man should escape the slaughter,
because he says, *make the sword pass,* or pass it, *over thy head, then
over thy chin,* so that nothing may remain. We see, then, how far the
passing of the razor is to go — until no hair remains entire on either
the head or beard. Whence it follows, that God will take vengeance on
the whole nation, so that not one of them shall survive. As to his
ordering *three parts to be weighed,* and a proportion to be kept
between them, in this way he signifies what we have often seen in
Jeremiah, (<span id="ix.i-p18.1"></span>[Jer
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p18.1"></span>.md) —
Whosoever shall have escaped the sword shall perish by famine, and
whosoever shall escape the famine shall perish by some other means. But
here God explains at length the manner in which he was about to destroy
all the Jews, although they were distributed into various ranks. For
their condition might seem different when some had been put to flight,
and others had betaken themselves to Egypt. But in this variety God
shows that it detracts nothing from his power or intention of destroying
them to a man.

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>Let us come to the words *make a razor pass
over thy head and over, thy beard;* and then *take scales* <span
id="ix.i-p19.1"></span>מאזנים, *maznim,* is properly called a balance on
account of its two ears. *Take,* therefore, *a balance,* or *scales for
weighing,* and divide *the hair.* What this division means I have
already explained, because all the Jews were not consumed by the same
punishment,, and therefore those who had escaped one kind of destruction
boasted that they were safe. Hence they were enraged against God. But
this foolish confidence is taken away, when the Prophet is ordered to
divide the hair extracted from his head and beard, *Divide them,* he
says; afterwards he adds, *a third part.* As to God’s distributing the
people into three parts, it is not done without the best reason for it;
for a part was consumed by famine and distress before the city was
taken. But because God marks all miseries *by fire,* therefore he orders
a third part to be cast into the fire, and consumed there. Now because
there were two parts remaining, every one promised himself life; for he
who escapes present death thinks himself free from all danger, and hence
confidence is increased; for we too often think ourselves safe when we
have overcome one kind of death. For this reason, therefore, it is
added, *after thou hast burnt a third part in the fire,* he says, *take
a third part and strike it with the sword* Besides, he orders a third
part to be burnt in the midst of the city. Ezekiel was then in Chaldea,
and not near the city; but we said that all this took place by a
prophetic vision. What is here said answers to the wrath of God, because
before the siege of the city, a third part was consumed by pestilence,
and famine, and distress, and other evils and slaughters; and all these
miseries are here denoted *by fire.* For after the city had been taken,
God orders a third part to be struck with the sword. We know this to
have been fulfilled when the king with all his company was seized, as he
was flying over the plain of Jericho, (<span id="ix.i-p19.2"></span>[2Ki
25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#000)<span id="ix.i-p19.2"></span>.md) when
meeting with the hostile army; because very many were killed there, the
king himself was carried off, his sons murdered in his sight, while his
eyes were put out, and he was dragged to Babylon bound in chains. Hence
this is the third part, which *he commanded the Prophet to strike with
the sword,* because that slaughter represented the slaughter of the
city.

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>Now it is added, *that he should take a third
part and cast it to the wind:* then follows the threat, *I will
unsheathe my sword after them* Here it is spoken as well of the
fugitives who had gone into various countries, as of the poor, who being
dispersed after the slaughter of the city, protracted their life but a
short time. For we know that some lay hid in the land of Moab, others in
that of Ammon, more in Egypt, and that others fled to various
hiding-places. This dispersion was as if any one should cast the
shorn-off hairs to the wind. But God pronounces that their flight and
dispersion would not profit them, because he will draw his sword against
them and follow them up to the very last. We see therefore, although at
first sight the citizens of Jerusalem differ, as if they were divided
into three classes, yet the wrath of God hangs over all, and destroys
the whole multitude.

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span><span id="ix.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span>It is now added: *Thou shalt take then a
small number, and bind them,* (that is, that number, but the number is
changed,) viz., *those hairs of which the number is small in the skirts
of thy clothing* It either takes away the confidence which might spring
up from a temporary escape, or else it signifies that very few should be
safe in the midst of the destruction of the whole people, which came to
pass wonderfully. If that is received, the correction is added, that God
would give some hope of favor because the people was consumed, yet so
that the covenant of God might remain. Hence it was necessary that some
relics should be preserved, and they had been reduced like Sodom, unless
God had kept for himself a small seed. (<span
id="ix.i-p22.1"></span>[Isa 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md)<span
id="ix.i-p22.1"></span>; <span id="ix.i-p22.2"></span>[Ro
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span id="ix.i-p22.2"></span>..md)
Therefore in this sense the Prophet is ordered to bind and to hide in
the skirts of his garment, some part of the hair. Moreover, that part is
understood only in the third order, because those who had escaped
thought that they had obtained safety by flight, especially when they
collected themselves in troops. Afterwards it follows, *thou shalt then
take from these, and throw it into the midst of the fire, and burn it in
the fire* Out of these few hairs God wishes another part to be burnt and
consumed; by which words he signifies, even where only a small portion
remains, yet it must be consumed in like manner, or at least that many
out of these few will be rejected. And indeed those who seemed to have
happily escaped and to have survived safely, were soon after cut off by
various slaughters, or pined away by degrees as if they had perished by
a slow contagion. But since it pleased him to remember his promise, we
gather that a few of the people survived through God’s wonderful mercy:
for because he was mindful of his covenant, he wished some part to be
preserved, and therefore that correction was interposed, that the
Prophet should bind under his skirts a small number. Yet from that
remnant, God again snatched away another part, and cast it into the
fire. If the filth of the remainder was such, that it was necessary to
purge it, and cast part of it into the fire, what must be thought of the
whole people, that is, of the dregs themselves? For the portion which
the Prophet bound in his skirts was clearly the flower of the people: if
there was any integrity, it ought to be seen there.

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span><span id="ix.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span>We just saw that there were many reprobate in
that small number. Hence, therefore, it is easily gathered how desperate
was the impiety of the whole people. *After this, he* says, *take:* this
adverb is used that those who survived after the slaughter of the city
should not think that all their punishments were over: *after this,*
says he, that is, when they shall fancy all their difficulties over,
*thou shalt take from that part which thou hast preserved, and shalt
cast it into the fire. Thence,* he says, a *fire shall go forth through
the whole house of Israel* He signifies by these words, as we have seen
before, that the vision was not illusory, just as many fictitious things
are represented in a theater. Hence God says, what he shows by vision to
his servant would happen, as the event itself at length proved. But he
goes further *that the whole house of Israel shall burn in this
burning,* because indeed the last destruction of the city brought
despair to the miserable, exiles, who, while the city was standing,
promised themselves a return. But when they saw such utter destruction
of the city, they were consumed just as if fire from Judea had crept
even to themselves. In the meantime the remnant are always excepted whom
the Lord wonderfully preserved, although he was in a vision destroying
the whole people. We now see the tendency of this vision. I will not
proceed further, because I should be compelled to desist, and so the
doctrine would be abrupt. It is sufficient therefore to hold, although
the people was divided into many parts so that the condition of each was
distinct, yet that all should perish, since God so determined. Hence the
confidence of those who thought they would be safe at Jerusalem was
broken: then the ten tribes, which were captives, ought also to
acknowledge that the last vengeance of God was not *complete,* until the
city itself, the seat of government and the priesthood was destroyed.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast
proclaimed such a proof of thy fierce anger against thine ancient
people, that we may this day learn wisdom from the suffering of others,
and may so subject ourselves obediently to thee, that thou mayest
receive us into favor, and show thyself so propitious to us, that by thy
pardon we may be restored from death to life, until we enjoy that
eternal blessedness which is provided for us by thine only-begotten Son
our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span>Lecture fourteen.

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**5.** Thus saith the Lord GOD; This *is*
Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries *that
are* round about her.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Sic dicit Dominator Iehoyah, Haec est
Hierusalem, in medio gentium, posui eam, et in circuitu ejus terras.

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span>**6.** And she hath changed my judgments into
wickedness more than the nations, and my statutes more than the
countries that *are* round about her: for they have refused my judgments
and my statutes, they have not walked in them.

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**6.** Et mutavit judicia mea ad impietatem
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) prae cunctis gentibus: et
statuta mea  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) prae terris quae in
circuitu ejus: judicia mea spreverunt et in statutis meis non
ambulaverunt.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span><span id="ix.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>Now God shows the reason why he determined
to act so severely and harshly towards that holy city which he had
selected as the royal residence. For the greater the benefits with which
he had adorned the city, by so much the baser and grosser was their
ingratitude. God recounts, therefore, his benefits towards Jerusalem,
and that for the sake of reproving it. For if the Jews had embraced the
blessing of God, doubtless he would have enriched them more and more
with his gifts: but when he saw that they rejected his favors, he was
the more angry with their indignity. For contempt of God’s benefits is a
kind of profanation and sacrilege. Now, therefore, we understand the
intention of the Holy Spirit when he says, that Jerusalem was placed as
it were on a lofty platform, that its dignity might be conspicuous on
all sides. This is not said in praise of Jerusalem, but rather to its
greatest disgrace, because whatever the Lord had conferred upon it ought
to be taken into account, since they had so unworthily corrupted
themselves and had polluted God’s glory as it were on purpose. As to its
being said, *that Jerusalem was in the midst of the nations,*(<span
id="ix.iv-p10.1"></span>[Ps 74:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012.md)<span
id="ix.iv-p10.1"></span>,) I do not take this so precisely as Jerome and
most others. For they fancy that Jerusalem was the center of the earth,
and he twists other places also into this sense: where God is said to
have worked salvation to the midst of the earth, he explains it the very
middle, as they say. But that is in my judgment puerile, because the
Prophet simply means that Jerusalem was placed in the most celebrated
part of the world: it had on all sides the most noble nations and very
rich, as is well known, and was not far distant from the Mediterranean
Sea: on one side it was opposite to Asia Minor: then it had Egypt for a
neighbor, and Babylon on the north. This is the genuine sense of the
Prophet, that Jerusalem was endued with remarkable nobility among other
nations, as if God had placed it in the highest rank. There is no city
which has not nations and lands round it, but God here names *lands and
nations par excellence,* not any whatsoever, but those only which
excelled in fruitfulness, in opulence, and all advantages. And the
demonstrative pronoun is emphatic when he says, This *is Jerusalem:* for
he extols the city with magnificent praises, that its ingratitude may
appear the greater — hence *it was placed in the midst of the nations
and of countries round about it:* because it was surrounded by many
opulent regions, and there the grace of God was chiefly displayed, as if
it were the most beautiful part of a theater, which attracted all eyes
towards it, and moved all minds to admiration.

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span><span id="ix.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span>He now adds, *My judgments are changed*
concerning the word <span id="ix.iv-p12.1"></span>מרה, *mereh*, I said
that it signifies sometimes to change, but oftener to transgress or to
reject, and there the sense suits very well, because the Jews were
rebellious against the judgments of God even to impiety. But he enlarges
upon their wickedness when he says, my *statutes have been despised*
since they so addicted themselves to impiety. For if there had been any
pretext of virtue, their fault might have been extenuated, but when they
cast themselves into gross impiety, and thus despise God’s commandments,
this is inexcusable. Let us learn from this passage, that unless we use
God’s blessings with purity the charge of ingratitude will always lie
against us: for whatever God bestows upon us, he sanctifies as well to
our salvation as to the glory of his name. We are then sacrilegious when
we corrupt those things which were destined for his glory; then are we
utterly perverse when we convert to our destruction what God has
appointed for our salvation. Now we must consider the ingratitude of
Jerusalem as flagrant, *because they rejected the commandments of God.*
When therefore God deposits among us the treasure of celestial doctrine,
we must diligently take care that we do not turn aside to impiety,
because there is no excuse for error when once we have been taught what
is right, and that from the mouth of God himself. Then he declares the
same sentiment in other words, and says, *beyond all nations and all
lands which were round about;* by which sentence he signifies that the
Jews; were worse than all the rest, because knowingly and willingly they
had shaken off God’s yoke. Other nations had not conducted themselves
better, for we know that the worship of God was then everywhere
vitiated: but the impiety of the elect people was fouler, for they
turned light into darkness, while the Gentiles wandered in darkness for
they were blind, but the conduct of this people was different whom God
had familiarly instructed. Since therefore the teaching of the law was
conspicuous among the Jews, the Prophet deservedly says, *that they were
impious beyond all nations and countries* Then he explains how they had
either changed the judgment of God, or were themselves rebellious,
*because they had despised,* says he, my *judgments, and had not walked
in my statutes* First, he says, they had not fallen through ignorance
but through pride and contempt; for when the will of God is made known
to us, there is no place for ignorance. *We* do not sin lightly
therefore, but our minds are necessarily infected with pride and
contempt of God. Now he adds, *that they did not walk in his precepts,*
by which words he signifies that the contempt just mentioned appeared
openly, because in truth the fruit showed itself in their whole life. It
follows —

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span><span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>**7.** Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Because ye multiplied more than the nations that *are* round about you,
*and* have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments,
neither have done according to the judgments of the nations that *are*
round about you;

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span>**7.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator Iehovah
propter multiplicare vestrum  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md)
prae cunctis gentibus, quae in circuitu vestro sunt, ut in statutis meis
non ambularetis, et judicia mea non faceretis, et secundum judicia
gentium, quae in circuitu vestro sunt non faceretis

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>**8.** Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Behold, I, even I, *am* against thee, and will execute judgments in the
midst of thee in the sight of the nations.

<span id="ix.v-p6"></span>**8.** Propterea sic dicit Dominator Iehovah,
Ecce ego contra *to,* etiam ego: et faciam in medio tui judicia coram
oculis gentium.

<span id="ix.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.v-p8"></span><span id="ix.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p9"></span>This verse is variously expounded on account
of the word <span id="ix.v-p9.1"></span>המנכם*, hemenekem:* for some
read it jointly in one context, as if through being multiplied they did
not worship God; as if he meant that they were luxurious through their
opulence, as horses are restive through too much food and fatness. That
passage of Moses has been marked: Israel, when highly fed, kicked;
therefore they think that this place is like it, and so they combine it
together: because thou hast been multiplied beyond. all Gentiles which
were around thee, thou hast despised my judgments, for thou hast become
blind and drunken by prosperity. (<span id="ix.v-p9.2"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="ix.v-p9.2"></span>..md)
But I do not approve of this sense, for it is clearly too forced. Others
derive it from <span id="ix.v-p9.3"></span>המה, *hemeh,* which signifies
to be agitated or disturbed, and elicit this sense, because *ye* are
tumultuous beyond all nations — -that is, because your lasciviousness
and *licentiousness* surpass that of all people, whilst your eagerness
has drawn you on as it were without a bridle. But I fear that
explanation is far-fetched, and so I take it simply for to be
multiplied, or multiplication; for *machor* may be either a noun or a
verb, but in the same sense. At the same time, I do not refer this to
the number and multitude of the people, nor even to the abundance of
goods, as the majority do; for they say that the number of persons was
multiplied, which does not suit the sense; if it be referred to wealth,
it is indeed true that God had acted liberally towards that city, but I
take it actively, that *they have multiplied beyond all nations:* and
Jerome, in my opinion, has not rendered it badly by translating,
*“because* ye have surpassed the nations,” yet he has departed from the
proper sense of the word: so it will be better to retain the verb
“multiply” or the noun “multiplication,” yet actively, because they had
wantoned intemperately in their superstitions, so that they surpassed
all nations in evil doing. *On account then of your multiplying,* or on
account of your multiplication beyond all nations, that is, because ye
were not content with moderate impiety, but heaped together all kinds of
wickedness, so that your impiety has arrived at the highest pitch whence
a curse follows it: but before he comes to that he confirms what he had
said before, namely, *because they had not walked in his statutes, and
had not kept his judgments* This, therefore, is the meaning of *to
multiply,* because when the law was delivered to them they despised it,
and imitated the wickedness of the nations and the countries around
them. These sentences then agree, because beyond all the nations they
had been rebellious in impiety against God, and then because they had
multiplied beyond all nations and countries. Again the reason is to be
observed, *because they did not walk in God’s statutes* For the Gentiles
held no course, hence it is not surprising that they wandered in their
own oblique direction. But a way had been shown to the Jews: the
language of Moses was not in vain. (<span id="ix.v-p9.4"></span>[De
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)<span id="ix.v-p9.4"></span>..md) I
call heaven and earth to witness that I have set before you life and
death: choose ye therefore life. Since then God had thus laid down the
doctrine of salvation for the Jews, he was the more indignant at their
insolence and baseness in not walking according to his statutes. Life
then had been set before them, as Moses says; it remained for them to
walk therein, which the Gentiles could not do.

<span id="ix.v-p10"></span>Now he adds, *and according to the judgments
of the Gentiles which are round about you* Here the Prophet seems to
blame what otherwise and in many places is praised. For the Jews ought
to be separate from the Gentiles, so that they might worship God in
purity, and the Prophets often expostulate with them because they
followed the judgments or statutes of the Gentiles. On these words I
have said nothing, because they occur often, and it has been already
shown in many places why God calls his judgments laws. Some distinguish
between judgments and statutes, because judgments belong to mortals, and
statutes to ceremonies. But this distinction is not everywhere observed.
But God, in very many places, commends the precepts of his law, since he
shows that nothing necessary to a complete system of teaching was
omitted. But. this name is sometimes transferred to perverse rites and
vicious superstitions, so that to walk in the judgments of the Gentiles,
is to corrupt oneself with their perverse morals. As I have said
already, the Jews were often condemned by the Prophets because they gave
themselves up to the corruptions of the Gentiles.

<span id="ix.v-p11"></span>Here, therefore, the Prophet says, *that they
had not done according to the judgments of the Gentiles* But he
understands that in this particular, also, they had surpassed the
madness of the Gentiles, because they had not embraced the law of God so
as to remain constantly in obedience to it. For we saw in the second
chapter of Jeremiah, (<span id="ix.v-p11.1"></span>[Jer.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011)<span id="ix.v-p11.1"></span>,.md)
that the Gentiles were obstinate in their madness. Although that was not
praiseworthy, yet God deservedly blames his people because they held him
in less honor than the Gentiles did their idols. For we know how
obstinately the nations were fixed in their superstitions, for they did
not change their religion except by some violent impulse, just as if
heaven and earth were shaken together. Since, therefore, the religion of
each was firm and fixed, God accuses the Jews of trifling deservedly,
because they inclined towards the errors and madness of the heathen.
This, therefore, is Ezekiel’s meaning when he says, *the Jews had not
done according to the statutes of the Gentiles:* as if he had said, they
should have looked at the Gentiles, and as they saw them obstinately
worshipping idols, so they should have persisted in my law and in pure
worship. But while the obstinacy of the Gentiles was so great that they
could not be torn away from their own superstition, my people, says he,
have perfidiously declined from me and my law by rash impulse, and
without necessity for it. Now, therefore, we perceive why the Prophet
adds this to their crimes, that the people had not walked after the
judgments or manners of the Gentiles. Hence they might have perceived,
that what men had once embraced they ought not lightly to have thrown
away, because when we are suddenly and easily turned aside in the matter
of the worship of God, it is certain that we have never put forth living
roots. Since, then, the Gentiles instructed the Jews in their duty,
their crime became more detestable.

<span id="ix.v-p12"></span><span id="ix.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p13"></span>Now follows the threat, that God was prepared
to take vengeance. *Behold, I, even, I, am against you* The particle
<span id="ix.v-p13.1"></span>גם*, gam, “even,”* is used as we in French
say, *yea, even: I,* even I. We now see that the repetition is emphatic,
as if God asserted a horrible destruction to be hanging over the Jews.
For he wishes to inspire them with fear, since he assures them that he
will prove an avenger. Though I do not receive Jerome’s comment, for he
says, that angels and other ministers of God’s wrath are excluded,
because God determined to destroy the Jews by himself. This we know to
be false, for he made use of the Assyrians and Chaldeans. Since then
those people were his scourges, it follows, that angels and men are not
excluded when God pronounces himself an avenger. But he increases the
weight of the punishment when he says, *I, even I, am he with whom thou
shalt have to do* Now he adds, *I will execute judgments,* by which word
jurisdiction, as they call it, is intended. What Jerome and those
interpreters who follow him affirm is not correct, that by this name
God’s justice is asserted, as if he meant, that he would not be cruel in
exacting punishment, nor yet unjust nor too rigid. For to execute
judgment means merely to exercise jurisdiction, and an earthly judge is
said to exercise justice when he sits on his tribunal, even if he
perverts justice and equity. This, indeed, cannot be the case with God,
although the word allows of it. Besides, there is a suitable antithesis
between the doctrinal judgments and the actual ones; God complained that
the Jews did not execute his judgments: now he threatens that he himself
would execute them, because he will vindicate his law by punishments.

<span id="ix.v-p14"></span>The sum of the whole is *that he will execute
judgments in the midst of Jerusalem,* because he will ascend a tribunal
and compel the wicked to plead their cause, and to render an account of
their life. God, therefore, then executed his judgments when he
manifested his vengeance by means of the Chaldeans, and so famine was a
part of his punishment, as well as the sword and the pestilence. For
while he delays, he seems to have ceased from his duty, and then the
impious indulge themselves as if he had forgotten to execute judgment.
Therefore, in opposition to this, he denounces *that he would execute
judgments:* as if he had said, I will appear as judge although you think
me asleep. For he says, *he will execute judgments in the midst of
Jerusalem, before the eyes of the Gentiles,* by which assertion he
means, that their punishments would be remarkable, and such as might be
easily considered by all the nations: for we know that the Gentiles were
then blind, for they thought that good and evil happened by chance. But
God affirms, that his judgments will be so manifest that the blind will
be, as it were, eye-witnesses. Now it follows —

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span><span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>**9.** And I will do in thee that which I
have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of
all thine abominations.

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span>**9.** Et faciam in to quae non feci, et
quae, non sum facturus secundum hoc amplius, propter cunctas
abominationes tuas.

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span>**10.** Therefore the fathers shall eat the
sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I
will execute judgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I
scatter into all the winds.

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span>**10.** Propterea  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) patres vorabunt filios in medio tui,
et filii vorabunt patres suos: faciam ergo judicia in to et dispergam
cunctas reliquias tuas ad quemlibet ventum.

<span id="ix.vi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.vi-p8"></span><span id="ix.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p9"></span>Now God subjoins, that their punishment
should be so severe that no similar example could be found in the world
— *I will do what I have not done, nor intended to do,* that is, I will
avenge your contempt of my law in a striking and unexpected manner; for
God sometimes so chastises men as not to exceed the ordinary method. But
because punishments seem vile and contemptible when they are so common,
God is compelled to surpass the ordinary measure, and to punish the
wicked signally and portentously, as he says by Moses. (<span
id="ix.vi-p9.1"></span>[De 28:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#046.md)<span
id="ix.vi-p9.1"></span>.) When therefore he now says, *that he would do
what he had not done before, and what he would not do again,* he
signifies a horrible vengeance, which has no similar example. It means
nothing else than what, we have quoted from Moses, that the vengeance
would be signal and portentous. Interpreters take this metaphorically,
but this view cannot be admitted, because in their opinion no history
has recorded its fulfillment; hence they fly to allegory and metaphor.
But first of all, we know what Josephus says, that mothers were so
ravenous that they slew their children and fed upon them, although here
a previous siege is referred to, in which God signifies that he would
cause fathers to devour their children: I confess it; but even if we
receive what they wish, it was not done then; hence Jeremiah is mistaken
when he says, that miserable women cooked their children for food.
(<span id="ix.vi-p9.2"></span>[La
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi-p9.2"></span>..md)
Surely this is a sufficient witness; for to say that we never find that
this actually happened is to reject the testimony of Jeremiah. Besides,
God had threatened that very thing by Moses; nor can the passage be
eluded, because there is weight in the words —

<span id="ix.vi-p10"></span>“Men delicate among you, and those
accustomed to luxuries,” says he, “shall eat their own children; a man
shall envy the wife of his bosom, so that he shall not suffer her to
enjoy that nefarious food with him. Then by stealth shall he consume and
devour the flesh of his son, so that he shall distribute no part of it
to another.” (<span id="ix.vi-p10.1"></span>[Deut.
28:54](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#054.md),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#055)<span id="ix.vi-p10.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.vi-p11"></span>When Moses uses this language he certainly
does not mean that there shall be intestine dissensions, so that
disciples shall rise up against their masters, and masters oppress their
disciples, as Jerome fancies. But it is necessary to take the words as
they sound, namely, that God would not be content with common and
customary punishments when the Jews had arrived at the very last pitch
of impiety and wickedness, since he blames them so severely. Hence
Ezekiel now threatens this; nor is it surprising that the Prophets took
such forms of expression from Moses, since they used the language of
Moses rather than a new one, that the people might not despise their
prophesyings. Now, therefore, we must decide, that the Prophet uses
these threatenings against the Jews literally. But if any one now object
that what God says will not happen does often happen, a solution must be
sought for. For we said that when the Jews were besieged by Titus, such
a ravenousness attacked certain women, that they fed by stealth on their
own children. But God pronounces *that he never would do this again* I
reply that this kind of vengeance is not to be restricted to one day, so
that God should not often punish the Jews in a similar manner. But we do
not read that this was done, except by the Jews, for although this
cruelty is related in tragedies — that children were used as food by
their parents, yet this barbarity nowhere existed, that a father
knowingly and willingly ate his own son; hence this was peculiar to the
Jews. And that God had once executed this vengeance on them by means of
the Chaldeans, is no obstacle to his again inflicting the same
punishment, when he wished to take vengeance on the extreme rebellion of
the people. For although in Ezekiel’s time all things were very corrupt,
yet we know that when the Son of God was rejected, the Jews cut off from
themselves all hope of restoration to the mercy of God. It is not
surprising, then, if again he had suffered sons to be devoured by their
fathers, as he now threatens that fathers should be so rabid as not even
to spare their own bowels.

<span id="ix.vi-p12"></span>I know not why Jerome invented this
difference, which is altogether futile. For he says, that when a thing
is honorable and becoming it should be ascribed to God, but when the
thing itself is base, God averts the infamy from himself. For when this
wonder is treated of here, God does not say I will cause the people to
eat their sons, but he says, fathers shall eat their sons, and sons
their fathers. But there is nothing solid in this comment, because the
cruelty which the Chaldeans exercised towards the Jews certainly was not
either honorable or becoming, and yet God ascribes to himself whatever
the Chaldeans did. Again, what was baser than the incest of Absalom, in
debauching his father’s wives? and even that was not sufficient, but he
wished the whole people, at the sound of a trumpet, to be witnesses of
his crime; and yet what does God say? “I will do this before the sun,”
says he. (<span id="ix.vi-p12.1"></span>[2Sa
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.vi-p12.1"></span>,
and <span id="ix.vi-p12.2"></span>[2 Sam.
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi-p12.2"></span>..md) We
see, then, that this man was not familiar with the Scriptures, and yet
that he offered his comments too hastily. There was, indeed, no true
religion in the man, and it is not without cause that I admonish you;
for there is danger lest many be deceived, if they were not admonished
that his genius was full of ostentation and arrogance.

<span id="ix.vi-p13"></span><span id="ix.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p14"></span>He says, then, *fathers shall eat their sons
in the midst of you,* and this was certainly fulfilled: for Jeremiah
speaks of women, but he comprehends men also. (<span
id="ix.vi-p14.1"></span>[La 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010.md)<span
id="ix.vi-p14.1"></span>.) For he says that women are tender-hearted, he
does not say mothers merely, but that they were humane beyond others;
but we know that maternal affection is more tender. But when mothers and
those tender ones devour their children, that was the final portent. Now
he adds, *I will execute, therefore,* (for the copula here ought to be
resolved into the expletive particle,) *judgments against thee* That is,
in this manner I will really show myself a judge, *and I will scatter
all thy remnants unto all winds. H*e signifies that there should be such
dispersion, that no body or name of the people should remain. But that
hope might cherish and sustain the Jews, if any name and body of the
people had been left. But when God pronounces that they should be
offscourings to be scattered to every wind, he takes away all hope of
restoration for the present at least. We know that there was a certain
number left, but such destruction was necessarily threatened before God
gave any hope of his mercy. When he says, *to any wind,* he signifies in
any quarter whatever. For as one or another wind blows so the dust is
carried, and the offscourings are dispersed in all directions. It
follows —

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**11.** Wherefore, *as* I live, saith the
Lord GOD; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy
detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I
also diminish *thee;* neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have
any pity

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**11.** Propterea vivo *ego,* dicit
Dominator Iehovah, si non propterea quod sanctuarium meum polluisti
 <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) in omnibus detestationibus
tuis, et omnibus abominationibus tuis: Etiam ego diminuam;  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) et non parcet oculus meus, et etiam
ego non miserebor.  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md)

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span><span id="ix.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span>Here God again expresses more clearly why he
was so eager to take vengeance namely, because the religion of the Jews
was corrupt, and the Temple had been violated, as we shall see
to-morrow.

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since at this time
thou hast so familiarly manifested thyself to us in the gospel of Christ
our Lord, that we may learn to raise our eyes to the light which has
been prepared for us; and grant that we may have them so fixed that we
may be directed and urged towards the object of our existence, until the
duties of our calling being finished, we may arrive at length unto thee,
and enjoy also with thee that glory which thine only-begotten Son
acquired for us by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span>Lecture fifteen

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>Yesterday, after Ezekiel had prophesied
concerning the slaughter of Jerusalem, he expressed one reason why God
was so angry against that city, which he had formerly chosen for his
dwelling. He says, *they had violated* or *polluted his sanctuary* Now
therefore we see of what great importance before God is that true and
pure religion whose pollution he so severely avenges. And indeed the
safety of the city depended solely on the pure worship of God. Therefore
the profanation of the Temple was just as if they had rejected God
himself, and renounced his aid. Lastly, that impiety sufficiently shows
that they despised whatever God had promised them. And these words are
to be marked, where he says, *even I will diminish thee, and my eye
shall not spare, and I will not pardon,* because nothing is more
precious to God than that worship which he has commanded: when his
sanctuary is polluted, it is no wonder if he is thus angry. Now it
follows —

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span><span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>**12.** A third part of thee shall die with
the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of
thee: and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I
will scatter a third part into all the winds, and I will draw out a
sword after them.

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**12.** Tertia pars peste morietur, et fame
peribunt in medio tui: et tertia pars per gladium cadent in circuitu
tuo, et tertiam partem in quemlibet ventum dispergam, et gladium
evaginabo post eos.

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span><span id="ix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span>Now he explains without a figure what he had
previously proposed figuratively. For he had been commanded to shave off
the hairs of his head and of his beard with a razor, and to divide them
so that the pestilence should consume one part, the sword another, and
the famine a third. Now he repeats the same thing but in another manner.
Hence God explains why he had offered a vision of this kind to his
servant. But he shortens what we formerly saw, because he omits the
fourth member; for he was commanded to take some portion and to hide it
under his armpit, or in the hem of his garment: but here there is no
mention of that part, and yet it was not spoken in vain, but God speaks
in various manners, and that by his own right. Meanwhile, both the
figure and its application agree, because God was consuming the whole
people by either famine, pestilence, or the sword. What was said
concerning the fourth part was not in vain, but it was not necessary to
repeat it. To this end then the Prophet tended, since some were
survivors it might seem that they were exempt from the common slaughter:
that he might take away that hope, he said, that they also, or at least
many of them, should perish by burning, so that they should light up a
fire in the whole people of Israel. For it happened through the
unconquerable obstinacy of the people, that the wretched exiles were
more hated; those who had already spared them began afresh to rage
against them with cruelty, because the name of the people became
detestable among all men. Because, therefore, the remnant of the
citizens who remained at Jerusalem perished, hence it happened that the
burning penetrated to the ten tribes, and to those wretched exiles who
were captives in remote lands. But now our Prophet is silent on this
point. In the meanwhile, he comprehends whatever we saw before, although
more briefly: only that explanation was wanting, which, although it was
formerly useful, yet ought not of necessity to be repeated. *A third
part,* therefore, *shall die by pestilence, and shall perish by hunger
in the midst of thee;* then *a third part shall perish by the sword
around thee, and a third part shall be scattered towards every wind:*
although God claims this for himself, *I will scatter,* says he, *the
third part, and draw out the sword after them,* so that they also shall
perish in their dispersion. Now that dispersion is by itself miserable,
but God pronounces that he would not be content with that moderate
punishment until he utterly consumed them. It follows —

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>**13.** Thus shall mine anger be
accomplished, and I wilt cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be
comforted: and they shall know that I the LORD have spoken *it* in my
zeal, when I have accomplished my fury in them.

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>**13.** Et perficietur ira mea, et residere
 <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) faciem excandescentiam meam in
ipsis: et consolationem accipiam: et cognoscent quod ego Iehovah, qui
locutus sum in zelo meo  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) cum
perfecero excandescentiam meam in ipsis.

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span><span id="ix.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span>In this verse the Prophet only teaches what
he had said before, but by way of confirmation, namely, that God’s
vengeance would be horrible and unceasing until the destruction and
extinction of the people. There are some who think that this was
interposed that God might mitigate the rigor of his vengeance, and so
this verse, according to them, contains a promise of pardon; but it is
rather a threat. For what they assert — that God would cause his anger
to cease — cannot stand. For it follows afterwards *they shall know that
I Jehovah have said it, when I shall have filled up my wrath or anger
against them* And the context, as we shall afterwards see, will refute
that comment. Let this, then, remain fixed, that the Prophet does not
here promise the people any mitigation of their punishment, but goes on
denouncing the vengeance which he formerly mentioned.

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span>First he says, *it shall be filled up:* <span
id="ix.xi-p9.1"></span>כלה*, keleh,* signifies sometimes “to finish,”
but also, “to be accomplished,” “to consume,” and also, “to be
consumed.” In this place God signifies that there should be no end to
the punishments until he was satisfied. The image is taken from men
desirous of vengeance, whose eagerness does not cease till they satiate
themselves with revenge. God, therefore, here likens himself to men when
he speaks of the end or fulfillment of his anger. Now he adds, *I will
cause my fury to rest upon them,* that is, my fury shall be, as it were,
fixed upon them. For “rest” is not to be received here for “cease,” for
wrath is said to rest when it has spent itself, but God wishes here to
mark by his Prophet the perseverance or untiring course of his
vengeance. *My wrath, therefore, shall rest upon them,* that is, it
shall not remove or pass away; for God is said to withdraw his hand when
he ceases to punish us, but here the rest of his wrath is its perpetual
continuing. He adds, *I will take comfort* Here God transfers to himself
what properly does not belong to him, for he does not delight himself
after the manner of men when he takes vengeance on wickedness; but we
know that God’s judgment cannot be comprehended, unless he puts on the
character of man, and in some manner transforms himself. Hence he is
said to *receive comfort* in the approbation of just judgment. For this
comfort signifies, that God cannot bear the contempt of his law — then
that the malice of man is so desperate, that the judge must at length
appear in his own nature; not that he indulges in any passions, as is
sufficiently known, but because we cannot otherwise conceive him to be a
just judge, unless he declare himself pleased with vengeance, when he
sees men so utterly abandoned and beside themselves, as not to be
otherwise recalled to penitence.

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *and they shall know
that I Jehovah have spoken it* Here God obliquely blames the stupidity
of the people, because they not only despised all prophecies, but also
proudly laughed at his threats. As often, then, as the Prophets declared
the vengeance and judgments of God, they gave material for laughter to a
perverse and impious people, and their obstinacy so blinded them that
they did not think it was God who spoke; for they supposed that men only
would be their adversaries, and hence their rage against the Prophets.
For if they had thought that they had spoken by divine inspiration, they
would never have dared to rise against them so madly; but because they
thought that the Prophets uttered in public their own comments,
therefore they strove with them in forgetfulness of God. The Jews,
therefore, did not acknowledge him. But let us mark the source of their
ignorance: they turned aside their senses from God of their own accord,
as at this time many do not think that God speaks when his truth is
openly shown from the Scriptures. Why do they not think so? because they
are unwilling. Hence this blindness was voluntary and affected, so to
speak, in the ancient people, since they imagined that the prophecies
would be without effect. This is the reason why the Prophet says, *then
they shall know that I have spoken,* because, as the proverb is,
experience is the fool’s teacher; since, therefore, they rejected all
threats, it came to pass that, by the teaching of calamity, they
perceived too late that God was the speaker. And so there is an
antithesis between experimental knowledge, and blindness which arises
from an evil disposition and a contempt of God. For when he says, *they
shall know when he has fulfilled his wrath,* that knowledge shall be too
late and unfruitful. Lastly, God here pronounces, that he would inflict
just punishment on their voluntary ignorance, from which the Jews should
know, whether they would or not, that the prophecies against which they
had closed their eyes had proceeded from himself alone.

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>He says also, *that he had spoken in his
zeal,* or jealousy, because the Prophets were thought to be very furious
when they thundered so against the impious. God therefore here acquits
those whom we know were commonly esteemed fanatics, and says *that he
spoke in his zeal,* because the impious, when they wish to load the
servants of God with envy, object that he is mild and merciful, and that
it does not accord with his character to speak roughly and sharply. God
therefore says that he also uses zeal, or anger, that the Jews might not
think his Prophets carried away with inconsiderate zeal and fervor,
since we know that they fell into that grievous error. It follows —

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>**14.** Moreover I will make thee waste, and
a reproach among the nations that *are* round about thee, in the sight
of all that pass by.

<span id="ix.xii-p3"></span>**14.** Et ponam to in vastitatem, et
opprobrium inter gentes quae in circuitu tuo sunt, in oculis eujusvis
transeuntis.  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md)

<span id="ix.xii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p7"></span>He explains what we saw before more at
length, whence also we understand that in the next verse God had not
softened his anger, but proclaimed the ultimate destruction of the
nation. He says therefore, *that the Jews shall be desolate,* as they
translate it: it also signifies dryness, and hence is the name for a
desert. But it suits this place to say, *the Jews shall be laid waste,
and a reproach among the nations:* for they were formerly a celebrated
nation: God had ennobled them with remarkable gifts, so that they
excelled in dignity in the sight of all the nations. Now he says, *they
should be like a vast desert, and in utter ruin, and a reproach;* and
not only is this rumor spread abroad, but all travelers through that
land are witnesses of this reproach. But in the next verse this is
followed out more at length.

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span>**15.** So it shall be a reproach and a
taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the nations that *are*
round about thee, when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in
fury and in furious rebukes. I the LORD have spoken *it.*

<span id="ix.xiii-p3"></span>**15.** Et eris probrum, et subsannatio,
castigatio, et stupor gentibus quae in circuitu tuo sunt, dum fecero in
to judicia in ira, et excandescentia, et increpationibus excandescentiæ:
ego Iehovah locutus sum.

<span id="ix.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p6"></span>He further explains how the Jews should be
devastated and become a reproach among the nations. Now, he does not
speak of their dispersion, but uses two words for one idea: he puts
<span id="ix.xiii-p6.1"></span>חרפה, *cherepheh,* which signifies a
reproach, and adds <span id="ix.xiii-p6.2"></span>גדופה*, gedopheh,*
which signifies a taunt and a mocking: but this could not take place
without the slaughter of the people. Unless the profane heathen had some
ground for it, there was no reason why they should utter their taunts
and hissings against the Jews. Hence destruction and complete slaughter
are comprehended under the words *reproach and taunt,* or
laughing-stock. But this sentence belongs to the former verse: there it
was said, *I will make thee:* here, *thou shalt be* Meanwhile the
execution of God’s vengeance is marked; when, therefore, God reproaches
us, we are compelled to lie under the power of his hand, because an
attempt to resist him is vain. We shall wrestle, indeed, as the ungodly
do, but unless we yield willingly, the violence of his power will crush
us. Hence we must observe the context: I will *make thee a reproach, and
thou shalt be one,* because God signifies that his threats should not be
either empty or in vain. He adds, *thou shalt be a correction:* <span
id="ix.xiii-p6.3"></span>מוסר, *moser,* signifies discipline and
instruction, but is often used for that correction which springs from a
sense of God’s wrath. When, therefore, God chastises his people, if they
repent, they are said to profit by his discipline, since they have
learnt themselves to be sinners by the punishments which he has
inflicted on them. But he says that the Jews *should be a correction to
the profane nations,* because they should grow wise by their
punishments; for while we apply examples to our use, this is a timely
correction, since we do not wait till God strikes us; but when he takes
vengeance on the despisers of his law at a distance, if we are moved by
such examples, this is, as I said, correction in good time: for the
Prophet now applies it to the nations, not without the disgrace of the
elect people: as if he had said that their punishment would be so
notorious that the very blind would recognize them, and tremble at the
perception of their import.

<span id="ix.xiii-p7"></span>Afterwards he adds — *in astonishment*
These words, indeed, do not seem sufficiently in agreement with the Jews
being *for a wonder and a correction;* but the Prophet does not simply
mean that those who perceived the judgment of God should be either
stupid or docile, he only means that in God’s severity material would be
proposed for all, as well of correction as of astonishment, so that they
should be horrified when they saw God treating his elect people so
harshly. For he adds, *when I shall execute judgments on thee in wrath,
and in fury, and in burnings of anger.* He confirms what we saw before,
namely, that God’s judgment would be remarkable, because he had so long
borne with a reprobate people. Since he had so long borne their impiety,
he broke forth at length in one impulse, and then exercised the
formidable judgment of which he speaks. This is the reason why he says
*the nations shall be astonished when I execute my judgments upon thee.*
What, then, were these judgments? — in truth, anger, and burning, and
furious rebukes. Here the Prophet seems verbose; but he could not be too
much so, since the sluggishness of the people was so great that they
were not moved by any prophecies. As we have formerly seen, he had been,
doubtless, derided by those Jews in Chaldea, who as yet remained at home
tranquil, as it were, in their nests. “Does he, the wretched exile,
threaten us? let him be content with his own lot: since God has spared
us, he seems to be stirred up to vex us by envy alone; but we have no
reason to fear the envy of a captive and an exile.” Since, then, the
Prophet knew that he was contemptible among the Jews, it was necessary
to heap up such forms of speech, that his teaching might have more
weight: nor does he look: at the Jews alone, but at those people also
who had been dragged into the same exile; for he has to advise them, for
the reasons which we have formerly explained. Now, therefore, we
understand his meaning when he speaks *concerning anger and burning,*
and adds, at the same time*, burning rebukes* He adds also, *I Jehovah
have spoken it:* which he will repeat at the last verse of the chapter.
And this confirmation is also very useful, because when both the
Israelites and the Jews looked at a mortal and abject man, a captive and
a slave of an impious people, they would doubtless have despised all his
prophecies. Hence he sets God before them, by which he means that he was
not the author of the threats, but spoke only from the mouth of God, as
the organ of the Spirit. It follows —

<span id="ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p2"></span>**16.** When I shall send upon them the evil
arrows of famine, which shall be for *their* destruction, *and* which I
will send to destroy you: and I will increase the famine upon you, and
will break your staff of bread:

<span id="ix.xiv-p3"></span>**16.** Cum emisero  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) sagittas famis malas in ipsos, quae
erunt in perditionem,  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) quas
jaculabor in ipsos ad perdendum eos: et famem addam contra eos, et
confringam ipsis baculum panis.

<span id="ix.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiv-p7"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p8"></span>He illustrates the sentiment which we have
seen, but not after the manner of rhetoricians, who affect splendor and
ornament of speech; but his only design was to penetrate the minds of
the people, like stones or iron. This, then, is the reason why he uses
such variety here, and adorns his teaching with various figures. For he
now compares God to an archer, who points his arrows against them; but
he speaks metaphorically concerning the arrows of God; for he calls them
*arrows of famine and evil,* that is, deadly and death-bearing. *Since,*
then, *I shall hurl evil arrows against them, they shall cause their
destruction,* says he; that is, they shall not escape death, because
they shall be struck with mortal wounds. A person might be struck by the
blow of an arrow, and yet become convalescent; but God pronounces the
arrows of which he speaks deadly, so that whoever is struck by them has
no hope of safety left. Besides, *by arrows of famine* we may understand
such barrenness of soil as flies, locusts, and other scourges of God —
at one time scorching, at another mildew dries up the corn-field, now
rains make the wheat rot, now heat burns it up, as many sources of
corruption and pestilence as these are to the crops, so many are the
arrows of God which transfix men’s hearts, and that too by a deadly
wound. If so subtle an explanation does not please any one, he is at
liberty to take it otherwise; yet if any one properly attends, he will
confess that God darts his own arrows as often as he causes famine, or
deprives men of sustenance. He adds, *which shall become corruption* He
confirms what we said was denoted by the epithet <span
id="ix.xiv-p8.1"></span>הרעים, *hergnim.* He says, therefore, that these
arrows would be destructive, because *they should be for perdition and
destruction.* Another confirmation follows: *which I will send,* says
he, *against them to destroy them* Here God distinctly affirms that he
would dart forth those arrows, and repeats again what we saw before, and
that, too, in the same verse. But we have taught you why the Prophet
insists, in many words, on a matter by no means obscure. He adds, *and I
will multiply famine against them.* Here he signifies that he was armed
with different weapons, so that if men perceive themselves to have
fallen, they may perceive that God has other hidden weapons, which he
has not yet brought into use. By the word *“*multiply*”* the Prophet
expresses what we have already seen, by means of arrows, for he uses the
plural number, but the impious restrict as much as they can the power of
God. “If God wills” they say, “he can indeed ruin the corn-fields with
continual rain, he can also burn them up by too much heat, if we have
escaped the frost and the hail, the storm, and the rain., and the
drought, it will have already gone well with *us.”* Thus the impious
harden themselves in their security. And why? because they restrict
God’s arrows to a fixed and certain number. This is the reason why he
says, *I will multiply famine upon them;* that is, when they think their
yearly produce safe, because they have escaped drought, and rain, and
mildew, and storm, and hail, I will find, says he, other modes unknown
to them, by which I will bring famine upon them. And he expresses one
manner of doing so — I will *break the staff of bread,* concerning which
form of speaking we have spoken previously. I do not subscribe to their
opinion who say, that the staff of bread is broken when God sends a
deficiency of corn; for in the greatest plenty the staff of bread is
broken, as we saw in Moses, when God takes away the nourishing quality
of bread, and makes it vanish, (<span id="ix.xiv-p8.2"></span>[De
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="ix.xiv-p8.2"></span>,.md)
because man lives not by bread alone, but by that secret inspiration
which God has implanted in the bread. Hence we may eat more than
fourfold the usual quantity, and yet not be satisfied, as this form of
speech often occurs with the Prophets, which they take from Moses. Thou
shalt eat, and not be satisfied, say they. (<span
id="ix.xiv-p8.3"></span>[Le 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026.md)<span
id="ix.xiv-p8.3"></span>; <span id="ix.xiv-p8.4"></span>[Isa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.xiv-p8.4"></span>;
<span id="ix.xiv-p8.5"></span>[Ezekiel
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#000.md)<span id="ix.xiv-p8.5"></span>; <span
id="ix.xiv-p8.6"></span>[Ho 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#010.md)<span
id="ix.xiv-p8.6"></span>; <span id="ix.xiv-p8.7"></span>[Mic
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#014)<span id="ix.xiv-p8.7"></span>..md)
So also here the Prophet repeats what we saw in the last chapter — that
God breaks the staff of bread, that is, takes away its nourishing
quality, so that he who feeds upon it does not feel that he has
recovered new rigor. It follows —

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017.md)<span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span>**17.** So will I send upon you famine and
evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee; and pestilence and blood shall
pass through thee; and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the LORD have
spoken *it.*

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Et mittam in vos famem, et bestiam
malam,  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) et orbabunt to;  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) get pestis, et sanguis transibunt in
to, et gladium venire faciam super to: ego Iehovah locutus sum.

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span><span id="ix.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span>Here God speaks generally concerning certain
adversities — *I will send evil upon them,* he says, but immediately
afterwards he adds the kind of evil, of which he had not yet spoken.
Hence, under the name of evil he embraces all adversities, as if he had
said that he intended to exact the penalty from the wicked, not in one
or two ways only, but by those numberless troubles which surround us,
and to which we are subject; so that there would be no bounds to his
wrath, unless men should cease to provoke his anger. This is the reason,
then, why he now speaks generally concerning evil; but as I have said he
adds the kind of evil — *An evil beast shall come upon thee, and so I
will bereave thee* Although only one form of evil is expressed, yet it
is by no means doubtful that for the sake of example God mentions this,
that they might understand that all injuries are in his hand. And these
are numberless. If we look upwards, how many deaths hang over us from
that direction? If we look at the earth, how many poisons? how many wild
and fierce beasts, how many serpents, swords, pitfalls,
stumbling-blocks, *precipices,* falls of houses, throwings of stones and
darts? In short, we cannot stir a step without ten deaths meeting us. So
God here speaks of wild beasts only for the purpose of showing that
*they* were at hand, and that by them he would execute his judgments.
Now, therefore, we understand why Ezekiel first spoke of the *genus,*
and afterwards came to the *species.*

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span>And at length he adds, *I will bereave* or
deprive them, namely, that he will deprive fathers of their sons, and
sons of their fathers; and he will do that, not only by cruel and savage
beasts, but by various other ways. Again he repeats — *pestilence and
blood shall pass over thee.* He had not spoken of blood before, unless
under the name of the sword, which he repeats again: but he heaps
together, as I have said, various forms of speech, so that those should
be at length awakened who had been too slow, and were afterwards turning
themselves willingly away from all sense of the wrath of God. Hence he
says, *pestilence and blood shall pass through thee.* Then, I *will
bring a sword,* says he, *upon thee* When he spoke of blood, he really
intended a sword, but, as I have already said, this did not cause either
the Israelites or Jews instantly to tremble at such threats. What,
therefore, was in itself sufficiently clear and easy, ought to be
impressed in various ways. With this view he adds again*, I Jehovah have
spoken* For he turns away the Jews and Israelites from looking at
himself, and shows them that he was not the author of the threats, but
that he faithfully delivers what he had received from God’s hand, and
what he was commanded to utter against them.

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we are so dull
and heavy, that we may awake in time at thy threats, and submit
ourselves to thy power, that we may not experience by our destruction
how formidable it is, but profit under thy rod when thou correctest us
like a father, and may we so become wise, that through the whole course
of our life we may proceed in the continual pursuit and meditation of
true repentance; and having put off the vices and filth of the flesh, we
may be reformed into true purity, until at length we arrive at the
enjoyment of celestial glow, which is laid up for us in Christ Jesus our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture sixteenth

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc22008.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="ix.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> That is, “*draw* it *across*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc22008.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="ix.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span> That is, “a just *one.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc22008.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span> That is, “the hairs which are erect upon thy
head and thy beard.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc22008.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span> “They shall be filled up;” literally, “for
filling up the *days*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc22008.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span> That is, “a small part in *number.*” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc22008.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="ix.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span> That is, “that part of them in the skirts of
thy *garments.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc22008.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span> Or, “she has transgressed my judgments or
been rebellious. <span id="ix.iv-p6.1"></span>מרה, *mereh,* properly
signifies was rebellious against my *judgments.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc22008.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span> Or, “was rebellious against my statutes.” —
*Calvin*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc22008.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="ix.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span> Or, “because of your multiplication.” —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc22008.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="ix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p6"></span> “Because,” or “on that account.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc22008.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="ix.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span> That is, “since thou hast polluted my
sanctuary.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc22008.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="ix.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span> Others translate, “I will break thee in
pieces.” — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc22008.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="ix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span> “I will not pardon.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc22008.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="ix.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span> Or, “rest.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc22008.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="ix.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span> Or, “in my jealousy.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc22008.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="ix.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p4"></span> Or, “traveler.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc22008.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="ix.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p4"></span> Or, “I shall have darted <span
id="ix.xiv-p4.1"></span>שלח, *shelech,* signifies to send, but it here
means to dart; for the context requires *it.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc22008.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="ix.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p5"></span> Or, “destruction.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc22008.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span> Or, “wild beast ” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc22008.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span> “He used before the plural number ” —
*Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc22009.md)
