[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc22004)  [Next](cc22006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 22: Ezekiel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And he said unto me, Son of man, stand
upon thy feet, and I will speak unto thee.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixit ad me, Fili hominis sta super
pedes tuos, et loquar tecum.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the spirit entered into me when he
spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto
me.

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et venit in me spiritus cum loqueretur
ad me, et statuit me super pedes meos, et audivi loquentem ad me.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span><span id="vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>Here the Prophet narrates that he was chosen
by the command of God. For God never prostrates his people so as to
leave them lying upon the earth, but continually raises them afterwards.
As to the reprobate, they are so frightened at the sight of God, that
they utterly fall and never rise again. But it is different with the
faithful, because the pride of the flesh is corrected in them; then God
stretches forth his hand to them, and restores them, as it were, from
death to life. And this difference we must mark diligently, because we
see the impious often dread the voice of God. But if they disdainfully
despise him when speaking, they are frightened by his hand when some
signs of his wrath and vengeance appear: but yet they remain lifeless.
In like manner the faithful dread the voice of God, but the result is
altogether different, as we see here: because after God has humbled
them, he commands them to be of good courage, and shows that he intended
nothing else but to establish them by his power. At the same time the
Prophet teaches that nothing was accomplished by this voice till the
Spirit was added. God indeed works efficiently by his own words, but we
must hold that this efficacy is not contained in the words themselves,
but proceeds from the secret instinct of the Spirit. The Prophet
therefore shows us both truths. On one side he says, *I heard the voice
of God, so that I stood on my feet:* God thus wished to animate his
confidence: but he adds that he was not raised up by the voice, until
*the Spirit placed him on his feet*

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>This work of the Spirit, then, is joined with
the word of God. But a distinction is made, that we may know that the
external word is of no avail by itself, unless animated by the power of
the Spirit. If any one should object, that the word was useless, because
not efficacious by itself, the solution is at hand, that if God takes
this method of acting there is no reason why we should object to it. But
we have a still clearer reply: since God always works in the hearts of
men by the Spirit, yet his word is not. without fruit; because, as God
enlightens us by the sun, and yet he alone is the Father of Lights, and
the splendor of the sun is profitless except as God uses it as an
instrument, so we must conclude concerning his word, because the Holy
Spirit penetrates our hearts, and thus enlightens our minds. All power
of action, then, resides in the Spirit himself, and thus all praise
ought to be entirely referred to God alone. Meanwhile, what. objection
is there to the Spirit of God using instruments? We hold, therefore,
that when God speaks, he adds the efficacy of his Spirit, since his word
without it would be fruitless; and yet the word is effectual, because
the instrument ought to be united with the author of the action. This
doctrine, thus briefly expounded, may suffice to refute foolish
objections, which are always in the mouths of many who fret about man’s
free-will: they say, that we can either attend to the word which is
offered to us or re jeer it: but we see what the Prophet says. If any of
us is fit for rendering obedience to God, the Prophet certainly excelled
in this disposition, and yet the word of God had no efficacy in his
case, until the Spirit gave him strength *to rise upon his feet* Hence
we collect, that it is not in our power to obey what God commands us,
except this power proceeds from him. Now it follows —

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And he said unto me, Son of man, I
send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath
rebelled against me: they and their fathers have transgressed against
me, *even* unto this very day.

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et dixit ad me: Fili hominis mitto to
 <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) ad filios Israel, ad gentes
rebelles *vel defectrices,* quae rebellarunt  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) in me: ipsi et partes eorum perfidie se
gesserunt erga me usque ad ipsum huic diem.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span><span id="vi.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>The Prophet now more clearly explains the
object of the vision which he has formerly mentioned, namely, that being
armed with authority he might more freely discharge the office of
Prophet among the Israelites. For we know that God claims this honor to
himself alone, that he should be head in his Church, and deservedly so,
for he is not called our Lawgiver in vain, (<span
id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>[Isa 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022)<span
id="vi.ii-p8.1"></span>; <span id="vi.ii-p8.2"></span>[Jas
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)<span id="vi.ii-p8.2"></span>,)
and our wisdom consists in nothing else but in attending to his
instructions. Since, therefore, God alone is to be heard, every mortal,
whatever he professes himself, must be rejected, unless he comes in the
name of God, and can prove his calling, and really convince men that he
does not speak except by God’s command. Therefore, that Ezekiel may not
labor in vain, he ought to prove himself divinely inspired, and this was
done by the vision. Now he more clearly explains that object of the
vision. Here it may be remarked, that figures are illusory without an
explanation. If the vision only had been offered to the eye of the
Prophet, and no voice of God had followed, what would have been the
advantage? But when God confirmed the vision by his word, the Prophet
was enabled to say with advantage, I have seen the glory of God. And
this can also be transferred to sacraments, because if signs only are
presented to our eyes they will be, as it were, dead images. The word of
God, then, throws life into the sacraments, as it has been said
concerning visions.

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>Since Ezekiel so often uses this form of
speech, saying, that he was called *Son of man,* I do not doubt that God
wished to prevent the people from despising him as one of the common
herd. For he had been dragged into exile not without ignominy: since
then he differed from the generality in no outward appearance, his
doctrine might be despised and rejected. God, therefore, takes him up,
and, by way of concession, calls him Son of man. So, on the other hand,
he signifies that the teaching ought not to be estimated by outward
appearance, but rather by his calling. It is quite true, that his
language was then more prolix, and we see how our Prophet differs from
the rest. For his language has evidently a foreign tinge, since those
who are in exile naturally contract many faults of language, and the
Prophet was never anxious about elegance and polish, but, as he had been
accustomed to homely language, so he spoke himself. But I have no doubt
that God wished purposely to select a man from the multitude
contemptible in outward appearance, and then to raise him above all
mortals by dignifying him with the gift of prophecy.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>We must now see how God prepares him for the
discharge of his duties. *I send thee,* he says, *to the children of
Israel, a rebellious race,* that is, disobedient and revolting. In this
manner the Prophet was able to escape as soon as he saw the odious duty’
assigned to him, for its difficulty alone would frighten him. But a
double trial is added when he saw himself engaged in a contest with
numberless enemies. He challenged, as it were, to conflict all the
Israelites of his day, and this was a most grievous trial. But another
trial was, not only that he perceived himself beating the air, — to use
a common proverb, rebut he must have felt it a profanation of heavenly
doctrine to address it to impious men, and that too only for the purpose
of exasperating them still further. We see, then, that the Prophet had
no inducement of earthly gratification to urge him to undertake his
duty. If God wished to use his agency, he ought to afford him some hope
of success, or, at least, he ought to leave it sufficiently uncertain to
urge him to make every effort. But when in the first instance this
difficulty occurs, that he has to deal with a perverse and stubborn
generation — next, that he is drawn into a hateful contest — thirdly,
that he is advised to cast what is holy before dogs, and pearls before
swine, and thus, as it were, to prostitute the word of God, surely his
mind must despair a hundred times when he pondered these things within
himself. Hence it was God’s plan to arm him with unconquerable
constancy, so that he might go forward in the course of his calling.

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>We must bear in mind, then, this principle:
when God wishes to stir us up to obedience, he does not always promise a
happy result of our labor: but sometimes he so puts our obedience to the
test, that he wishes us to be content with his command, even if our
labor should be deemed ridiculous before men. Sometimes, indeed, he
indulges our infirmity, and when he orders us to undertake any duty, he
at the same time bears witness that our labor shall not be in vain, and
our industry without its recompense: then indeed God spares us. But he
sometimes proves his people as I have said, providing that whatever be
the result of their labors, it is sufficient for them to obey his
command. And from

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>passage we readily collect that our Prophet
was thus dispirited. And we read the same of Isaiah; for when he is sent
by God, he is not only told that he must speak to the deaf, but what God
proposes to him is still harder. Go, says he, render the eyes of this
people blind, and their ears dull, and their heart obstinate. (<span
id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>[Isa. 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>.)
Not only therefore does Isaiah see that he would be exposed to ridicule,
and so lose the fruit of his labor, but he sees that his address has but
one tendency, and that the blinding of the Jews: nay, even their
threefold destruction — though even one destruction is enough: but, as I
have already said, God sometimes so wishes his servants to acquiesce in
his government, that they should labor even without any hope of fruit:
and this must be diligently marked. For as often as we are called upon
by God before we apply ourselves to our work, these thoughts come into
the mind: “What will be the result of this?” and “What shall I obtain by
my labor?” And, then, when the event does not turn out according to our
wish, we despond in our minds: but this is wresting from God a part of
his government. For although our labor should be in vain, yet it is
sufficiently pleasing to God himself; therefore let us learn to leave
the event in the hand of God when he enjoins anything upon us; and
although the whole world should deride us, and despair itself should
render us inactive, yet let us be of good cheer and strive to the
utmost, because it ought to suffice us that our obedience is pleasing to
God.

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>For this reason Paul says, (<span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>[2 Cor. 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>,)
that the gospel, although it is a savor of death unto death, is yet a
sweet savor unto God. When it is said that the gospel brings death, our
judgment might immediately suggest to us, that nothing is better than to
leave it. Therefore Paul meets us, and says, we ought not to judge the
gospel by its success. Although, therefore, men not only remain deaf,
but even become worse, and rush headlong in fury against God, yet the
gospel always retains its sweet savor before God. The doctrine of the
Prophet is the same. Now, if any one objects that God acts cruelly while
he so purposely blinds men, that those who are already sufficiently lost
perish twice or thrice over, the answer is at hand — God offers his word
indiscriminately to the good and bad, but it works by his Spirit in the
elect, as I have already said; and as to the reprobate, the doctrine is
useful, as it renders them without excuse. Next, that their obstinacy
may be broken down — for since they refuse to yield willingly to God, it
is necessary that they should yield when conquered — when, therefore,
God sees the reprobate thus broken down, he strikes them with the hammer
of his word. At length he takes away all excuse of ignorance, because
being convicted of their own conscience, whether they will or not, they
become their own judges, and their mouth is stopped. Although they do
not cease their rebellion against God, yet they are subject to his
judgment. Although, therefore, this may seem absurd, that God should
send his Prophets to render the people blind, yet we must reverently
submit to his counsel, even if the cause is unknown to us for a time.
But, as I have said, we do understand, to a certain extent, why God thus
strives with rebellious and obstinate men.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>Now, therefore, since at the very beginning
Ezekiel is informed of the result, it is scarcely doubtful that God
wished to prepare him to descend to the discharge of his duty without
yielding to any obstacles. For some who seem to be sufficiently ready to
obey, yet when difficulties and obstacles occur, desist in the middle of
their course, and many recede altogether; and some we see who have
renounced their vocation, because they had conceived great and excessive
hopes of success, but when the event does not answer their expectations,
they think themselves discharged from duty, and even murmur against God,
and reject the burden, or rather shake off what had been imposed upon
them. Because, then, many retreat from the course they had undertaken,
because they do not experience the success they had imagined, or had
presumed upon in their minds, therefore before Ezekiel begins to speak,
God sets before him trials of this kind, and informs him that he would
have to deal with a rebellious people.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>He says *the children of Israel are a
revolting nation;* for <span id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>מרד*, mered,*
signifies to rebel or resist, and the noun “rebellious” is suitable
enough. Therefore *I send thee to the rebellions nations,* because
directly after follows the word <span id="vi.ii-p15.2"></span>מרדו,
*merdo,* which means *who have rebelled against me.* We know that among
the Jews this is a word of reproach; for they often call us <span
id="vi.ii-p15.3"></span>גוימ*, goim “Gentiles,”* as if they called us
“profane,” “rejected,” and altogether alienated from God. Lastly, this
word *goim* means with them *“pollution”* and “abomination;*”* we are to
the Jews like dung, and the off-scouring of the world, because we are
*goim.* And there is no doubt that this pride filled the minds of the
people in the days of the Prophet; God therefore calls them *unbelieving
nations. I* confess, indeed, that this is sometimes used in a good
sense; but because the Scriptures more usually call foreigners *goim*
who are not partakers of God’s covenant, hence it became a mark of
disgrace and reproach among the Jews. It is scarcely doubtful, then, but
that God wished to abolish the honorable title which he had assigned to
them; for it was a holy nation and a priestly kingdom. When, therefore,
God calls them *goim,* it is just as if he should say, that they were
cut off from all that dignity in which they formerly excelled, and
differed in nothing from the profane and re-jeered nations, as we have a
similar description in Hosea. There the Prophet is ordered to take a
harlot to wife. (<span id="vi.ii-p15.4"></span>[Hosea
1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii-p15.4"></span>.) He
says that he begat a son and a daughter, and that, he called the son
<span id="vi.ii-p15.5"></span>לאעמי, *lo-ammi* that is, “not God
people.” Then he called his daughter “not beloved.” By this vision the
Prophet shows that the Jews were rejected, so that God no longer thinks
of them as sons, but repels them as foreigners. So also in this place
rejection is denoted, when the Prophet, as the mouth of God, calls them
Gentiles. The plural number is used, that he may the better express the
defection which oppressed the whole people. If a few only were such as
this, the Prophet might still feel encouraged. But God here pronounced
the severest sentence, because the whole people, taken both at large and
separately, was rebellious; and this is the reason why the plural number
is used.

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span>Is ‘it then asked whether a single
individual remained who would embrace the Prophet’s doctrine? The answer
is easy. The discourse does not relate to individuals, but to the whole
people; for the Prophets often use similar language, as when *they* call
the Israelites degenerate and spurious, then sons of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the offspring of Canaan: they inveigh against the multitude
promiscuously; for they had in fact a few disciples who could not be
classed in that order. (<span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>[Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.ii-p16.2"></span>[Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span id="vi.ii-p16.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.ii-p16.3"></span>[Isa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p16.3"></span>;
<span id="vi.ii-p16.4"></span>[Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p16.4"></span>.)
But we must hold what is said by <span id="vi.ii-p16.5"></span>[Isaiah
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii-p16.5"></span>. —
“Bind my testimony upon my disciples.” There the Prophet is ordered from
above to address the faithful, of whom a small number remained, and so
to address them as if the letter were folded and sealed. But he spreads
abroad this discourse among the whole people*.* So also when God
pronounces the sons of Israel to be *rebellious nations,* he looks to
the body of the people; at the same time there is no doubt that God
always preserved a seed to serve him, although hidden from man. Daniel
was then in exile with his colleagues, and he surely was not a rebel
against God; but as I have already said, enough has been brought forward
to show that the whole people were impious. God says that he had
previously tried what the people was — They *have rebelled,* he says,
*against me;* by which words he signifies that he was not making an
experiment as if they were previously unknown. He says that he had
already found out their perverseness by many trials; and yet he says
that *he sends to them,* because he wished, as I have already said, to
render their ignorance perfectly excuseless, and then he wished to break
down their *contumacy,* which was otherwise untameable.

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span>He says, *they and their fathers have
behaved themselves treacherously against me even to this very day* He
does not extenuate their crime when he says, that they imitated the
example of their fathers, but he rather increases their own impiety when
he says they were not the beginners of it, but were born of impious
parents, as if he should say, according to the vulgar proverb, “a chip
of the old block.”  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) Hence it
appears that there is no pretext for the error when we use the fathers
as the Papists do, who oppose them as a shield to God; for whilst they
have the fathers on their tongue, they esteem this a sufficient defense
for every impiety. But we see that God not only reckons this as nothing,
but that the crime of the children is exaggerated when they plead the
evil example of their fathers as the cause of their own obstinacy. Now,
not only does the Prophet desire to show this to be a frivolous excuse,
if the Jews should object that they framed their life in imitation of
their fathers, but as we see, it shows them doubly condemned, because
they did not desist from provoking God at the beginning, and so by a
continual succession, impiety and contempt of heavenly teaching
prevailed through all ages, even to their own. Besides, this passage
warns us against abusing the long-suffering of God; for when he sent his
Prophet we see the purport of his doing so — the people was now on the
brink of utter destruction, but God wished to plunge them deeper into
the lowest abyss. Let us take care lest a similar punishment should be
our lot if we remain obstinate. When, therefore, God sends some Prophets
to one people, and some to another:, it ought to recall us to penitence,
and to caution us, lest the word which is peculiarly destined to the
salvation of men, should be to us a savor of death unto death, as it was
to the ancient people. It follows —

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#004)<span id="vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** For *they are* impudent children and
stiffhearted. I do send thee unto them; and thou shalt say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD.

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et filii duri fade, et robusti corde:
ergo mitto to ad eos. et dices illis, Sic dieit Dominator Iehovah.

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span>**5.** And they, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear, (for they *are* a rebellious house,) yet
shall know that there hath been a prophet among them.

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Et ipsi sive audiant sive desistant
quoniam domus rebellionis ipsi: et  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)
scient quod propheta fuerit inter ipsos.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span><span id="vi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>God proceeds in the same discourse, but
expresses in other words the great rebellion of the people, for they
were not only obstinate and unbending in heart, but also of a
contumacious countenance: therefore he places hardness in face as well
as in heart. The words indeed are different, <span
id="vi.iii-p9.1"></span>קשי*, keshi,* and <span
id="vi.iii-p9.2"></span>חזקי, *chezki, “of* brazen countenance,” for we
may translate “winked” and “contumacious,” for this disposition appears
in the countenance, nor is it objectionable to render it *“impudent.”*
But. propriety of speech must be retained; for we must speak of the
robust of heart as *“broken down,”* or if the allusion seems more
apposite, we must render it *“of* broken *countenance,”* then of “broken
spirits,” as we call the wicked “brazen-fronted.” The meaning is, that
the Jews were not only rebellious against God and puffed up with proud
contempt, but their impiety was so desperate that they opposed
themselves to God without disguise, as if they had been horned oxen or
furious bulls. We know that hypocrisy often lies hid in the mind, and
although men swell with malice, yet they do not betray what they
inwardly nourish. But the Prophet here signifies that the Israelites
were so immersed in impiety, that they displayed themselves as the open
enemies of God in their very countenances. The result is, that the
Prophet, while he applied himself to perform the commands of God, ought
so to determine with himself, when he approaches the people, that his
teaching would be not only useless as to them, because it would not be
received with the reverence which it deserves, but would be even exposed
to many reproaches: since the Israelites were not only filled with a
hidden contempt of God, but they openly showed their ferocity, so to
speak, since they were of so brazen a front that they would without
doubt purposely reject the Prophet. *They are hard-hearted children,
etc*., *yet I send thee unto them* Here, again, God opposes his own
command, as the Prophet simply acquiesces in this word alone, “I have a
divine mission.” If he displeases men, he is content to have his labor
approved of God. This is the meaning of the phrase which is now a second
time repeated, *I send thee unto them* For the Prophet might object,
What can I do? for if they are of a brazen heart and of an iron front, I
shall labor in vain. But God answers in return, that the Prophet need
not be anxious, it is enough to have a command: as if a prince should
not explain the whole of his counsel to his ambassador, and yet should
order him to discharge his embassy, thus God acts towards his servant.
We see then how God here magnifies his authority: and we must mark this
diligently, that we may not wish always to be bargaining with him, as we
are accustomed. For unless God show us the present fruit of our labor,
we languish, and so we endeavor by turning back to withdraw ourselves
from his authority: but God opposes this single sentence, *Behold I send
thee* The rest I leave till to-morrow.

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>Grant, O Almighty God, since thou hast
counted us worthy of enjoying the privilege of daily listening to thy
word, that it may not find our hearts of stone and our minds of iron,
but may we so submit ourselves to thee with all due docility, that we
may truly perceive thee to be our Father, and may be confirmed in the
confidence of our adoption, as long as thou perseverest to address us,
until at length we enjoy not merely thy voice, but also the aspect of
thy glory in thy heavenly kingdom, which thine only-begotten Son has
acquired for us by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p1"></span>Lecture Seventh.

<span id="vi.v-p2"></span>After God has admonished his servant as to the
difficulty of his mission, he now strengthens him and exhorts him to
unconquered freedom. *Thou shalt say,* says he, *Thus saith the Lord,*
as if he should say, this alone is sufficient for overcoming all
obstacles, that he has to take in hand God’s business. For even here God
does not give fixed commands, that he will do afterwards in its place,
but the observation is general. *Thus saith Jehovah:* that is, I bring
forward nothing of myself, but faithfully relate what God has commanded.
We see then the Almighty’s object here: viz., to oppose his name to the
obstinacy of the people, and he orders the Prophet when instructed by
his authority to be of a brave and intrepid disposition, although he has
stern and hard-hearted enemies. Afterwards he adds, *whether they will
hear or whether they will forbear, yet they shall acknowledge that a
prophet has been among them*

<span id="vi.v-p3"></span><span id="vi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.v-p4"></span>Here, again, God exhorts his servant to
persevere whatever be the event of his labor, for if we do not succeed
according to the desire of our minds, we are inclined to despair: but
God wishes us to proceed in the course of our duty, though all things
should turn out contrary to our wishes. But he shows that there shall be
some fruit of our labor, although the people, through their own
depravity, reject what has been said to them: for this thought breaks
the spirits of God’s servants, when they do not perceive the usefulness
of their labor: for we always desire to accomplish something worth the
trouble which we give to it. God therefore here signifies that he has
some other object in view than the salvation of men; namely, the removal
of all pretext for error, and the stripping off of every disguise of
impiety in which men willingly clothe themselves. For even hypocrites,
though they perish knowingly and willfully, yet think themselves
excusable, unless God afford them the light of his doctrine. The meaning
therefore is, although the Prophet’s teaching would not profit the
Israelites, yet it would be useful in another way, namely, *that they
may perceive that there has been a prophet among them* In this way there
is no defect, although some think the words of the Prophet abrupt: for
an important word seems to be wanting when he says, *whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, because they are a rebellious house,
and they shall know,* etc. For we have said that the copula ought to be
resolved into the adversative particle, *because even then they shall
know:* for their perverseness shall not prevent their being convinced by
God. We may learn then from this place, that although the impious
furiously endeavor to reject the doctrine of God, yet they obtain no
other end than the more complete manifestation of their own wickedness.
Hence, also, we may learn that God’s doctrine is precious to himself,
and that he cannot bear us to despise it. The wicked then never can
escape punishment when they treat with contempt the divine teaching, for
it is as if they trampled upon inestimable treasure, Those who are left
without the law and the prophets shall not escape God’s hand, because
their conscience is sufficient to take away all excuse. (<span
id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>[Ro 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span
id="vi.v-p4.1"></span>.) But when God invites men to himself, and
approaches near them, and offers himself to them in a peculiar manner as
their Father and Teacher, if they reject so remarkable a benefit, truly
their ingratitude is worthy of the utmost severity. For as often as God
raises up prophets for us and faithful ministers of his doctrine, let
this which has just been said come into our minds: unless we embrace
such a benefit, we at length shall know that a prophet has been among
us, because God will exact fearful vengeance for the contempt of his
great loving-kindness. Now it follows —

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>**6.** And thou, son of man, be not afraid of
them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns *be*
with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their
words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they *be* a rebellious
house.

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Et tu fili hominis ne timeas ab illis,
et a sermonibus eorum ne timeas quia rebelles  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) *sunt,* et spinae tecum *erga* to, et cam
scorpionibus tu habitas: a sermonibus eorum ne timeas, et a facie
eorum.he frangaris, quia domus rebellis ipsi *sunt.*

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span><span id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>Here God again commands his servant to break
forth boldly, even if the people deny him all approach through their
malice and wickedness. But because we often fail through terror; God
arms his Prophet with impregnable confidence against the threats of the
people, and then against all discourses of every sort. He brings forward
no other reason *than they are a rebellious house,* or a rebellious and
perverse nation. For we said, though at the first glance it might seem
cold, yet it suffices to animate the servants of God to know that he
commands nothing rashly, and when they acknowledge that God is pleased
by their spending their breath upon the deaf, yet they do not cease to
discharge their duty, although they fatigue themselves in vain as far as
the world is concerned. But now when this thought is added, that God
will take care of his own servants, it doubles their confidence and good
spirits. Thus it happens, that all threats and terrors being despised,
they discharge their duty boldly. For this reason he now says, *thou,
son of man, do not be afraid of them, nor be terrified at their words*
By “words,” I do not understand simply threats but calumnies by which we
know the servants of God to be oppressed. For hypocrites rise up with
great confidence and complain of the injury done to them, and then
presumptuously take upon themselves the name of God, as at this time the
Papists not only vomit out threats by which they disturb us, but
haughtily boast themselves to be the Church, and confirm this by
perpetual succession; then they say that the Church never is without the
Holy Spirit, and hence it cannot happen that God should ever desert
them. We see, therefore, that the domestic enemies of God not only use
threats against his servants, but at the same time bring many false
pretenses by which they load the true and faithful Prophets with envy
and hatred. But, however such calumnies have some appearance of truth
when its enemies unjustly press us, God orders us to proceed with
unconquered fortitude. *Be not afraid,* therefore, he says, *of either
them, or their words* And since the same phrase is repeated shortly
afterwards, hence we infer that it has no common meaning. It is
therefore worthy of observation, that God once, yea twice, pronounces
that we ought not to fear their words who boast themselves to be the
Church of God, and doubt not petulantly to render that sacred name a
laughing-stock by their use of it. Since, therefore, God allows us to
despise language of this kind, there is no reason why the Papists of
this day should daunt us, when, with inflated cheeks, they thunder out
the name of the Church and the Apostolic authority; for just honor is
not attributed to God, unless every lofty thing in the world is
compelled to obey him, so that the doctrine alone may shine forth which
comes direct from the mouth of God.

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span>Now he adjoins, *because,* (or *although,*
for this causal particle may be resolved adversatively,) *however
rebellious they may be, and like thorns, however thou mayest dwell among
scorpions, yet do not fear their words, and do not be broken down by
their appearance,* <span id="vi.vi-p8.1"></span>חתת*, chetheth,*
signifies to be rubbed and broken, and it is here transferred to the
mind, and is to be metaphorically understood for being broken in spirit,
as if it had been said, be thou intrepid in receiving all threats and
calumnies, *because they are a rebellious house* This passage teaches us
that none are fit to undertake the prophetic office, unless those who
are armed with fortitude and perseverance whatever may happen, so that
they do not fear any threats, nor hesitate or vacillate when oppressed
by unjust calamities. So Paul says, (<span id="vi.vi-p8.2"></span>[2Co
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008)<span id="vi.vi-p8.2"></span>,)
that he persevered through both evil report and good report, although he
was unworthily slandered by the wicked. Whoever, therefore, wishes to
prepare himself faithfully for undertaking the office of a teacher,
should be endued with such constancy that he may oppose, as it were, an
iron front to all calumnies and curses, threats and terrors.

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>We cannot doubt but that the Israelites were
much enraged when they heard themselves called thorns and scorpions. But
they ought to be thus stung, since if they had been attacking a mortal
man only, they would conduct themselves far more petulantly. But when
God pronounces them *scorpions and thorns,* and they see the Prophet
performing commands of this kind fearlessly and without hesitation, they
are necessarily impelled to either fury or silence. But when they have
striven to the very last in their obstinacy and hardness, yet God at
length causes them to yield through shame, because truth has prevailed,
of which the Prophet was a minister endued with such great fortitude of
mind. We also perceive from this passage, that the Prophets often spoke
with great asperity when the wickedness of those with whom they had to
deal required it: yet they were not hurried away into any excess, or
carried forward with intemperance against their adversaries. But they
could not in any other way vindicate their doctrine against the wicked,
who, impelled by a diabolical fury, strove with even God himself. We
must hold, therefore, that although they were cruel and severe in
language, yet they breathed pure humanity from the heart. For our
Prophet was not a barbarous man, who excited by indignation, vomited out
coarse reproaches against his own people, but the Spirit of God
dictated, as we see, what might seem too severe to soft and delicate
ears.

<span id="vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#007)<span id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span>**7.** And thou shalt speak my words unto
them, whether they will hear, or whether will forbear: for they *are*
most rebellious.

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Et proferes verba mea ad ipsos si
audierint et si destiterint, quia rebelles sunt.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span><span id="vi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p7"></span>Again he repeats what he had said, with but
the change of a few words, yet the meaning is the same, that the Prophet
should not desist in the midst of his course, if he saw that he did not
obtain what he wished and hoped for. For when we apply ourselves to what
God commands, we ought to be of good cheer, and expect that some fruit
of our labor may appear. We may, therefore, indulge both hopes and
wishes, but if it should turn out otherwise than we anticipated, yet we
ought to leave the result in the hands of God, and to proceed even to
the goal in the discharge of our duty. To this end this sentence tends:
*thou,* says he, *shalt utter my words,* or pronounce my words, *whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear:* that is, even if you sing
a song to the deaf, according to the proverb, yet you shall not cease to
utter my words: and he adds the reason, *because they are a rebellious
house.* God admonishes his servant beforehand, that there was no reason
why he should turn back although he should see no fruit of his labors,
because he ought to determine this in his mind, although they have no
ears yet he must speak in God’s name. It is certain, as we mentioned
yesterday, that there were some, though few in number, to whom his
teaching was useful, but he treats here of the people at large. We must
learn, therefore, when God calls us to the office of teaching, not to
regard the conduct of mankind. For if it please God to exercise us while
we strive with the rebellious and refractory, yet God’s word must be
uttered, because he commands it. It follows —

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span><span id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#008)<span id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>**8.** But thou, son of man, hear what I
say unto thee; Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house: open
thy mouth, and eat that I give thee.

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et tu fill hominis audi quae ego
loquor ad re, ne sis rebellis quemadmodum domus haec:  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) aperi os tuum et comede quaecunque
proposuero tibi.

<span id="vi.viii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.viii-p6"></span><span id="vi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p7"></span>God continues to confirm his servant, but
he advises him of a cause of stumbling which might break his spirit; for
when he perceived the great obstinacy of the house of Israel, he might
refuse the office of their teacher a hundred times over. God, however,
adds incentives and exhortations to perseverance, although he
experiences the abandoned obstinacy of the house of Israel: *do thou
hear,* says he, *what I shall say to thee* Here we see that no one can
discharge the teacher’s office, unless he be a proficient in God’s
school. It behoves, therefore, those who wish to be thought disciples of
God to be teachers of truth, and for this purpose first to listen to
God’s instructions. Then he takes away a stumblingblock, as we have
said, *be not thou, rebellious like the house of Israel* For we know
that a multitude has much influence over us to disturb us: for the
consent of a whole people is like a violent tempest, where all conspire
together, and even those who are not wicked yet are carried forward with
the crowd. Since, therefore, the, multitude sometimes carries away even
the servants of God, here God meets his Prophet and puts a bridle upon
him, *that thou be not rebellious,* says he, *like the house of Israel*
He does not here speak indefinitely concerning any people, but
concerning ‘that nation which boasted itself to be divinely elected, and
bore in the flesh the symbol of its adoption. Yet God wishes the consent
of his people to be neglected by his Prophet, because we know how
insolently the Israelites boasted themselves to be the sacred and
peculiar people of God; in the same way indeed as the Papists now exult,
Israel then vaunted against all the Prophets. And therefore this passage
must be diligently observed, because at this day many of these
magnificent titles vanish away when they are brought to reason: for we
know that they are mere smoke by which Satan endeavors to blind our
eyes, while he falsely brings forward the name of God and the Church.

<span id="vi.viii-p8"></span>We ought, indeed, to receive whatever is
uttered by God with such modesty and veneration that we may be
completely affected as soon as his name is mentioned, but meanwhile we
must. use prudence and discretion, lest we should be struck with awe
when Satan uses God’s name to deceive us. And as we must use
discernment, God here shows us the rule of doing so. For if we are
thoroughly persuaded that, the doctrine which we follow and profess is
from God, we can safely look down from on high not only upon all mortals
but upon angels themselves: for there is no excellence so great but that
God’s truth outshines it. Therefore when formerly the Israelites
pretended that they were God’s people, and were adorned by the marks of
a true Church, we must hold that the honor of the Church is frivolous
when hypocrites reign in it, or rather exercise impious tyranny, and
oppose themselves to God and his doctrine. And at this very day we may
turn this passage against the Papists — nay, even point it at them
directly as often as they bring up those pompous titles of “the Catholic
Church,” and “the Spouse of Christ,” for God has said once for all, that
we ought not to be rebellious, although the whole house of Israel should
become so; that is, although those who bring forward the name of God
should mutually enter into a diabolic conspiracy, yet we must not regard
their conduct so as to subscribe to their impious conspiracy. We read
the same in Isaiah, (<span id="vi.viii-p8.1"></span>[Isa.
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013)<span id="vi.viii-p8.1"></span>,)
Thou shalt not say a conspiracy whenever this people says conspiracy:
thou shalt not feel their fear nor their dread, but sanctify the Lord of
hosts. Which passage Peter also cites, (<span
id="vi.viii-p8.2"></span>[1 Pet. 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)<span id="vi.viii-p8.2"></span>;)
because the Jews, who then pertinaciously opposed the gospel, weakened
the feeble by their boasting, by saying that they were the Church, and
yet rejected and abominated the new teaching which was then spread
abroad: Peter cites that place of the Prophet, namely, although the
house of Israel impiously conspired against God, yet such contumacy must
be despised. Afterwards the Prophet adds, (<span
id="vi.viii-p8.3"></span>[Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)<span id="vi.viii-p8.3"></span>,)
Behold! I and the children whom God hath given me for a sign and a
wonder. He says, therefore, that those little ones who worship God
purely, and withdraw themselves from the common impiety, were like
monsters, and were esteemed as complete wonders. But the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews accommodates this place to the reign of Christ,
(<span id="vi.viii-p8.4"></span>[Heb
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013)<span id="vi.viii-p8.4"></span>,)
and not without reason. For to this day we are a wonder to God’s
enemies, who carry themselves not only with boldness but with abandoned
impudence against the pure doctrine of the gospel. To them we are
heretics, schismatics, dogs — nay, the offscouring of the world. But
although we are to them for signs and wonders, it is sufficient for us
to be acknowledged by God: because it is needful for us to be separated
from that impious conspiracy unless we wish to be separated from God
himself. For what agreement is there with Papists, or what union with
those dregs, unless by separation from God himself? Therefore, because
we cannot extend the hand to Papists on any other condition, and
cultivate a brotherly intercourse with them except by denying God, let
all that injurious union with them cease, and let us learn to separate
from them with boldness, since we clearly see that we are all commanded
to act thus in the person of the Prophet: for he had said a little
before, a prophet dwells in the midst of them — and this was clearly
expressed, that he might manifest more anxious care for himself. For it
is difficult to walk amidst thorns and scorpions, lest we should be
pricked, and lest we should be struck by their virulent tail. God, then,
commands us to be so attentive, that although we walk amid thorns we
should not be pricked by them, and also that we should not be injured by
the poison of scorpions; and if we seek from heaven that prudence which
does not naturally belong to us, this will happen, for if the Spirit of
God govern us, he will preserve us harmless from every bite of the
serpent, and from all injury and mischief.

<span id="vi.viii-p9"></span>It follows: *open thy mouth, and eat
whatever I shall put before thee* By this practical symbol God confirms
Ezekiel in his vocation: for he orders him *to eat a book,* which was
fulfilled in vision. Jeremiah uses the same metaphor, (<span
id="vi.viii-p9.1"></span>[Jer
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016)<span id="vi.viii-p9.1"></span>,)
but with some slight difference, because our Prophet seemed to himself
to eat a volume: but Jeremiah only signifies that he had digested the
words of God like food, not that he only tasted them with his tongue,
and that they were so thoroughly fixed in his mind as if he had really
dressed and digested them. But God wished to confirm our Prophet in
another way, namely, by offering him a volume, and commanding him to eat
it. There is no doubt that this volume comprehended whatever the Spirit
of God afterwards dictated to the Prophet; and yet the effect was just
as if God had made a mortal the channel of his Spirit: as if he had
said, “Now you shall utter nothing human nor terrestrial; because you
shall utter what my Spirit has already written in this book.” But here
we see a difference between the true servants of God, who discharge
their duty in earnest, and talkative men, who are satisfied with their
own powers of eloquence, or rather garrulity: for there are many ready
speakers who utter what they have never digested, and thus their
teaching is but vapid. And this is the meaning of what Paul says: the
kingdom of God is not in word but in power. (<span
id="vi.viii-p9.2"></span>[1Co
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#020)<span id="vi.viii-p9.2"></span>.)
But those who truly consecrate themselves to God, not only learn what
they speak of, but as food is eaten, so also they receive within them
the word of God, and hide it in the inmost recesses of their heart, so
that they may bring it forth from thence as food properly dressed. Now,
therefore, we understand why God wished the Prophet to eat the book,
concerning which also it follows afterwards —

<span id="vi.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p1"></span><span id="vi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Ezekiel
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009)<span id="vi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p2"></span>**9.** And when I looked, behold, an hand
*was* sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book *was* therein;

<span id="vi.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Et aspexi, et ecce marius emissa ad
me, et *ecce* in ea volumen libri;

<span id="vi.ix-p4"></span>**10.** And he spread it before me; and it
*was* written within and without: and *there was* written therein
lamentations, and mourning, and woe.

<span id="vi.ix-p5"></span>**10.** Et explicuit coram facie *mea,* et
ecce scriptum erat volumen a facie et retro,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) et scriptura  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) lamentationes*,* et carmen, et we.

<span id="vi.ix-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.ix-p9"></span><span id="vi.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p10"></span>Now the Prophet more fully explains what we
have just dwelt upon. He narrates how a *volume of a book was offered to
him:* that is, a book in the form of a roll was offered to him. For the
noun which he uses, <span id="vi.ix-p10.1"></span>מגלת, *megleth,* comes
from <span id="vi.ix-p10.2"></span>גלל, *gelel,* to roll, as the word
*volume* among the Latins. For they were formerly accustomed to write on
rolls, that is, they had not the form of books so compact and well
arranged as we now use, but they had volumes, which barbarians call
rolls. Ancient documents were written in this way, for there is nothing
ancient in the archives of princes which is not written on rolls. Hence
the phrase, “In the volume of the book it is written of me,” etc. (<span
id="vi.ix-p10.3"></span>[Ps 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#008)<span
id="vi.ix-p10.3"></span>; <span id="vi.ix-p10.4"></span>[Heb
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#007)<span id="vi.ix-p10.4"></span>.)
Now the Prophet says, *such a volume was offered to me that I might eat
it;* and he adds*, it was offered to me by a hand sent forth,* But by
this symbol God more clearly shows that the volume was not merely formed
in the air, nor was produced anywhere but in heaven. For if the Prophet
had only seen a volume presented to him, he might doubt whether it was
sent by God or not. But when the hand which offers the volume appears,
and is truly sent forth from God, nothing is wanting for full and
complete certainty.

<span id="vi.ix-p11"></span><span id="vi.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p12"></span>He adds, *after the volume was unrolled,
that he saw it written on each side:* by which words he understands not
that any brief command was given to him, but that a length of much time
was imposed. For if he had only spoken concerning the roll, the Jews
might have contemptuously rejected him after three or four days, as if
he had come to an ends” A roll was indeed offered to thee, but now thou
hast spoken three or four times, is not this sufficient?” Hence, as the
Prophet might meet with neglect, he says, *the roll was written before
and behind* He now says, for such was his argument, *that lamentations
only were written there* <span id="vi.ix-p12.1"></span>הגה*, hegeh,*
signifies sometimes meditation and speech simply, but here, *because* it
is connected with lamentations, there is no doubt that it is to be taken
for a mournful strain. At length the particle <span
id="vi.ix-p12.2"></span>הי, *hei,* is added in the sense of grieving. On
the whole then, the Prophet teaches, that the instruction contained in
the book was not sweet or pleasant, but full of sorrow, since truly God
here showed proofs of his anger, and this cannot be apprehended unless
by its causing grief and lamentations. Now, therefore, we understand
that the Israelites were more and more exasperated, when the Prophet
said, that he came like a herald who denounced war in the name of God,
and, at the same time, had no message of peace. As to the rest of the
people, we shall see afterwards, in many places, that he was a messenger
of God’s mercy, but his duty was to rouse up the Jews, that they might
feel God their adversary: thus the Prophet was sent with no other object
than that of going, as an armed man, into the midst,, and uttering
threats in the name of God. I cannot now proceed further, although what
follows is connected with this subject.

<span id="vi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="vi.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast this day
deigned to invite us to thyself with the testimony of thy paternal
favor, that we may not *be* as the beasts of the forest, but submit
ourselves calmly to thee, and so follow where thou callest us, that we
may in reality feel thee to be our Father; and thus may we live under
the protection of thy hand as long as we are pilgrims in this world, so
that at length being gathered unto thy heavenly kingdom, we may cleave
entirely to thee and thine only-begotten Son, who is our felicity and
glory. — Amen.

<span id="vi.xi"></span>

<span id="vi.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Eighth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc22005.htm#fr_56) <span
id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span> Literally, “I sending thee.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc22005.htm#fr_57) <span
id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span> *Rebelled.* This word is the same as the
last. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc22005.htm#fr_58) <span
id="vi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span> Calvin’s Latin is <span
id="vi.ii-p18.1"></span>*mala ova malorum corvorum* — *Tr.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc22005.htm#fr_59) <span
id="vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span> The copula “and” is here redundant, but it
may be resolved into the adverb of time or the adversative particle —
“trot they shall know.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc22005.htm#fr_60) <span
id="vi.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span> The word is different from <span
id="vi.vi-p4.1"></span>מורדים, *mordim, rebellious,* <span
id="vi.vi-p4.2"></span>[Eze 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003)<span
id="vi.vi-p4.2"></span>; but commentators translate it the same, though
perhaps it signifies something else, for it is not in common use among
the Hebrews. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc22005.htm#fr_61) <span
id="vi.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span> *Otherwise,* Thou shalt pronounce my words
to them, whether they will hear, or whether they will refuse to hear,
for surely they are men of rebellion. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc22005.htm#fr_62) <span
id="vi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p4"></span> Israel must be understood. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc22005.htm#fr_63) <span
id="vi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p6"></span> “That is, behind and *before.”* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc22005.htm#fr_64) <span
id="vi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ix-p7"></span> “What was written in *it.”* — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc22006)
