[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal046)  [Next](njal048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 47. OF OTKELL IN KIRKBY

There was a man named Otkell; he was the son of Skarf, the son of
Hallkell, who fought with Grim of Grimsness, and felled him on the holm.
(1) This Hallkell and Kettlebjorn the Old were brothers.

Otkell kept house at Kirkby; his wife's name was Thorgerda; she was a
daughter of Mar, the son of Runolf, the son of Naddad of the Faroe
Isles. Otkell was wealthy in goods. His son's name was Thorgeir; he was
young in years, and a bold dashing man.

Skamkell was the name of another man; he kept house at another farm
called Hof (2); he was well off for money, but he was a spiteful man and
a liar; quarrelsome too, and ill to deal with. He was Otkell's friend.
Hallkell was the name of Otkell's brother; he was a tall strong man, and
lived there with Otkell; their brother's name was Hallbjorn the White;
he brought out to Iceland a thrall, whose name was Malcolm; he was
Irish, and had not many friends.

Hallbjorn went to stay with Otkell, and so did his thrall Malcolm. The
thrall was always saying that he should think himself happy if Otkell
owned him. Otkell was kind to him, and gave him a knife and belt, and a
full suit of clothes, but the thrall turned his hand to any work that
Otkell wished.

Otkell wanted to make a bargain with his brother for the thrall; he said
he would give him the thrall, but said, too, that he was a worse
treasure than he thought. But as soon as Otkell owned the thrall, then
he did less and less work. Otkell often said outright to Hallbjorn, that
he thought the thrall did little work; and he told Otkell that there was
worse in him yet to come.

At that time came a great scarcity, so that men fell short both of meat
and hay, and that spread over all parts of Iceland. Gunnar shared his
hay and meat with many men; and all got them who came thither, so long
as his stores lasted. At last it came about that Gunnar himself fell
short both of hay and meat. Then Gunnar called on Kolskegg to go along
with him; he called too on Thrain Sigfus' son, and Lambi Sigurd's son.
They fared to Kirkby, and called Otkell out. He greeted them, and Gunnar
said, "It so happens that I am come to deal with thee for hay and meat,
if there be any left."

Otkell answers, "There is store of both, but I will sell thee neither."

"Wilt thou give me them then," says Gunnar, "and run the risk of my
paying thee back somehow?"

"I will not do that either," says Otkell.

Skamkell all the while was giving him bad counsel.

Then Thrain Sigfus' son, said, "It would serve him right if we take both
hay and meat and lay down the worth of them instead."

Skamkell answered, "All the men of Mossfell must be dead and gone then,
if ye, sons of Sigfus, are to come and rob them."

"I will have no hand in any robbery," says Gunnar.

"Wilt thou buy a thrall of me?" says Otkell.

"I'll not spare to do that," says Gunnar. After that Gunnar bought the
thrall, and fared away as things stood.

Njal hears of this, and said, "Such things are ill done, to refuse to
let Gunnar buy; and it is not a good outlook for others if such men as
he cannot get what they want."

"What's the good of thy talking so much about such a little matter,"
says Bergthora; "far more like a man would it be to let him have both
meat and hay, when thou lackest neither of them."

"That is clear as day," says Njal, "and I will of a surety supply his
need somewhat."

Then he fared up to Thorolfsfell, and his sons with him, and they bound
hay on fifteen horses; but on five horses they had meat. Njal came to
Lithend, and called Gunnar out. He greeted them kindly.

"Here is hay and meat," said Njal, "which I will give thee; and my wish
is, that thou shouldst never look to any one else than to me if thou
standest in need of anything."

"Good are thy gifts," says Gunnar, "but methinks thy friendship is still
more worth, and that of thy sons."

After that Njal fared home, and now the spring passes away.

ENDNOTES:

\(1\) That is, slew him in a duel. (2) Mord Valgard's son lived at the
other farm called Hof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 48. How Hallgerda Makes Malcolm Steal From Kirkby](njal048.md)
