[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal062)  [Next](njal064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 63. NJAL'S COUNSEL TO GUNNAR

Steinvor, at Sandgil, besought Thorgrim the Easterling to take in hand
the care of her goods, and not to sail away from Iceland, and so to keep
in mind the death of his messmate and kinsman.

"My messmate Thorir," said he, "foretold that I should fall by Gunnar's
hand if I stayed here in the land, and he must have foreseen that when
he foreknew his own death."

"I will give thee," she says, "Gudruna my daughter to wife, and all my
goods into the bargain."

"I knew not," he said, "that thou wouldest pay such a long price."

After that they struck the bargain that he shall have her, and the
wedding feast was to be the next summer.

Now Gunnar rides to Bergthorsknoll, and Kolskegg with him. Njal was out
of doors and his sons, and they went to meet Gunnar and gave them a
hearty welcome. After that they fell a-talking, and Gunnar said, "Hither
am I come to seek good counsel and help at thy hand."

"That is thy due," said Njal.

"I have fallen into a great strait," says Gunnar, "and slain many men,
and I wish to know what thou wilt make of the matter?"

"Many will say this," said Njal, "that thou hast been driven into it
much against thy will; but now thou shalt give me time to take counsel
with myself."

Then Njal went away all by himself, and thought over a plan, and came
back and said, "Now have I thought over the matter somewhat, and it
seems to me as though this must be carried through--if it be carried
through at all--with hardihood and daring. Thorgeir has got my kinswoman
Thorfinna with child, and I will hand over to thee the suit for
seduction. Another suit of outlawry against Starkad I hand over also to
thee, for having hewn trees in my wood on the Threecorner ridge. Both
these suits shalt thou take up. Thou shalt fare too, to the spot where
ye fought, and dig up the dead, and name witnesses to the wounds, and
make all the dead outlaws, for that they came against thee with that
mind to give thee and thy brothers wounds or swift death. But if this be
tried at the Thing, and it be brought up against thee that thou first
gave Thorgeir a blow, and so mayst neither plead thine own cause nor
that of others, then I will answer in that matter, and say that I gave
thee back thy rights at the Thingskala-Thing, so that thou shouldest be
able to plead thine own suit as well as that of others, and then there
will be an answer to that point. Thou shalt also go to see Tyrfing of
Berianess, and he must hand over to thee a suit against Aunund of
Witchwood, who has the blood feud after his brother Egil."

Then first of all Gunnar rode home; but a few nights after Njal's sons
and Gunnar rode thither where the bodies were, and dug them up that were
buried there. Then Gunnar summoned them all as outlaws for assault and
treachery, and rode home after that.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 64. Of Valgard And Mord](njal064.md)
