[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal069)  [Next](njal071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 70. MORD'S COUNSEL

A little after, those namesakes and Mord met, and they were not at all
of one mind. They thought they had lost much goods for Mord's sake, but
had got nothing in return; and they bade him set on foot some other plot
which might do Gunnar harm.

Mord said so it should be. "But now this is my counsel, that thou,
Thorgeir Otkell's son shouldest beguile Ormilda, Gunnar's kinswoman; but
Gunnar will let his displeasure grow against thee at that, and then I
will spread that story abroad that Gunnar will not suffer thee to do
such things. Then ye two shall some time after make an attack on Gunnar,
but still ye must not seek him at home, for there is no thinking of that
while the hound is alive."

So they settled this plan among them that it should be brought about.

Thorgeir began to turn his steps towards Ormilda, and Gunnar thought
that ill, and great dislike arose between them.

So the winter wore away. Now comes the summer, and their secret meetings
went on oftener than before.

As for Thorgeir of the Threecorner and Mord, they were always meeting;
and they plan an onslaught on Gunnar when he rides down to the isles to
see after the work done by his house-caries.

One day Mord was ware of it when Gunnar rode down to the isles, and sent
a man off under the Threecorner to tell Thorgeir that then would be the
likeliest time to try to fall on Gunnar.

They bestirred them at once, and fare thence twelve together, but when
they came to Kirkby there they found thirteen men waiting for them.

Then they made up their minds to ride down to Rangriver and lie in wait
there for Gunnar.

But when Gunnar rode up from the isles, Kolskegg rode with him. Gunnar
had his bow and his arrows and his bill. Kolskegg had his short sword
and weapons to match.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 71. The Slaying Of Thorgeir Otkell's Son](njal071.md)
