[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal027)  [Next](njal029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 28. HALLVARD COMES OUT TO ICELAND

There came a ship out from Norway, and ran into Arnbael's Oyce (1), and
the master of the ship was Hallvard the White, a man from the Bay (2).
He went to stay at Lithend, and was with Gunnar that winter, and was
always asking him to fare abroad with him. Gunnar spoke little about it,
but yet said more unlikely things might happen; and about spring he went
over to Bergthorsknoll to find out from Njal whether he thought it a
wise step in him to go abroad.

"I think it is wise," says Njal; "they will think thee there an
honourable man, as thou art."

"Wilt thou perhaps take my goods into thy keeping while I am away, for I
wish my brother Kolskegg to fare with me; but I would that thou shouldst
see after my household along with my mother."

"I will not throw anything in the way of that," says Njal; "lean on me
in this thing as much as thou likest."

"Good go with thee for thy words," says Gunnar, and he rides then home.

The Easterling (3) fell again to talk with Gunnar that he should fare
abroad. Gunnar asked if he had ever sailed to other lands? He said he
had sailed to every one of them that lay between Norway and Russia, and
so, too, I have sailed to Biarmaland (4).

"Wilt thou sail with me eastward ho?" says Gunnar.

"That I will of a surety," says he.

Then Gunnar made up his mind to sail abroad with him. Njal took all
Gunnar's goods into his keeping.

ENDNOTES:

\(1\) "Oyce," a north country word for the mouth of a river, from the
Icelandic.

\(2\) "The Bay" (comp. ch. ii., and other passages), the name given to
the great bay in the east of Norway, the entrance of which from the
North Sea is the Cattegat, and at the end of which is the Christiania
Firth. The name also applies to the land round the Bay, which thus
formed a district, the boundary of which, on the one side, was the
promontory called Lindesnaes, or the Naze, and on the other, the
Gota-Elf, the river on which the Swedish town of Gottenburg stands, and
off the mouth of which lies the island of Hisingen, mentioned shortly
after.

\(3\) Easterling, i.e., the Norseman Hallvard. (4) Permia, the country
one comes to after doubling the North Cape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. Gunnar Goes Abroad](njal029.md)
