[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal096)  [Next](njal098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 97. OF THANGBRAND'S JOURNEYS

The spring after Thangbrand set out to preach Christianity, and Hall
went with him. But when they came west across Lonsheath to Staffell,
there they found a man dwelling named Thorkell. He spoke most against
the faith, and challenged Thangbrand to single combat. Then Thangbrand
bore a rood-cross (1) before his shield, and the end of their combat was
that Thangbrand won the day and slew Thorkell.

Thence they fared to Hornfirth and turned in as guests at Borgarhaven,
west of Heinabergs sand. There Hilldir the Old dwelt (2), and then
Hilldir and all his household took upon them the new faith.

Thence they fared to Fellcombe, and went in as guests to Calffell. There
dwelt Kol Thorstein's son, Hall's kinsman, and he took upon him the
faith and all his house.

Thence they fared to Swinefell, and Flosi only took the sign of the
cross, but gave his word to back them at the Thing.

Thence they fared west to Woodcombe, and went in as guests at Kirkby.
There dwelt Surt Asbjorn's son, the son of Thorstein, the son of Kettle
the Foolish. These had all of them been Christians from father to son.

After that they fared out of Woodcombe on to Headbrink. By that time the
story of their journey was spread far and wide. There was a man named
Sorcerer-Hedinn who dwelt in Carlinedale. There heathen men made a
bargain with him that he should put Thangbrand to death with all his
company. He fared upon Arnstacksheath, and there made a great sacrifice
when Thangbrand was riding from the east. Then the earth burst asunder
under his horse, but he sprang off his horse and saved himself on the
brink of the gulf, but the earth swallowed up the horse and all his
harness, and they never saw him more.

Then Thangbrand praised God.

ENDNOTES:

\(1\) Rood-cross, a crucifix. (2) His son was Glum who fared to the
burning with Flosi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 98. Of Thangbrand And Gudleif](njal098.md)
