[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal005)  [Next](njal007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 6. HRUT SAILS OUT TO ICELAND

Hrut stayed with the king that winter in good cheer, but when spring
came he grew very silent. Gunnhillda finds that out, and said to him
when they two were alone together, "Art thou sick at heart?"

"So it is," said Hrut, "as the saying runs--'Ill goes it with those who
are born on a barren land.'"

"Wilt thou to Iceland?" she asks.

"Yes," he answered.

"Hast thou a wife out there?" she asked; and he answers, "No."

"But I am sure that is true," she says; and so they ceased talking about
the matter.

Shortly after Hrut went before the king and bade him Good-day; and the
king said, "What dost thou want now, Hrut?"

"I am come to ask, lord, that you give me leave to go to Iceland."

"Will thine honour be greater there than here?" asks the king.

"No, it will not," said Hrut; "but every one must win the work that is
set before him."

"It is pulling a rope against a strong man," said Gunnhillda, "so give
him leave to go as best suits him."

There was a bad harvest that year in the land, yet Gunnhillda gave Hrut
as much meal as he chose to have; and now he busks him to sail out to
Iceland, and Auzur with him; and when they were "all-boun," Hrut went to
find the king and Gunnhillda. She led him aside to talk alone, and said
to him, "Here is a gold ring which I will give thee;" and with that she
clasped it round his wrist.

"Many good gifts have I had from thee," said Hrut.

Then she put her hands round his neck and kissed him, and said, "If I
have as much power over thee as I think, I lay this spell on thee that
thou mayst never have any pleasure in living with that woman on whom thy
heart is set in Iceland, but with other women thou mayst get on well
enough, and now it is like to go well with neither of us; but thou hast
not believed what I have been saying."

Hrut laughed when he heard that, and went away; after that he came
before the king and thanked him; and the king spoke kindly to him, and
bade him "farewell." Hrut went straight to his ship, and they had a fair
wind all the way until they ran into Borgarfirth.

As soon as the ship was made fast to the land, Hrut rode west home, but
Auzur stayed by the ship to unload her and lay her up. Hrut rode
straight to Hauskuldstede, and Hauskuld gave him a hearty welcome, and
Hrut told him all about his travels. After that they send men east
across the rivers to tell Fiddle Mord to make ready for the bridal
feast; but the two brothers rode to the ship, and on the way Hauskuld
told Hrut how his money-matters stood, and his goods had gained much
since he was away. Then Hrut said, "The reward is less worth than it
ought to be, but I will give thee as much meal as thou needst for thy
household next winter."

Then they drew the ship on land on rollers, and made her snug in her
shed, but all the wares on board her they carried away into the Dales
westward. Hrut stayed at home at Hrutstede till winter was six weeks
off, and then the brothers made ready and Auzur with them, to ride to
Hrut's wedding. Sixty men ride with them, and they rode east till they
came to Rangriver plains. There they found a crowd of guests, and the
men took their seats on benches down the length of the hall, but the
women were seated on the cross-benches on the dais, and the bride was
rather downcast. So they drank out the feast and it went off well. Mord
pays down his daughter's portion, and she rides west with her husband
and his train. So they ride till they reach home. Hrut gave over
everything into her hands inside the house, and all were pleased at
that; but for all that she and Hrut did not pull well together as man
and wife, and so things went on till spring, and when spring came Hrut
had a journey to make to the Westfirths, to get in the money for which
he had sold his wares; but before he set off his wife says to him, "Dost
thou mean to be back before men ride to the Thing?"

"Why dost thou ask?" said Hrut.

"I will ride to the Thing," she said, "to meet my father."

"So it shall be," said he, "and I will ride to the Thing along with
thee."

"Well and good," she says.

After that Hrut rode from home west to the Firths, got in all his money,
and laid it out anew, and rode home again. When he came home he busked
him to ride to the Thing, and made all his neighbours ride with him. His
brother Hauskuld rode among the rest. Then Hrut said to his wife, "If
thou hast as much mind now to go to the Thing as thou saidst a while
ago, busk thyself and ride along with me."

She was not slow in getting herself ready, and then they all rode to the
Thing. Unna went to her father's booth, and he gave her a hearty
welcome, but she seemed somewhat heavy-hearted, and when he saw that he
said to her, "I have seen thee with a merrier face. Hast thou anything
on thy mind?"

She began to weep, and answered nothing. Then he said to her again. "Why
didst thou ride to the Thing, if thou wilt not tell me thy secret? Dost
thou dislike living away there in the west?"

Then she answered him, "I would give all I own in the world that I had
never gone thither."

"Well!" said Mord, "I'll soon get to the bottom of this." Then be sends
men to fetch Hauskuld and Hrut, and they came straightway; and when they
came in to see Mord, he rose up to meet them and gave them a hearty
welcome, and asked them to sit down. Then they talked a long time in a
friendly way, and at last Mord said to Hauskuld, "Why does my daughter
think so ill of life in the west yonder?"

"Let her speak out," said Hrut, "if she has anything to lay to my
charge."

But she brought no charge against him. Then Hrut made them ask his
neighbours and household how he treated her, and all bore him good
witness, saying that she did just as she pleased in the house.

Then Mord said, "Home thou shalt go, and be content with thy lot; for
all the witness goes better for him than for thee."

After that Hrut rode home from the Thing, and his wife with him, and all
went smoothly between them that summer; but when spring came it was the
old story over again, and things grew worse and worse as the spring went
on. Hrut had again a journey to make west to the Firths, and gave out
that he would not ride to the Althing, but Unna his wife said little
about it. So Hrut went away west to the Firths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Unna Separates From Hrut](njal007.md)
