[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal010)  [Next](njal012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 11. THORWALD'S SLAYING

Throwald rode home from the bridal feast, and his wife with him, and
Thiostolf, who rode by her horse's side, and still talked to her in a
low voice. Oswif turned to his son and said, "Art thou pleased with thy
match? and how went it when ye talked together."

"Well," said he, "she showed all kindness to me. Thou mightst see that
by the way she laughs at every word I say."

"I don't think her laughter so hearty as thou dost," answered Oswif,
"but this will be put to the proof by and by."

So they ride on till they come home, and at night she took her seat by
her husband's side, and made room for Thiostolf next herself on the
inside. Thiostolf and Thorwald had little to do with each other, and few
words were thrown away between them that winter, and so time went on.
Hallgerda was prodigal and grasping, and there was nothing that any of
their neighbours had that she must not have too, and all that she had,
no matter whether it were her own or belonged to others she wasted. But
when the spring came there was a scarcity in the house, both of meal and
stock fish, so Hallgerda went up to Thorwald and said, "Thou must not be
sitting in-doors any longer, for we want for the house both meal and
fish.

"Well," said Thorwald, "I did not lay in less for the house this year
than I laid in before, and then it used to last till summer."

"What care I," said Hallgerda, "if thou and thy father have made your
money by starving yourselves."

Then Thorwald got angry and gave her a blow on the face and drew blood,
and went away and called his men and ran the skiff down to the shore.
Then six of them jumped into her and rowed out to the Bear-isles, and
began to load her with meal and fish.

Meantime it is said that Hallgerda sat out of doors heavy at heart.
Thiostolf went up to her and saw the wound on her face, and said, "Who
has been playing thee this sorry trick?"

"My husband, Thorwald," she said, "and thou stoodst aloof, though thou
wouldst not if thou hadst cared at all for me."

"Because I knew nothing about it," said Thiostolf, "but I will avenge
it."

Then he went away down to the shore and ran out a six-oared boat, and
held in his hand a great axe that he had with a haft overlaid with iron.
He steps into the boat and rows out to the Bear-isles, and when he got
there all the men had rowed away but Thorwald and his followers, and he
stayed by the skiff to load her, while they brought the goods down to
him. So Thiostolf came up just then and jumped into the skiff, and began
to load with him, and after a while he said, "Thou canst do but little
at this work, and that little thou dost badly."

"Thinkst thou thou canst do it better," said Thorwald.

"There's one thing to be done which I can do better than thou," said
Thiostolf, and then he went on, "The woman who is thy wife has made a
bad match, and you shall not live much longer together."

Then Thorwald snatched up a fishing-knife that lay by him, and made a
stab at Thiostolf; he had lifted his axe to his shoulder and dashed it
down. It came on Thorwald's arm and crushed the wrist, but down fell the
knife. Then Thiostolf lifted up his axe a second time and gave Thorwald
a blow on the head, and he fell dead on the spot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. Thiostolf's Flight](njal012)
