[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal124)  [Next](njal126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 125. FLOSI'S JOURNEY FROM HOME

Flosi busked him from the east when two months were still to winter, and
summoned to him all his men who had promised him help and company. Each
of them had two horses and good weapons, and they all came to Swinefell,
and were there that night.

Flosi made them say prayers betimes on the Lord's day, and afterwards
they sate down to meat. He spoke to his household, and told them what
work each was to do while he was away. After that he went to his horses.

Flosi and his men rode first west on the Sand (1). Flosi bade them not
to ride too hard at first; but said they would do well enough at that
pace, and he bade all to wait for the others if any of them had need to
stop. They rode west to Woodcombe, and came to Kirkby. Flosi there bade
all men to come into the church, and pray to God, and men did so.

After that they mounted their horses, and rode on the fell, and so to
Fishwaters, and rode a little to the west of the lakes, and so struck
down west on to the Sand (2). Then they left Eyjafell Jokul on their
left hand, and so came down into Godaland, and so on to Markfleet, and
came about nones (3) on the second day of the week to Threecorner ridge,
and waited till mid-even. Then all had came thither save Ingialld of the
Springs.

The sons of Sigfus spoke much ill of him, but Flosi bade them not blame
Ingialld when he was not by, "But we will pay him for this hereafter."

ENDNOTES:

\(1\) "Sand," Skeidara sand. (2) "Sand," Maelifell's sand. (3) "Nones,"
the well-known canonical hour of the day, the ninth hour from six a.m.,
that is, about three o'clock when one of the church services took place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 126. Of Portents At Bergthorsknoll](njal126)
