[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal105)  [Next](njal107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 106. OF VALGARD THE GUILEFUL

Valgard the Guileful came back to Iceland that summer; he was then still
heathen. He fared to Hof to his son Mord's house, and was there the
winter over. He said to Mord, "Here I have ridden far and wide all over
the neighbourhood, and methinks I do not know it for the same. I came to
Whiteness, and there I saw many tofts of booths and much ground levelled
for building. I came to Thingskala-Thing, and there I saw all our booths
broken down. What is the meaning of such strange things?

"New priesthoods," answers Mord, "have been set up here, and a law for a
Fifth Court, and men have declared themselves out of my Thing, and have
gone over to Hauskuld's Thing."

"Ill hast thou repaid me," said Valgard, "for giving up to thee my
priesthood, when thou hast handled it so little like a man, and now my
wish is that thou shouldst pay them off by something that will drag them
all down to death; and this thou canst do by setting them by the ears by
talebearing, so that Njal's sons may slay Hauskuld; but there are many
who will have the blood-feud after him, and so Njal's sons will be slain
in that quarrel."

"I shall never be able to get that done," says Mord.

"I will give thee a plan," says Valgard; "thou shalt ask Njal's sons to
thy house, and send them away with gifts, but thou shalt keep thy
tale-bearing in the background until great friendship has sprung up
between you, and they trust thee no worse than their own selves. So wilt
thou be able to avenge thyself on Skarphedinn for that he took thy money
from thee after Gunnar's death; and in this wise, further on, thou wilt
be able to seize the leadership when they are all dead and gone."

This plan they settled between them should be brought to pass; and Mord
said, "I would, father, that thou wouldst take on thee the new faith.
Thou art an old man.

"I will not do that," says Valgard. "I would rather that thou shouldst
cast off the faith, and see what follows then."

Mord said he would not do that. Valgard broke crosses before Mord's
face, and all holy tokens. A little after Valgard took a sickness and
breathed his last, and he was laid in a cairn by Hof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 107. Of Mord And Njal's Sons](njal107.md)
