[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal156)  [Next](njal158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 157. THE SLAYING OF KOL THORSTEIN'S SON

Kari Solmund's son told master Skeggi that he wished he would get him a
ship. So master Skeggi gave Kari a longship, fully trimmed and manned,
and on board it went Kari, and David the White, and Kolbein the Black.

Now Kari and his fellows sailed south through Scotland's firths, and
there they found men from the Southern isles. They told Kari the tidings
from Ireland, and also that Flosi was gone to Wales, and his men with
him.

But when Kari heard that, he told his messmates that he would hold on
south to Wales, to fall in with Flosi and his band. So he bade them then
to part from his company, if they liked it better, and said that he
would not wish to beguile any man into mischief, because he thought he
had not yet had revenge enough on Flosi and his band.

All chose to go with him; and then he sails south to Wales, and there
they lay in hiding in a creek out of the way.

That morning Kol Thorstein's son went into the town to buy silver. He of
all the burners had used the bitterest words. Kol had talked much with a
mighty dame, and he had so knocked the nail on the head, that it was all
but fixed that he was to have her, and settle down there.

That same morning Kari went also into the town. He came where Kol was
telling the silver.

Kari knew him at once, and ran at him with his drawn sword and smote him
on the neck; but he still went on telling the silver, and his head
counted "ten" just as it spun off his body.

Then Kari said, "Go and tell this to Flosi, that Kari Solmund's son hath
slain Kol Thorstein's son. I give notice of this slaying as done by my
hand."

Then Kari went to his ship, and told his shipmates of the manslaughter.

Then they sailed north to Beruwick, and laid up their ship, and fared up
into Whitherne in Scotland, and were with Earl Malcolm that year.

But when Flosi heard of Kol's slaying, he laid out his body, and
bestowed much money on his burial.

Flosi never uttered any wrathful words against Kari.

Thence Flosi fared south across the sea and began his pilgrimage, and
went on south, and did not stop till he came to Rome. There he got so
great honour that he took absolution from the Pope himself, and for that
he gave a great sum of money.

Then he fared back again by the east road, and stayed long in towns, and
went in before mighty men, and had from them great honour.

He was in Norway the winter after, and was with Earl Eric till he was
ready to sail, and the earl gave him much meal, and many other men
behaved handsomely to him.

Now he sailed out to Iceland, and ran into Hornfirth, and thence fared
home to Swinefell. He had then fulfilled all the terms of his atonement,
both in fines and foreign travel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 158. Of Flosi And Kari](njal158)
