[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](njal032)  [Next](njal034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 33. GUNNAR'S WOOING

So Gunnar rode, and they all rode. But when they came to the Thing they
were so well arrayed that none could match them in bravery; and men came
out of every booth to wonder at them. Gunnar rode to the booths of the
men of Rangriver, and was there with his kinsmen. Many men came to see
Gunnar, and ask tidings of him; and he was easy and merry to all men,
and told them all they wished to hear.

It happened one day that Gunnar went away from the Hill of Laws, and
passed by the booths of the men from Mossfell; then he saw a woman
coming to meet him, and she was in goodly attire; but when they met she
spoke to Gunnar at once. He took her greeting well, and asks what woman
she might be. She told him her name was Hallgerda, and said she was
Hauskuld's daughter, Dalakoll's son. She spoke up boldly to him, and
bade him tell her of his voyages; but he said he would not gainsay her a
talk. Then they sat them down and talked. She was so clad that she had
on a red kirtle, and had thrown over her a scarlet cloak trimmed with
needlework down to the waist. Her hair came down to her bosom, and was
both fair and full. Gunnar was clad in the scarlet clothes which King
Harold Gorm's son had given him; he had also the gold ring on his arm
which Earl Hacon had given him.

So they talked long out loud, and at last it came about that he asked
whether she were unmarried. She said, so it was, "and there are not many
who would run the risk of that."

"Thinkest thou none good enough for thee?"

"Not that," she says, "but I am said to be hard to please in husbands."

"How wouldst thou answer, were I to ask for thee?"

"That cannot be in thy mind," she says.

"It is though," says he.

"If thou hast any mind that way, go and see my father."

After that they broke off their talk.

Gunnar went straightway to the Dalesmen's booths, and met a man outside
the doorway, and asks whether Hauskuld were inside the booth?

The man says that he was. Then Gunnar went in, and Hauskuld and Hrut
made him welcome. He sat down between them, and no one could find out
from their talk that there had ever been any misunderstanding between
them. At last Gunnar's speech turned thither; how these brothers would
answer if he asked for Hallgerda?

"Well," says Hauskuld, "if that is indeed thy mind."

Gunnar says that he is in earnest, "but we so parted last time, that
many would think it unlikely that we should ever be bound together."

"How thinkest thou, kinsman Hrut?" says Hauskuld.

Hrut answered, "Methinks this is no even match."

"How dost thou make that out?" says Gunnar.

Hrut spoke, "In this wise will I answer thee about this matter, as is
the very truth. Thou art a brisk brave man well to do, and unblemished;
but she is much mixed up with ill report, and I will not cheat thee in
anything."

"Good go with thee for thy words," says Gunnar, "but still I shall hold
that for true, that the old feud weighs with ye, if ye will not let me
make this match."

"Not so," says Hrut, "'t is more because I see that thou art unable to
help thyself; but though we make no bargain, we would still be thy
friends."

"I have talked to her about it," says Gunnar, "and it is not far from
her mind."

Hrut says, "I know that you have both set your hearts on this match;
and, besides, ye two are those who run the most risk as to how it turns
out."

Hrut told Gunnar unasked all about Hallgerda's temper, and Gunnar at
first thought that there was more than enough that was wanting; but at
last it came about that they struck a bargain.

Then Hallgerda was sent for, and they talked over the business when she
was by, and now, as before, they made her betroth herself. The bridal
feast was to be at Lithend, and at first they were to set about it
secretly; but the end after all was that every one knew of it.

Gunnar rode home from the Thing, and came to Bergthorsknoll, and told
Njal of the bargain he had made. He took it heavily.

Gunnar asks Njal why he thought this so unwise?

"Because from her," says Njal, "will arise all kind of ill if she comes
hither east."

"Never shall she spoil our friendship," says Gunnar.

"Ah! but yet that may come very near," says Njal; "and, besides, thou
wilt have always to make atonement for her."

Gunnar asked Njal to the wedding, and all those as well whom he wished
should be at it from Njal's house.

Njal promised to go; and after that Gunnar rode home, and then rode
about the district to bid men to his wedding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 34. Of Thrain Sigfus' Son](njal034)
