[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal009)  [Next](njal011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 10. HALLGERDA'S WEDDING

Hauskuld told Hallgerda of the bargain he had made, and she said, "Now
that has been put to the proof which I have all along been afraid of,
that thou lovest me not so much as thou art always saying, when thou
hast not thought it worth while to tell me a word of all this matter.
Besides, I do not think this match so good a one as thou hast always
promised me."

So she went on, and let them know in every way that she thought she was
thrown away.

Then Hauskuld said, "I do not set so much store by thy pride as to let
it stand in the way of my bargains; and my will, not thine, shall carry
the day if we fall out on any point."

"The pride of all you kinsfolk is great," she said, "and so it is not
wonderful if I have some of it."

With that she went away, and found her foster-father Thiostolf, and told
him what was in store for her, and was very heavy-hearted. Then
Thiostolf said, "Be of good cheer, for thou wilt be married a second
time, and then they will ask thee what thou thinkest of the match; for I
will do in all things as thou wishest, except in what touches thy father
or Hrut."

After that they spoke no more of the matter, and Hauskuld made ready the
bridal feast, and rode off to ask men to it. So he came to Hrutstede and
called Hrut out to speak with him. Hrut went out, and they began to
talk, and Hauskuld told him the whole story of the bargain, and bade him
to the feast, saying, "I should be glad to know that thou dost not feel
hurt though I did not tell thee when the bargain was being made.

"I should be better pleased," said Hrut "to have nothing at all to do
with it; for this match will bring luck neither to him nor to her; but
still I will come to the feast if thou thinkest it will add any honour
to thee."

"Of course I think so," said Hauskuld, and rode off home.

Oswif and Thorwald also asked men to come, so that no fewer than one
hundred guests were asked.

There was a man named Swan, who dwelt in Bearfirth, which lies north
from Steingrimsfirth. This Swan was a great wizard, and he was
Hallgerda's mother's brother. He was quarrelsome, and hard to deal with,
but Hallgerda asked him to the feast, and sends Thiostolf to him; so he
went, and it soon got to friendship between him and Swan.

Now men come to the feast, and Hallgerda sat upon the cross- bench, and
she was a very merry bride. Thiostolf was always talking to her, though
he sometimes found time to speak to Swan, and men thought their talking
strange. The feast went off well, and Hauskuld paid down Hallgerda's
portion with the greatest readiness. After he had done that, he said to
Hrut, "Shall I bring out any gifts beside?"

"The day will come," answered Hrut, "when thou wilt have to waste thy
goods for Hallgerda's sake, so hold thy hand now."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Thorwald's Slaying](njal011.md)
