[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal141)  [Next](njal143.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 142. OF EYJOLF BOLVERK'S SON

Then Eyjolf Bolverk's son went before the court, and took witness to
this, "I take witness that this is a lawful defence in this cause, that
ye have pleaded the suit in the Eastfirthers' Court, when ye ought to
have pleaded it in the Northlanders' Court; for Flosi has declared
himself one of the Thingmen of Askel the Priest and here now are those
two witnesses who were by, and who will bear witness that Flosi handed
over his priesthood to his brother Thorgeir, but afterwards declared
himself one of Askel the Priest's Thingmen. I take witness to this for
my own part, and for those who may need to make use of it."

Again Eyjolf took witness, "I take witness," he said, "to this, that I
bid Mord who pleads this suit, or the next of kin, to listen to my oath,
and to my declaration of the defence which I am about to bring forward;
I bid him by a lawful bidding before the court, so that the judges may
hear me."

Again Eyjolf took witness, "I take witness to this, that I swear an oath
on the book, a lawful oath, and say it before God, that I will so defend
this cause, in the most truthful, and most just, and most lawful way, so
far as I know, and so fulfil all lawful duties which belong to me at
this Thing."

Then Eyjolf said, "These two men I take to witness that I bring forward
this lawful defence that this suit was pleaded in another Quarter Court,
than that in which it ought to have been pleaded; and I say that for
this sake their suit has come to naught; I utter this defence in this
shape before the Eastfirthers' Court."

After that he let all the witness be brought forward which belonged to
the defence, and then he took witness to all the steps in the defence to
prove that they had all been duly taken.

After that Eyjolf again took witness and said, "I take witness to this,
that I forbid the judges, by a lawful protest before the priest, to
utter judgment in the suit of Mord and his friends, for now a lawful
defence has been brought before the court. I forbid you by a protest
made before a priest; by a full, fair, and binding protest; as I have a
right to forbid you by the common custom of the Althing, and by the law
of the land."

After that be called on the judges to pronounce for the defence.

Then Asgrim and his friends brought on the other suits for the burning,
and those suits took their course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 143. The Counsel Of Thorhall Asgrim's Son](njal143.md)
