[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal107)  [Next](njal109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 108. OF THE SLANDER OF MORD VALGARD'S SON.

A little after Njal's sons and Hauskuld were to have their yearly
feasts, and they were the first to bid Hauskuld to come to them.

Skarphedinn had a brown horse four winters old, both tall and sightly.
He was a stallion, and had never yet been matched in fight. That horse
Skarphedinn gave to Hauskuld, and along with him two mares. They all
gave Hauskuld gifts, and assured him of their friendship.

After that Hauskuld bade them to his house at Ossaby, and had many
guests to meet them, and a great crowd.

It happened that he had just then taken down his hall, but he had built
three outhouses, and there the beds were made.

So all that were bidden came, and the feast went off very well. But when
men were to go home Hauskuld picked out good gifts for them, and went a
part of the way with Njal's sons.

The sons of Sigfus followed him and all the crowd, and both sides said
that nothing should ever come between them to spoil their friendship.

A little while after Mord came to Ossaby and called Hauskuld out to talk
with him, and they went aside and spoke.

"What a difference in manliness there is," said Mord, "between thee and
Njal's sons! Thou gavest them good gifts, but they gave thee gifts with
great mockery."

"How makest thou that out?" says Hauskuld.

"They gave thee a horse which they called a 'dark horse,' and that they
did out of mockery to thee, because they thought thee too untried. I can
tell thee also that they envy thee the priesthood. Skarphedinn took it
up as his own at the Thing when thou camest not to the Thing at the
summoning of the Fifth Court, and Skarphedinn never means to let it go."

"That is not true," says Hauskuld, "for I got it back at the Folkmote
last harvest."

"Then that was Njal's doing," says Mord. "They broke, too, the atonement
about Lyting."

"I do not mean to lay that at their door," says Hauskuld.

"Well," says Mord, "thou canst not deny that when ye two, Skarphedinn
and thou, were going east towards Markfleet, an axe fell out from under
his belt, and he meant to have slain thee then and there."

"It was his woodman's axe," says Hauskuld, "and I saw how he put it
under his belt; and now, Mord, I will just tell thee this right out,
that thou canst never say so much ill of Njal's sons as to make me
believe it; but though there were aught in it, and it were true as thou
sayest, that either I must slay them or they me, then would I far rather
suffer death at their hands than work them any harm. But as for thee,
thou art all the worse a man for having spoken this."

After that Mord fares home. A little after Mord goes to see Njal's sons,
and he talks much with those brothers and Kari.

"I have been told," says Mord, "that Hauskuld has said that thou,
Skarphedinn, hast broken the atonement made with Lyting; but I was made
aware also that he thought that thou hadst meant some treachery against
him when ye two fared to Markfleet. But still, methinks that was no less
treachery when he bade you to a feast at his house, and stowed you away
in an outhouse that was farthest from the house, and wood was then
heaped round the outhouse all night, and he meant to burn you all
inside; but it so happened that Hogni Gunnar's son came that night, and
naught came of their onslaught, for they were afraid of him. After that
he followed you on your way and great band of men with him, then he
meant to make another onslaught on you, and set Grani Gunnar's son, and
Gunnar Lambi's son to kill thee; but their hearts failed them, and they
dared not to fall on thee."

But when he had spoken thus, first of all they spoke against it, but the
end of it was that they believed him, and from that day forth a coldness
sprung up on their part towards Hauskuld, and they scarcely ever spoke
to him when they met; but Hauskuld showed them little deference, and so
things went on for a while.

Next harvest Hauskuld fared east to Swinefell to a feast, and Flosi gave
him a hearty welcome. Hildigunna was there too. Then Flosi spoke to
Hauskuld and said, "Hildigunna tells me that there is great coldness
with you and Njal's sons, and methinks that is ill, and I will beg thee
not to ride west, but I will get thee a homestead in Skaptarfell, and I
will send my brother, Thorgeir, to dwell at Ossaby."

"Then some will say," says Hauskuld, "that I am flying thence for fear's
sake, and that I will not have said."

"Then it is more likely that great trouble will arise," says Flosi.

"Ill is that then," says Hauskuld, "for I would rather fall unatoned,
than that many should reap ill for my sake."

Hauskuld busked him to ride home a few nights after, but Flosi gave him
a scarlet cloak, and it was embroidered with needlework down to the
waist.

Hauskuld rode home to Ossaby, and now all is quiet for a while.

Hauskuld was so much beloved that few men were his foes, but the same
ill-will went on between him and Njal's sons the whole winter through.

Njal had taken as his foster-child, Thord, the son of Kari. He had also
fostered Thorhall, the son of Asgrim Ellidagrim's son. Thorhall was a
strong man, and hardy both in body and mind, he had learnt so much law
that he was the third greatest lawyer in Iceland.

Next spring was an early spring, and men are busy sowing their corn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 109. Of Mord And Njal's Sons](njal109.md)
