[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Iceland](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](njal149)  [Next](njal151.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 150. MORE OF KARI AND BJORN

Then Kari asked Bjorn, "What counsel shall we take now? Now I will try
what thy wit is worth."

"Dost thou think now," answered Bjorn, "that much lies on our being as
wise as ever we can?"

"Ay," said Kari, "I think so surely."

"Then our counsel is soon taken," says Bjorn. "We will cheat them all as
though they were giants; and now we will make as though we were riding
north on the fell, but as soon as ever we are out of sight behind the
brae, we will turn down along Skaptarwater, and hide us there where we
think handiest, so long as the hue and cry is hottest, if they ride
after us."

"So will we do," said Kari; "and this I had meant to do all along."

"And so you may put it to the proof," said Bjorn, "that I am no more of
an every-day body in wit than I am in bravery."

Now Kari and his companion rode as they had purposed down along
Skaptarwater, till they came where a branch of the stream ran away to
the south-east; then they turned down along the middle branch, and did
not draw bridle till they came into Middleland, and on that moor which
is called Kringlemire; it has a stream of lava all around it.

Then Kari said to Bjorn that he must watch their horses, and keep a good
look-out; "But as for me," he says, "I am heavy with sleep."

So Bjorn watched the horses, but Kari lay him down, and slept but a very
short while ere Bjorn waked him up again, and he had already led their
horses together, and they were by their side. Then Bjorn said to Kari,
"Thou standest in much need of me though! A man might easily have run
away from thee if he had not been as brave-hearted as I am; for now thy
foes are riding upon thee, and so thou must up and be doing."

Then Kari went away under a jutting crag, and Bjorn said, "Where shall I
stand now?"

"Well!" answers Kari, "now there are two choices before thee; one is,
that thou standest at my back and have my shield to cover thyself with,
if it can be of any use to thee; and the other is, to get on thy horse
and ride away as fast as thou canst."

"Nay," says Bjorn, "I will not do that, and there are many things
against it; first of all, may be, if I ride away, some spiteful tongues
might begin to say that I ran away from thee for faint- heartedness; and
another thing is, that I well know what game they will think there is in
me, and so they will ride after me, two or three of them, and then I
should be of no use or help to thee after all. No! I will rather stand
by thee and keep them off so long as it is fated."

Then they had not long to wait ere horses with packsaddles were driven
by them over the moor, and with them went three men.

Then Kari said, "These men see us not."

"Then let us suffer them to ride on," said Bjorn.

So those three rode on past them; but the six others then came riding
right up to them, and they all leapt off their horses straightway in a
body, and turned on Kari and his companion.

First, Glum Hildir's son rushed at them, and thrust at Kari with a
spear; Kari turned short round on his heel, and Glum missed him, and the
blow fell against the rock. Bjorn sees that and hewed at once the head
off Glum's spear. Kari leant on one side and smote at Glum with his
sword, and the blow fell on his thigh, and took off the limb high up in
the thigh, and Glum died at once.

Then Vebrand and Asbrand the sons of Thorbrand ran up to Kari, but Kari
flew at Vebrand and thrust his sword through him, but afterwards he
hewed off both of Asbrand's feet from under him.

In this bout both Kari and Bjorn were wounded.

Then Kettle of the Mark rushed at Kari, and thrust at him with his
spear. Kari threw up his leg, and the spear stuck in the ground, and
Kari leapt on the spear-shaft, and snapped it in sunder.

Then Kari grasped Kettle in his arms, and Bjorn ran up just then, and
wanted to slay him, but Kari said, "Be still now. I will give Kettle
peace; for though it may be that Kettle's life is in my power, still I
will never slay him."

Kettle answers never a word, but rode away after his companions, and
told those the tidings who did not know them already.

They told also these tidings to the men of the Hundred, and they
gathered together at once a great force of armed men, and went
straightway up all the water-courses, and so far up on the fell that
they were three days in the chase; but after that they turned back to
their own homes, but Kettle and his companions rode east to Swinefell,
and told the tidings these.

Flosi was little stirred at what had befallen them, but said, "No one
could tell whether things would stop there, for there is no man like
Kari of all that are now left in Iceland."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151. Of Kari And Bjorn And Thorgeir](njal151.md)
