[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cog02)  [Next](cog04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Book 3--The Two Gods

CHAPTER XII

 

CAITILIN NI MURRACHU was sitting alone in the little cave behind Gort na
Cloca Mora. Her companion had gone out as was his custom to walk in the
sunny morning and to sound his pipe in desolate, green spaces whence,
perhaps, the wanderer of his desire might hear the guiding sweetness. As
she sat she was thinking. The last few days had awakened her body, and
had also awakened her mind, for with the one awakening comes the other.
The despondency which had touched her previously when tending her
father's cattle came to her again, but recognizably now. She knew the
thing which the wind had whispered in the sloping field and for which
she had no name--it was Happiness. Faintly she shadowed it forth, but
yet she could not see it. It was only a pearl-pale wraith, almost
formless, too tenuous to be touched by her hands, and too aloof to be
spoken to. Pan had told her that he was the giver of happiness, but he
had given her only unrest and fever and a longing which could not be
satisfied. Again there was a want, and she could not formulate, or even
realize it with any closeness. Her new-born Thought had promised
everything, even as Pan, and it had given--she could not say that it had
given her nothing or anything. Its limits were too quickly divinable.
She had found the Tree of Knowledge, but about on every side a great
wall soared blackly enclosing her in from the Tree of Life--a wall which
her thought was unable to surmount even while instinct urged that it
must topple before her advance; but instinct may not advance when
thought has schooled it in the science of unbelief; and this wall will
not be conquered until Thought and Instinct are wed, and the first son
of that bridal will be called The Scaler of the Wall.

So, after the quiet weariness of ignorance, the unquiet weariness of
thought had fallen upon her. That travail of mind which, through
countless generations, has throed to the birth of an ecstasy, the
prophecy which humanity has sworn must be fulfilled, seeing through
whatever mists and doubtings the vision of a gaiety wherein the
innocence of the morning will not any longer be strange to our maturity.

While she was so thinking Pan returned, a little disheartened that he
had found no person to listen to his pipings. He had been seated but a
little time when suddenly, from without, a chorus of birds burst into
joyous singing. Limpid and liquid cadenzas, mellow flutings, and the
sweet treble of infancy met and danced and piped in the airy soundings.
A round, soft tenderness of song rose and fell, broadened and soared,
and then the high flight was snatched, eddied a moment, and was borne
away to a more slender and wonderful loftiness, until, from afar, that
thrilling song turned on the very apex of sweetness, dipped steeply and
flashed its joyous return to the exultations of its mates below, rolling
an ecstasy of song which for one moment gladdened the whole world and
the sad people who moved thereon; then the singing ceased as suddenly as
it began, a swift shadow darkened the passage, and Angus Og came into
the cave.

Caitilin sprang from her seat Frighted, and Pan also made a half
movement towards rising, but instantly sank back again to his negligent,
easy posture.

The god was slender and as swift as a wind. His hair swung about his
face like golden blossoms. His eyes were mild and dancing and his lips
smiled with quiet sweetness. About his head there flew perpetually a
ring of singing birds, and when he spoke his voice came sweetly from a
centre of sweetness.

"Health to you, daughter of Murrachu," said he, and he sat down.

"I do not know you, sir," the terrified girl whispered.

"I cannot be known until I make myself known," he replied. "I am called
Infinite Joy, O daughter of Murrachu, and I am called Love."

The girl gazed doubtfully from one to the other.

Pan looked up from his pipes.

"I also am called Love," said he gently, "and I am called Joy."

Angus Og looked for the first time at Pan.

"Singer of the Vine," said he, "I know your names--they are Desire and
Fever and Lust and Death. Why have you come from your own place to spy
upon my pastures and my quiet fields?"

Pan replied mildly.

"The mortal gods move by the Immortal Will, and, therefore, I am here."

"And I am here," said Angus.

"Give me a sign," said Pan, "that I must go."

Angus Og lifted his hand and from without there came again the
triumphant music of the birds.

"It is a sign," said he, "the voice of Dana speaking in the air," and,
saying so, he made obeisance to the great mother.

Pan lifted his hand, and from afar there came the lowing of the cattle
and the thin voices of the goats.

"It is a sign," said he, "the voice of Demeter speaking from the earth,"
and he also bowed deeply to the mother of the world.

Again Angus Og lifted his hand, and in it there appeared a spear, bright
and very terrible.

But Pan only said, "Can a spear divine the Eternal Will?" and Angus Og
put his weapon aside, and he said: "The girl will choose between us, for
the Divine Mood shines in the heart of man."

Then Caitilin Ni Murrachu came forward and sat between the gods, but Pan
stretched out his hand and drew her to him, so that she sat resting
against his shoulder and his arm was about her body.

"We will speak the truth to this girl," said Angus Og.

"Can the gods speak otherwise?" said Pan, and he laughed with delight.

"It is the difference between us," replied Angus Og. "She will judge."

"Shepherd Girl," said Pan, pressing her with his arm, "you will judge
between us. Do you know what is the greatest thing in the
world?--because it is of that you will have to judge."

"I have heard," the girl replied, "two things called the greatest
things. You," she continued to Pan, "said it was Hunger, and long ago my
father said that Commonsense was the greatest thing in the world."

"I have not told you," said Angus Og, "what I consider is the greatest
thing in the world."

"It is your right to speak," said Pan.

"The greatest thing in the world," said Angus Og, "is the Divine
Imagination."

"Now," said Pan, "we know all the greatest things and we can talk of
them."

"The daughter of Murrachu," continued Angus Og, "has told us what you
think and what her father thinks, but she has not told us what she
thinks herself. Tell us, Caitilin Ni Murrachu, what you think is the
greatest thing in the world."

So Caitilin Ni Murrachu thought for a few moments and then replied
timidly.

"I think that Happiness is the greatest thing in the world," said she.

Hearing this they sat in silence for a little time, and then Angus Og
spoke again-

"The Divine Imagination may only be known through the thoughts of His
creatures. A man has said Commonsense and a woman has said Happiness are
the greatest things in the world. These things are male and female, for
Commonsense is Thought and Happiness is Emotion, and until they embrace
in Love the will of Immensity cannot be fruitful. For, behold, there has
been no marriage of humanity since time began. Men have but coupled with
their own shadows. The desire that sprang from their heads they pursued,
and no man has yet known the love of a woman. And women have mated with
the shadows of their own hearts, thinking fondly that the arms of men
were about them. I saw my son dancing with an Idea, and I said to him,
'With what do you dance, my son?' and he replied, 'I make merry with the
wife of my affection,' and truly she was shaped as a woman is shaped,
but it was an Idea he danced with and not a woman. And presently he went
away to his labours, and then his Idea arose and her humanity came upon
her so that she was clothed with beauty and terror, and she went apart
and danced with the servant of my son, and there was great joy of that
dancing--for a person in the wrong place is an Idea and not a person.
Man is Thought and woman is Intuition, and they have never mated. There
is a gulf between them and it is called Fear, and what they fear is,
that their strengths shall be taken from them and they may no longer be
tyrants. The Eternal has made love blind, for it is not by science, but
by intuition alone, that he may come to his beloved; but desire, which
is science, has many eyes and sees so vastly that he passes his love in
the press, saying there is no love, and he propagates miserably on his
own delusions. The finger-tips are guided by God, but the devil looks
through the eyes of all creatures so that they may wander in the errors
of reason and justify themselves of their wanderings. The desire of a
man shall be Beauty, but he has fashioned a slave in his mind and called
it Virtue. The desire of a woman shall be Wisdom, but she has formed a
beast in her blood and called it Courage: but the real virtue is
courage, and the real courage is liberty, and the real liberty is
wisdom, and Wisdom is the son of Thought and Intuition; and his names
also are Innocence and Adoration and Happiness."

When Angus Og had said these words he ceased, and for a time there was
silence in the little cave. Caitilin had covered her face with her hands
and would not look at him, but Pan drew the girl closer to his side and
peered sideways, laughing at Angus.

"Has the time yet come for the girl to judge between us?" said he.

"Daughter of Murrachu," said Angus Og, "will you come away with me from
this place?"

Caitilin then looked at the god in great distress. "I do not know what
to do," said she. "Why do you both want me? I have given myself to Pan,
and his arms are about me."

"I want you," said Angus Og, "because the world has forgotten me. In all
my nation there is no remembrance of me. I, wandering on the hills of my
country, am lonely indeed. I am the desolate god forbidden to utter my
happy laughter. I hide the silver of my speech and the gold of my
merriment. I live in the holes of the rocks and the dark caves of the
sea. I weep in the morning because I may not laugh, and in the evening I
go abroad and am not happy. Where I have kissed a bird has flown; where
I have trod a flower has sprung. But Thought has snared my birds in his
nets and sold them in the market-places. Who will deliver me from
Thought, from the base holiness of Intellect, the maker of chains and
traps? Who will save me from the holy impurity of Emotion, whose
daughters are Envy and Jealousy and Hatred, who plucks my flowers to
ornament her lusts and my little leaves to shrivel on the breasts of
infamy? Lo, I am sealed in the caves of non-entity until the head and
the heart shall come together in fruitfulness, until Thought has wept
for Love, and Emotion has purified herself to meet her lover. Tir-na-nOg
is the heart of a man and the head of a woman. Widely they are
separated. Self-centred they stand, and between them the seas of space
are flooding desolately. No voice can shout across those shores. No eye
can bridge them, nor any desire bring them together until the blind god
shall find them on the wavering stream--not as an arrow searches
straightly from a bow, but gently, imperceptibly as a feather on the
wind reaches the ground on a hundred starts; not with the compass and
the chart, but by the breath of the Almighty which blows from all
quarters without care and without ceasing. Night and day it urges from
the outside to the inside. It gathers ever to the centre. From the far
without to the deep within, trembling from the body to the soul until
the head of a woman and the heart of a man are filled with the Divine
Imagination. Hymen, Hymenaea! I sing to the ears that are stopped, the
eyes that are sealed, and the minds that do not labour. Sweetly I sing
on the hill-side. The blind shall look within and not without; the deaf
shall hearken to the murmur of their own veins, and be enchanted with
the wisdom of sweetness; the thoughtless shall think without effort as
the lightning flashes, that the hand of Innocence may reach to the
stars, that the feet of Adoration may dance to the Father of Joy, and
the laugh of Happiness be answered by the Voice of Benediction."

Thus Angus Og sang in the cave, and ere he had ceased Caitilin Ni
Murrachu withdrew herself from the arms of her desires. But so strong
was the hold of Pan upon her that when she was free her body bore the
marks of his grip, and many days passed away before these marks faded.

Then Pan arose in silence, taking his double reed in his hand, and the
girl wept, beseeching him to stay to be her brother and the brother of
her beloved, but Pan smiled and said: "Your beloved is my father and my
son. He is yesterday and to-morrow. He is the nether and the upper
millstone, and I am crushed between until I kneel again before the
throne from whence I came," and, saying so, he embraced Angus Og most
tenderly and went his way to the quiet fields, and across the slopes of
the mountains, and beyond the blue distances of space.

And in a little time Caitilin Ni Murrachu went with her companion across
the brow of the hill, and she did not go with him because she had
understood his words, nor because he was naked and unashamed, but only
because his need of her was very great, and, therefore, she loved him,
and stayed his feet in the way, and was concerned lest he should
stumble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 4--The Philosophers Return](cog04)
