[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cog04)  [Next](cog06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Book 5--The Policemen

CHAPTER XIV

 

SOME distance down the road the policemen halted. The night had fallen
before they effected their capture, and now, in the gathering darkness,
they were not at ease. In the first place, they knew that the occupation
upon which they were employed was not a creditable one to a man whatever
it might be to a policeman. The seizure of a criminal may be justified
by certain arguments as to the health of society and the preservation of
property, but no person wishes under any circumstances to hale a wise
man to prison. They were further distressed by the knowledge that they
were in the very centre of a populous fairy country, and that on every
side the elemental hosts might be ranging, ready to fall upon them with
the terrors of war or the still more awful scourge of their humour. The
path leading to their station was a long one, winding through great
alleys of trees, which in some places overhung the road so thickly that
even the full moon could not search out that deep blackness. In the
daylight these men would have arrested an Archangel and, if necessary,
bludgeoned him, but in the night-time a thousand fears afflicted and a
multitude of sounds shocked them from every quarter.

Two men were holding the Philosopher, one on either side; the other two
walked one before and one behind him. In this order they were proceeding
when just in front through the dim light they saw the road swallowed up
by one of these groves already spoken of. When they came nigh they
halted irresolutely: the man who was in front (a silent and perturbed
sergeant) turned fiercely to the others-

"Come on, can't you?" said he; "what the devil are you waiting for?" and
he strode forward into the black gape.

"Keep a good hold of that man," said the one behind.

"Don't be talking out of you," replied he on the right. "Haven't we got
a good grip of him, and isn't he an old man into the bargain?"

"Well, keep a good tight grip of him, anyhow, for if he gave you the
slip in there he'd vanish like a weasel in a bush. Them old fellows do
be slippery customers. Look here, mister," said he to the Philosopher,
"if you try to run away from us I'll give you a clout on the head with
my baton; do you mind me now!"

They had taken only a few paces forward when the sound of hasty
footsteps brought them again to a halt, and in a moment the sergeant
came striding back. He was angry.

"Are you going to stay there the whole night, or what are you going to
do at all?" said he.

"Let you be quiet now," said another; "we were only settling with the
man here the way he wouldn't try to give us the slip in a dark place."

"Is it thinking of giving us the slip he is?" said the sergeant. "Take
your baton in your hand, Shawn, and if he turns his head to one side of
him hit him on that side."

"I'll do that," said Shawn, and he pulled out his truncheon.

The Philosopher had been dazed by the suddenness of these occurrences,
and the enforced rapidity of his movements prevented him from either
thinking or speaking, but during this brief stoppage his scattered wits
began to return to their allegiance. First, bewilderment at his
enforcement had seized him, and the four men, who were continually
running round him and speaking all at once, and each pulling him in a
different direction, gave him the impression that he was surrounded by a
great rabble of people, but he could not discover what they wanted.
After a time he found that there were only four men, and gathered from
their remarks that he was being arrested for murder--this precipitated
him into another and a deeper gulf of bewilderment. He was unable to
conceive why they should arrest him for murder when he had not committed
any; and, following this, he became indignant.

"I will not go another step," said he, "unless you tell me where you are
bringing me and what I am accused of."

"Tell me," said the sergeant, "what did you kill them with? for it's a
miracle how they came to their ends without as much as a mark on their
skins or a broken tooth itself."

"Who are you talking about?" the Philosopher demanded.

"It's mighty innocent you are," he replied. "Who would I be talking
about but the man and woman that used to be living with you beyond in
the little house? Is it poison you gave them now, or what was it? Take a
hold of your note-book, Shawn."

"Can't you have sense, man?" said Shawn. "How would I be writing in the
middle of a dark place and me without as much as a pencil, let alone a
book?"

"Well, we'll take it down at the station, and himself can tell us all
about it as we go along. Move on now, for this is no place to be
conversing in."

They paced on again, and in another moment they were swallowed up by the
darkness. When they had proceeded for a little distance there came a
peculiar sound in front like the breathing of some enormous animal, and
also a kind of shuffling noise, and so they again halted.

"There's a queer kind of a thing in front of us," said one of the men in
a low voice.

"If I had a match itself," said another.

The sergeant had also halted.

"Draw well into the side of the road," said he, "and poke your batons in
front of you. Keep a tight hold of that man, Shawn."

"I'll do that," said Shawn.

Just then one of them found a few matches in his pocket, and he struck a
light; there was no wind, so that it blazed easily enough, and they all
peered in front. A big black cart-horse was lying in the middle of the
road having a gentle sleep, and when the light shone it scrambled to its
feet and went thundering away in a panic.

"Isn't that enough to put the heart crossways in you?" said one of the
men, with a great sigh.

"Ay," said another; "if you stepped on that beast in the darkness you
wouldn't know what to be thinking."

"I don't quite remember the way about here," said the sergeant after a
while, "but I think we should take the first turn to the right. I wonder
have we passed the turn yet; these criss-cross kinds of roads are the
devil, and it dark as well. Do any of you men know the way?"

"I don't," said one voice; "I'm a Cavan man myself."

"Roscommon," said another, "is my country, and I wish I was there now,
so I do."

"Well, if we walk straight on we're bound to get somewhere, so step it
out. Have you got a good hold of that man, Shawn?"

"I have so," said Shawn.

The Philosopher's voice came pealing through the darkness.

"There is no need to pinch me, sir," said he.

"I'm not pinching you at all," said the man.

"You are so," returned the Philosopher. "You have a big lump of skin
doubled up in the sleeve of my coat, and unless you instantly release it
I will sit down in the road."

"Is that any better?" said the man, relaxing his hold a little.

"You have only let out half of it," replied the Philosopher. "That's
better now," he continued, and they resumed their journey.

After a few minutes of silence the Philosopher began to speak.

"I do not see any necessity in nature for policemen," said he, "nor do I
understand how the custom first originated. Dogs and cats do not employ
these extraordinary mercenaries, and yet their polity is progressive and
orderly. Crows are a gregarious race with settled habitations and an
organized commonwealth. They usually congregate in a ruined tower or on
the top of a church, and their civilization is based on mutual aid and
tolerance for each other's idiosyncrasies. Their exceeding mobility and
hardiness renders them dangerous to attack, and thus they are free to
devote themselves to the development of their domestic laws and customs.
If policemen were necessary to a civilization crows would certainly have
evolved them, but I triumphantly insist that they have not got any
policemen in their republic--"

"I don't understand a word you are saying," said the sergeant.

"It doesn't matter," said the Philosopher. "Ants and bees also live in
specialized communities and have an extreme complexity both of function
and occupation. Their experience in governmental matters is enormous,
and yet they have never discovered that a police force is at all
essential to their wellbeing--"

"Do you know," said the sergeant, "that whatever you say now will be
used in evidence against you later on?"

"I do not," said the Philosopher. "It may be said that these races are
free from crime, that such vices as they have are organized and communal
instead of individual and anarchistic, and that, consequently, there is
no necessity for policecraft, but I cannot believe that these large
aggregations of people could have attained their present high culture
without an interval of both national and individual dishonesty--"

"Tell me now, as you are talking," said the sergeant, "did you buy the
poison at a chemist's shop, or did you smother the pair of them with a
pillow?"

"I did not," said the Philosopher. "If crime is a condition precedent to
the evolution of policemen, then I will submit that jackdaws are a very
thievish clan--they are somewhat larger than a blackbird, and will steal
wool off a sheep's back to line their nests with; they have,
furthermore, been known to abstract one shilling in copper and secrete
this booty so ingeniously that it has never since been recovered--"

"I had a jackdaw myself," said one of the men. "I got it from a woman
that came to the door with a basket for fourpence. My mother stood on
its back one day, and she getting out of bed. I split its tongue with a
threepenny bit the way it would talk, but devil the word it ever said
for me. It used to hop around letting on it had a lame leg, and then it
would steal your socks."

"Shut up!" roared the sergeant.

"If," said the Philosopher, "these people steal both from from sheep and
from men, if their peculations range from wool to money, I do not see
how they can avoid stealing from each other, and consequently, if
anywhere, it is amongst jackdaws one should look for the growth of a
police force, but there is no such force in existence. The real reason
is that they are a witty and thoughtful race who look temperately on
what is known as crime and evil--one eats, one steals; it is all in the
order of things, and therefore not to be quarrelled with. There is no
other view possible to a philosophical people--"

"What the devil is he talking about?" said the ser- geant.

"Monkeys are gregarious and thievish and semi-human. They inhabit the
equatorial latitudes and eat nuts--"

"Do you know what he is saying, Shawn?"

"I do not," said Shawn.

"--they ought to have evolved professional thief-takers, but it is
common knowledge that they have not done so. Fishes, squirrels, rats,
beavers, and bison have also abstained from this singular
growth--therefore, when I insist that I see no necessity for policemen
and object to their presence, I base that objection on logic and facts,
and not on any immediate petty prejudice."

"Shawn," said the sergeant, "have you got a good grip on that man?"

"I have," said Shawn.

"Well, if he talks any more hit him with your baton."

"I will so," said Shawn.

"There's a speck of light down yonder, and, maybe, it's a candle in a
window--we'll ask the way at that place."

In about three minutes they came to a small house which was overhung by
trees. If the light had not been visible they would undoubtedly have
passed it in the darkness. As they approached the door the sound of a
female voice came to them scoldingly.

"There's somebody up anyhow," said the sergeant, and he tapped at the
door.

The scolding voice ceased instantly. After a few seconds he tapped
again; then a voice was heard from just behind the door.

"Tomas," said the voice, "go and bring up the two dogs with you before I
take the door off the chain."

The door was then opened a few inches and a face peered out-

"What would you be wanting at this hour of the night?" said the woman.

"Not much, ma'am," said the sergeant; "only a little direction about the
road, for we are not sure whether we've gone too far or not far enough."

The woman noticed their uniforms.

"Is it policemen ye are? There's no harm in your coming in, I suppose,
and if a drink of milk is any good to ye I have plenty of it."

"Milk's better than nothing," said the sergeant with a sigh.

"I've a little sup of spirits," said she, "but it wouldn't be enough to
go around."

"Ah, well," said he, looking sternly at his comrades, "everybody has to
take their chance in this world," and he stepped into the house followed
by his men.

The women gave him a little sup of whisky from a bottle, and to each of
the other men she gave a cup of milk.

"It'll wash the dust out of our gullets, anyhow," said one of them.

There were two chairs, a bed, and a table in the room. The Philosopher
and his attendants sat on the bed. The sergeant sat on the table, the
fourth man took a chair, and the woman dropped wearily into the
remaining chair from which she looked with pity at the prisoner.

"What are you taking the poor man away for?" she asked.

"He's a bad one, ma'am," said the sergeant. "He killed a man and a woman
that were staying with him and he buried their corpses underneath the
hearthstone of his house. He's a real malefactor, mind you."

"Is it hanging him you'll be, God help us?"

"You never know, and I wouldn't be a bit surprisedif it came to that.
But you were in trouble yourself,ma'am, for we heard your voice
lamenting about something as we came along the road."

"I was, indeed," she replied, "for the person that has a son in her
house has a trouble in her heart."

"Do you tell me now--What did he do on you?" and the sergeant bent a
look of grave reprobation on a young lad who was standing against the
wall between two dogs.

"He's a good boy enough in some ways," said she, "but he's too fond of
beasts. He'll go and lie in the kennel along with them two dogs for
hours at a time, petting them and making a lot of them, but if I try to
give him a kiss, or to hug him for a couple of minutes when I do be
tired after the work, he'll wriggle like an eel till I let him out--it
would make a body hate him, so it would. Sure, there's no nature in him,
sir, and I'm his mother."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, you young whelp," said the
sergeant very severely.

"And then there's the horse," she continued. "Maybe you met it down the
road a while ago?"

"We did, ma'am," said the sergeant.

"Well, when he came in Tomas went to tie him up, for he's a caution at
getting out and wandering about the road, the way you'd break your neck
over him if you weren't minding. After a while I told the boy to come
in, but he didn't come, so I went out myself, and there was himself and
the horse with their arms round each other's necks looking as if they
were moonstruck."

"Faith, he's the queer lad!" said the sergeant. "What do you be making
love to the horse for, Tomas?"

"It was all I could do to make him come in," she continued, "and then I
said to him, 'Sit down alongside of me here, Tomas, and keep me company
for a little while'--for I do be lonely in the night-time--but he
wouldn't stay quiet at all. One minute he'd say, 'Mother, there's a moth
flying round the candle and it'll be burnt,' and then, 'There was a fly
going into the spider's web in the corner,' and he'd have to save it,
and after that, 'There's a daddy-long-legs hurting himself on the
window-pane,' and he'd have to let it out; but when I try to kiss him he
pushes me away. My heart is tormented, so it is, for what have I in the
world but him?"

"Is his father dead, ma'am?" said the sergeant kindly.

"I'll tell the truth," said she. "I don't know whether he is or not, for
a long time ago, when we used to live in the city of Bla' Cliah, he lost
his work one time and he never came back to me again. He was ashamed to
come home I'm thinking, the poor man, because he had no money; as if I
would have minded whether he had any money or not--sure, he was very
fond of me, sir, and we could have pulled along somehow. After that I
came back to my father's place here; the rest of the children died on
me, and then my father died, and I'm doing the best I can by myself.
It's only that I'm a little bit troubled with the boy now and again."

"It's a hard case, ma'am," said the sergeant, "but maybe the boy is only
a bit wild not having his father over him, and maybe it's just that he's
used to yourself, for there isn't a child at all that doesn't love his
mother. Let you behave yourself now, Tomas; attend to your mother, and
leave the beasts and the insects alone, like a decent boy, for there's
no insect in the world will ever like you as well as she does. Could you
tell me, ma'am, if we have passed the first turn on this road, or is it
in front of us still, for we are lost altogether in the darkness?"

"It's in front of you still," she replied, "about ten minutes down the
road; you can't miss it, for you'll see the sky where there is a gap in
the trees, and that gap is the turn you want."

"Thank you, ma'am," said the sergeant; "we'd better be moving on, for
there's a long tramp in front of us before we get to sleep this night."

He stood up and the men rose to follow him when, suddenly, the boy spoke
in a whisper.

"Mother," said he, "they are going to hang the man," and he burst into
tears.

"Oh, hush, hush," said the woman, "sure, the men can't help it." She
dropped quickly on her knees and opened her arms, "Come over to your
mother, my darling."

The boy ran to her.

"They are going to hang him," he cried in a high, thin voice, and he
plucked at her arm violently.

"Now, then, my young boy-o," said the sergeant, "none of that violence."

The boy turned suddenly and flew at him with astonishing ferocity. He
hurled himself against the sergeant's legs and bit, and kicked, and
struck at him. So furiously sudden was his attack that the man went
staggering back against the wall, then he plucked at the boy and whirled
him across the room. In an instant the two dogs leaped at him snarling
with rage--one of these he kicked into a corner, from which it rebounded
again bristling and red-eyed; the other dog was caught by the woman, and
after a few frantic seconds she gripped the first dog also. To a
horrible chorus of howls and snapping teeth the men hustled outside and
slammed the door.

"Shawn," the sergeant bawled, "have you got a good grip of that man?"

"I have so," said Shawn.

"If he gets away I'll kick the belly out of you; mind that now! Come
along with you and no more of your slouching."

They marched down the road in a tingling silence.

"Dogs," said the Philosopher, "are a most intelligent race of people--"

"People, my granny!" said the sergeant.

"From the earliest ages their intelligence has been observed and
recorded, so that ancient literatures are bulky with references to their
sagacity and fidelity--"

"Will you shut your old jaw?" said the sergeant.

"I will not," said the Philosopher. "Elephants also are credited with an
extreme intelligence and devotion to their masters, and they will build
a wall or nurse a baby with equal skill and happiness. Horses have
received high recommendations in this respect, but crocodiles, hens,
beetles, armadillos, and fish do not evince any remarkable partiality
for man--"

"I wish," said the sergeant bitterly, "that all them beasts were stuffed
down your throttle the way you'd have to hold your prate."

"It doesn't matter," said the Philosopher. "I do not know why these
animals should attach themselves to men with gentleness and love and yet
be able to preserve intact their initial bloodthirstiness, so that while
they will allow their masters to misuse them in any way they will yet
fight most willingly with each other, and are never really happy saving
in the conduct of some private and nonsensical battle of their own. I do
not believe that it is fear which tames these creatures into mildness,
but that the most savage animal has a capacity for love which has not
been sufficiently noted, and which, if more intelligent attention had
been directed upon it, would have raised them to the status of
intellectual animals as against intelligent ones, and, perhaps, have
opened to us a correspondence which could not have been other than bene-
ficial."

"Keep your eyes out for that gap in the trees, Shawn," said the
sergeant.

"I'm doing that," said Shawn.

The Philosopher continued:

"Why can I not exchange ideas with a cow? I am amazed at the
incompleteness of my growth when I and a fellow-creature stand dumbly
before each other without one glimmer of comprehension, locked and
barred from all friendship and intercourse--"

"Shawn," cried the sergeant.

"Don't interrupt," said the Philosopher; "you are always talking.--The
lower animals, as they are foolishly called, have abilities at which we
can only wonder. The mind of an ant is one to which I would readily go
to school. Birds have atmospheric and levitational information which
millions of years will not render accessible to us; who that has seen a
spider weaving his labyrinth, or a bee voyaging safely in the trackless
air, can refuse to credit that a vivid, trained intelligence animates
these small enigmas? and the commonest earthworm is the heir to a
culture before which I bow with the profoundest veneration--"

"Shawn," said the sergeant, "say something for goodness' sake to take
the sound of that man's clack out of my ear."

"I wouldn't know what to be talking about," said Shawn, "for I never was
much of a hand at conversation, and, barring my prayers, I got no
education--I think myself that he was making a remark about a dog. Did
you ever own a dog, sergeant?"

"You are doing very well, Shawn," said the sergeant, "keep it up now."

"I knew a man had a dog would count up to a hundred for you. He won lots
of money in bets about it, and he'd have made a fortune, only that I
noticed one day he used to be winking at the dog, and when he'd stop
winking the dog would stop counting. We made him turn his back after
that, and got the dog to count sixpence, but he barked for more than
five shillings, he did so, and he would have counted up to a pound,
maybe, only that his master turned round and hit him a kick. Every
person that ever paid him a bet said they wanted their money back, but
the man went away to America in the night, and I expect he's doing well
there for he took the dog with him. It was a wire-haired terrier bitch,
and it was the devil for having pups."

"It is astonishing," said the Philosopher, "on what slender compulsion
people will go to America--"

"Keep it up, Shawn," said the sergeant, "you are doing me a favour."

"I will so," said Shawn. "I had a cat one time and it used to have
kittens every two months."

The Philosopher's voice arose:

"If there was any periodicity about these migrations one could
understand them. Birds, for example, migrate from their homes in the
late autumn and seek abroad the sustenance and warmth which the winter
would withhold if they remained in their native lands. The salmon also,
a dignified fish with a pink skin, emigrates from the Atlantic Ocean,
and betakes himself inland to the streams and lakes, where he
recuperates for a season, and is often surprised by net, angle, or
spear--"

"Cut in now, Shawn," said the sergeant anxiously.

Shawn began to gabble with amazing speed and in a mighty voice:

"Cats sometimes eat their kittens, and sometimes they don't. A cat that
eats its kittens is a heartless brute. I knew a cat used to eat its
kittens--it had four legs and a long tail, and it used to get the
head-staggers every time it had eaten its kittens. I killed it myself
one day with a hammer for I couldn't stand the smell it made, so I
couldn't--"

"Shawn," said the sergeant, "can't you talk about something else besides
cats and dogs?"

"Sure, I don't know what to talk about," said Shawn. "I'm sweating this
minute trying to please you, so I arm. If you'll tell me what to talk
about I'll do my endeavours."

"You're a fool," said the sergeant sorrowfully; "you'll never make a
constable. I'm thinking that I would sooner listen to the man himself
than to you. Have you got a good hold of him now?"

"I have so," said Shawn.

"Well, step out and maybe we'll reach the barracks this night, unless
this is a road that there isn't any end to at all. What was that? Did
you hear a noise?"

"I didn't hear a thing," said Shawn.

"I thought," said another man, "that I heard something moving in the
hedge at the side of the road."

"That's what I heard," said the sergeant. "Maybe it was a weasel. I wish
to the devil that we were out of this place where you can't see as much
as your own nose. Now did you hear it, Shawn?"

"I did so," said Shawn; "there's some one in the hedge, for a weasel
would make a different kind of a noise if it made any at all."

"Keep together, men," said the sergeant, "and march on; if there's
anybody about they've no business with us.

He had scarcely spoken when there came a sudden pattering of feet, and
immediately the four men were surrounded and were being struck at on
every side with sticks and hands and feet.

"Draw your batons," the sergeant roared; "keep a good grip of that man,
Shawn."

"I will so," said Shawn.

"Stand round him, you other men, and hit anything that comes near you."

There was no sound of voices from the assailants, only a rapid scuffle
of feet, the whistle of sticks as they swung through the air or slapped
smartly against a body or clashed upon each other, and the quick
breathing of many people; but from the four policemen there came noise
and to spare as they struck wildly on every side, cursing the darkness
and their opposers with fierce enthusiasm.

"Let out," cried Shawn suddenly. "Let out or I'll smash your nut for
you. There's some one pulling at the prisoner, and I've dropped my
baton."

The truncheons of the policemen had been so fero-ciously exercised that
their antagonists departed as swiftly and as mysteriously as they came.
It was just two minutes of frantic, aimless conflict, and then the
silent night was round them again, without any sound but the slow
creaking of branches, the swish of leaves as they swung and poised, and
the quiet croon of the wind along the road.

"Come on, men," said the sergeant, "we'd better be getting out of this
place as quick as we can. Are any of ye hurted?"

"I've got one of the enemy," said Shawn, panting.

"You've got what?" said the sergeant.

"I've got one of them, and he is wriggling like an eel on a pan."

"Hold him tight," said the sergeant excitedly.

"I will so," said Shawn. "It's a little one by the feel of it. If one of
ye would hold the prisoner, I'd get a better grip on this one. Aren't
they dangerous villains now?"

Another man took hold of the Philosopher's arm, and Shawn got both hands
on his captive.

"Keep quiet, I'm telling you," said he, "or I'll throttle you, I will
so. Faith, it seems like a little boy by the feel of it!"

"A little boy!" said the sergeant.

"Yes, he doesn't reach up to my waist."

"It must be the young brat from the cottage that set the dogs on us, the
one that loves beasts. Now then, boy, what do you mean by this kind of
thing? You'll find yourself in gaol for this, my young buck-o. Who was
with you, eh? Tell me that now?" and the sergeant bent forward.

"Hold up your head, sonny, and talk to the sergeant," said Shawn. "Oh!"
he roared, and suddenly he made a little rush forward. "I've got him,"
he gasped; "he nearly got away. It isn't a boy at all, sergeant; there's
whiskers on it!"

"What do you say?" said the sergeant.

"I put my hand under its chin and there's whiskers on it. I nearly let
him out with the surprise, I did so."

"Try again," said the sergeant in a low voice; "you are making a
mistake."

"I don't like touching them," said Shawn. "It's a soft whisker like a
billy-goat's. Maybe you'd try yourself, sergeant, for I tell you I'm
frightened of it."

"Hold him over here," said the sergeant, "and keep a good grip of him."

"I'll do that," said Shawn, and he hauled some reluctant object towards
his superior.

The sergeant put out his hand and touched a head.

"It's only a boy's size to be sure," said he, then he slid his hand down
the face and withdrew it quickly.

"There are whiskers on it," said he soberly. "What the devil can it be?
I never met whiskers so near the ground before. Maybe they are false
ones, and it's just the boy yonder trying to disguise himself." He put
out his hand again with an effort, felt his way to the chin, and tugged.

Instantly there came a yell, so loud, so sudden, that every man of them
jumped in a panic.

"They are real whiskers," said the sergeant with a sigh. "I wish I knew
what it is. His voice is big enough for two men, and that's a fact. Have
you got another match on you?"

"I have two more in my waistcoat pocket," said one of the men.

"Give me one of them," said the sergeant; "I'll strike it myself."

He groped about until he found the hand with the match.

"Be sure and hold him tight, Shawn, the way we can have a good look at
him, for this is like to be a queer miracle of a thing."

"I'm holding him by the two arms," said Shawn, "he can't stir anything
but his head, and I've got my chest on that."

The sergeant struck the match, shading it for a moment with his hand,
then he turned it on their new prisoner.

They saw a little man dressed in tight green clothes; he had a broad
pale face with staring eyes, and there was a thin fringe of grey whisker
under his chin--then the match went out.

"It's a Leprecaun," said the sergeant.

The men were silent for a full couple of minutes--at last Shawn spoke.

"Do you tell me so?" said he in a musing voice; "that's a queer miracle
altogether."

"I do," said the sergeant. "Doesn't it stand to reason that it can't be
anything else? You saw it yourself."

Shawn plumped down on his knees before his captive.

"Tell me where the money is?" he hissed. "Tell me where the money is or
I'll twist your neck off."

The other men also gathered eagerly around, shouting threats and
commands at the Leprecaun.

"Hold your whist," said Shawn fiercely to them. "He can't answer the lot
of you, can he?" and he turned again to the Leprecaun and shook him
until his teeth chattered.

"If you don't tell me where the money is at once I'll kill you, I will
so."

"I haven't got any money at all, sir," said the Leprecaun.

"None of your lies," roared Shawn. "Tell the truth now or it'll be worse
for you."

"I haven't got any money," said the Leprecaun, "for Meehawl MacMurrachu
of the Hill stole our crock a while back, and he buried it under a thorn
bush. I can bring you to the place if you don't believe me."

"Very good," said Shawn. "Come on with me now, and I'll clout you if you
as much as wriggle; do you mind me?"

"What would I wriggle for?" said the Leprecaun: "sure I like being with
you."

Hereupon the sergeant roared at the top of his voice.

"Attention," said he, and the men leaped to position like automata.

"What is it you are going to do with your prisoner, Shawn?" said he
sarcastically. "Don't you think we've had enough tramping of these roads
for one night, now? Bring up that Leprecaun to the barracks or it'll be
the worse for you--do you hear me talking to you?"

"But the gold, sergeant," said Shawn sulkily.

"If there's any gold it'll be treasure trove, and belong to the Crown.
What kind of a constable are you at all, Shawn? Mind what you are about
now, my man, and no back answers. Step along there. Bring that murderer
up at once, whichever of you has him."

There came a gasp from the darkness.

"Oh, Oh, Oh!" said a voice of horror.

"What's wrong with you?" said the sergeant: "are you hurted?"

"The prisoner!" he gasped, "he, he's got away!"

"Got away?" and the sergeant's voice was a blare of fury.

"While we were looking at the Leprecaun," said the voice of woe, "I must
have forgotten about the other one--I, I haven't got him--"

"You gawm!" gritted the sergeant.

"Is it my prisoner that's gone?" said Shawn in a deep voice. He leaped
forward with a curse and smote his negligent comrade so terrible a blow
in the face, that the man went flying backwards, and the thud of his
head on the road could have been heard anywhere.

"Get up," said Shawn, "get up till I give you another one."

"That will do," said the sergeant, "we'll go home. We're the
laughing-stock of the world. I'll pay you out for this some time, every
damn man of ye. Bring that Leprecaun along with you, and quick march."

"Oh!" said Shawn in a strangled tone.

"What is it now?" said the sergeant testily.

"Nothing," replied Shawn.

"What did you say 'Oh!' for then, you block-head?"

"It's the Leprecaun, sergeant," said Shawn in a whisper--"he's got
away--when I was hitting the man there I forgot all about the Leprecaun:
he must have run into the hedge. Oh, sergeant, dear, don't say anything
to me now--!"

"Quick march," said the sergeant, and the four men moved on through the
darkness in a silence, which was only skin deep.

 

CHAPTER XV

 

BY reason of the many years which he had spent in the gloomy pine wood,
the Philosopher could see a little in the darkness, and when he found
there was no longer any hold on his coat he continued his journey
quietly, marching along with his head sunken on his breast in a deep
abstraction. He was meditating on the word "Me," and endeavouring to
pursue it through all its changes and adventures. The fact of "me-ness"
was one which startled him. He was amazed at his own being. He knew that
the hand which he held up and pinched with another hand was not him and
the endeavour to find out what was him was one which had frequently
exercised his leisure. He had not gone far when there came a tug at his
sleeve and looking down he found one of the Leprecauns of the Gort
trotting by his side.

"Noble Sir," said the Leprecaun, "you are terrible hard to get into
conversation with. I have been talking to you for the last long time and
you won't listen."

"I am listening now," replied the Philosopher.

"You are, indeed," said the Leprecaun heartily. "My brothers are on the
other side of the road over there beyond the hedge, and they want to
talk to you: will you come with me, Noble Sir?"

"Why wouldn't I go with you?" said the Philosopher, and he turned aside
with the Leprecaun.

They pushed softly through a gap in the hedge and into a field beyond.

"Come this way, sir," said his guide, and the Philosopher followed him
across the field. In a few minutes they came to a thick bush among the
leaves of which the other Leprecauns were hiding. They thronged out to
meet the Philosopher's approach and welcomed him with every appearance
of joy. With them was the Thin Woman of Inis Magrath, who embraced her
husband tenderly and gave thanks for his escape.

"The night is young yet," remarked one of the Leprecauns. "Let us sit
down here and talk about what should be done."

"I am tired enough," said the Philosopher, "for I have been travelling
all yesterday, and all this day and the whole of this night I have been
going also, so I would be glad to sit down anywhere."

They sat down under the bush and the Philosopher lit his pipe. In the
open space where they were there was just light enough to see the smoke
coming from his pipe, but scarcely more. One recognized a figure as a
deeper shadow than the surrounding darkness; but as the ground was dry
and the air just touched with a pleasant chill, there was no discomfort.
After the Philosopher had drawn a few mouthfuls of smoke he passed his
pipe on to the next person, and in this way his pipe made the circuit of
the party.

"When I put the children to bed," said the Thin Woman, "I came down the
road in your wake with a basin of stirabout, for you had no time to take
your food, God help you! and I was thinking you must have been hungry."

"That is so," said the Philosopher in a very anxious voice: "but I don't
blame you, my dear, for letting the basin fall on the road--"

"While I was going along," she continued, "I met these good people and
when I told them what happened they came with me to see if anything
could be done. The time they ran out of the hedge to fight the policemen
I wanted to go with them, but I was afraid the stirabout would be
spilt."

The Philosopher licked his lips.

"I am listening to you, my love," said he.

"So I had to stay where I was with the stirabout under my shawl--"

"Did you slip then, dear wife?"

"I did not, indeed," she replied: "I have the stirabout with me this
minute. It's rather cold, I'm thinking, but it is better than nothing at
all," and she placed the bowl in his hands.

"I put sugar in it," said she shyly, "and currants, and I have a spoon
in my pocket."

"It tastes well," said the Philosopher, and he cleaned the basin so
speedily that his wife wept because of his hunger.

By this time the pipe had come round to him again and it was welcomed.

"Now we can talk," said he, and he blew a great cloud of smoke into the
darkness and sighed happily.

"We were thinking," said the Thin Woman, "that you won't be able to come
back to our house for a while yet: the policemen will be peeping about
Coille Doraca for a long time, to be sure; for isn't it true that if
there is a good thing coming to a person, nobody takes much trouble to
find him, but if there is a bad thing or a punishment in store for a
man, then the whole world will be searched until he be found?"

"It is a true statement," said the Philosopher.

"So what we arranged was this--that you should go to live with these
little men in their house under the yew tree of the Gort. There is not a
policeman in the world would find you there; or if you went by night to
the Brugh of the Boyne, Angus Og himself would give you a refuge."

One of the Leprecauns here interposed.

"Noble Sir," said he, "there isn't much room in our house but there's no
stint of welcome in it. You would have a good time with us travelling on
moonlit nights and seeing strange things, for we often go to visit the
Shee of the Hills and they come to see us; there is always something to
talk about, and we have dances in the caves and on the tops of the
hills. Don't be imagining now that we have a poor life for there is fun
and plenty with us and the Brugh of Angus Mac an Og is hard to be got
at."

"I would like to dance, indeed," returned the Philosopher, "for I do
believe that dancing is the first and last duty of man. If we cannot be
gay what can we be? Life is not any use at all unless we find a laugh
here and there--but this time, decent men of the Gort, I cannot go with
you, for it is laid on me to give myself up to the police."

"You would not do that," exclaimed the Thin Woman pitifully: "You
wouldn't think of doing that now!"

"An innocent man," said he, "cannot be oppressed, for he is fortified by
his mind and his heart cheers him. It is only on a guilty person that
the rigour of punishment can fall, for he punishes himself. This is what
I think, that a man should always obey the law with his body and always
disobey it with his mind. I have been arrested, the men of the law had
me in their hands, and I will have to go back to them so that they may
do whatever they have to do."

The Philosopher resumed his pipe, and although the others reasoned with
him for a long time they could not by any means remove him from his
purpose. So, when the pale glimmer of dawn had stolen over the sky, they
arose and went downwards to the cross-roads and so to the Police
Station.

Outside the village the Leprecauns bade him farewell and the Thin Woman
also took her leave of him, saying she would visit Angus Og and implore
his assistance on behalf of her husband, and then the Leprecauns and the
Thin Woman returned again the way they came, and the Philosopher walked
on to the barracks.

 

CHAPTER XVI

 

WHEN he knocked at the barracks door it was opened by a man with
tousled, red hair, who looked as though he had just awakened from sleep.

"What do you want at this hour of the night?" said he.

"I want to give myself up," said the Philosopher. The policeman looked
at him-

"A man as old as you are," said he, "oughtn't to be a fool. Go home now,
I advise you, and don't say a word to any one whether you did it or not.
Tell me this now, was it found out, or are you only making a clean
breast of it?"

"Sure I must give myself up," said the Philosopher.

"If you must, you must, and that's an end of it. Wipe your feet on the
rail there and come in--I'll take your deposition."

"I have no deposition for you," said the Philosopher, "for I didn't do a
thing at all."

The policeman stared at him again.

"If that's so," said he, "you needn't come in at all, and you needn't
have wakened me out of my sleep either. Maybe, tho', you are the man
that fought the badger on the Naas Road--Eh?"

"I am not," replied the Philosopher: "but I was arrested for killing my
brother and his wife, although I never touched them."

"Is that who you are?" said the policeman; and then, riskly, "You're as
welcome as the cuckoo, you are so. Come in and make yourself comfortable
till the men awaken, and they are the lads that'll be glad to see you. I
couldn't make head or tail of what they said when they came in last
night, and no one else either, for they did nothing but fight each other
and curse the banshees and cluricauns of Leinster. Sit down there on the
settle by the fire and, maybe, you'll be able to get a sleep; you look
as if you were tired, and the mud of every county in Ireland is on your
boots."

The Philosopher thanked him and stretched out on the settle. In a short
time, for he was very weary, he fell asleep.

Many hours later he was awakened by the sound of voices, and found on
rising, that the men who had captured him on the previous evening were
standing by the bed. The sergeant's face beamed with joy. He was dressed
only in his trousers and shirt. His hair was sticking up in some places
and sticking out in others which gave a certain wild look to him, and
his feet were bare. He took the Philosopher's two hands in his own and
swore if ever there was anything he could do to comfort him he would do
that and more. Shawn, in a similar state of unclothedness, greeted the
Philosopher and proclaimed himself his friend and follower for ever.
Shawn further announced that he did not believe the Philosopher had
killed the two people, that if he had killed them they must have richly
deserved it, and that if he was hung he would plant flowers on his
grave; for a decenter, quieter, and wiser man he had never met and never
would meet in the world.

These professions of esteem comforted the Philosopher, and he replied to
them in terms which made the red-haired policeman gape in astonishment
and approval.

He was given a breakfast of bread and cocoa which he ate with his
guardians, and then, as they had to take up their outdoor duties, he was
conducted to the backyard and informed he could walk about there and
that he might smoke until he was black in the face. The policemen
severally presented him with a pipe, a tin of tobacco, two boxes of
matches and a dictionary, and then they withdrew, leaving him to his own
devices.

The garden was about twelve feet square, having high, smooth walls on
every side, and into it there came neither sun nor wind. In one corner a
clump of rusty-looking sweet-pea was climbing up the wall--every leaf of
this plant was riddled with holes, and there were no flowers on it.
Another corner was occupied by dwarf nasturtiums, and on this plant, in
despite of every discouragement, two flowers were blooming, but its
leaves also were tattered and dejected. A mass of ivy clung to the third
corner, its leaves were big and glossy at the top, but near the ground
there was only grey, naked stalks laced together by cobwebs. The fourth
wall was clothed in a loose Virginia creeper every leaf of which looked
like an insect that could crawl if it wanted to. The centre of this
small plot had used every possible artifice to cover itself with grass,
and in some places it had wonderfully succeeded, but the pieces of
broken bottles, shattered jampots, and sections of crockery were so
numerous that no attempt at growth could be other than tentative and
unpassioned.

Here, for a long time, the Philosopher marched up and down. At one
moment he examined the sweet-pea and mourned with it on a wretched
existence. Again he congratulated the nasturtium on its two bright
children; but he thought of the gardens wherein they might have bloomed
and the remembrance of that spacious, sunny freedom saddened him.

"Indeed, poor creatures!" said he, "ye also are in gaol."

The blank, soundless yard troubled him so much that at last he called to
the red-haired policeman and begged to be put into a cell in preference;
and to the common cell he was, accordingly, conducted.

This place was a small cellar built beneath the level of the ground. An
iron grating at the top of the wall admitted one blanched wink of light,
but the place was bathed in obscurity. A wooden ladder led down to the
cell from a hole in the ceiling, and this hole also gave a spark of
brightness and some little air to the room. The walls were of stone
covered with plaster, but the plaster had fallen away in many places
leaving the rough stones visible at every turn of the eye.

There were two men in the cell, and these the Philosopher saluted; but
they did not reply, nor did they speak to each other. There was a low,
wooden form fixed to the wall, running quite round the room, and on
this, far apart from each other, the two men were seated, with their
elbows resting on their knees, their heads propped upon their hands, and
each of them with an unwavering gaze fixed on the floor between his
feet.

The Philosopher walked for a time up and down the little cell, but soon
he also sat down on the low form, propped his head on his hands and
lapsed to a melancholy dream.

So the day passed. Twice a policeman came down the ladder bearing three
portions of food, bread and cocoa; and by imperceptible gradations the
light faded away from the grating and the darkness came. After a great
interval the policeman again approached carrying three mattresses and
three rough blankets, and these he bundled through the hole. Each of the
men took a mattress and a blanket and spread them on the floor, and the
Philosopher took his share also.

By this time they could not see each other and all their operations were
conducted by the sense of touch alone. They laid themselves down on the
beds and a terrible, dark silence brooded over the room.

But the Philosopher could not sleep, he kept his eyes shut, for the
darkness under his eyelids was not so dense as that which surrounded
him; indeed, he could at will illuminate his own darkness and order
around him the sunny roads or the sparkling sky. While his eyes were
closed he had the mastery of all pictures of light and colour and
warmth, but an irresistible fascination compelled him every few minutes
to reopen them, and in the sad space around he could not create any
happiness. The darkness weighed very sadly upon him so that in a short
time it did creep under his eyelids and drowned his happy pictures until
a blackness possessed him both within and without-

"Can one's mind go to prison as well as one's body?" said he.

He strove desperately to regain his intellectual freedom, but he could
not. He could conjure up no visions but those of fear. The creatures of
the dark invaded him, fantastic terrors were thronging on every side:
they came from the darkness into his eyes and beyond into himself, so
that his mind as well as his fancy was captured, and he knew he was,
indeed, in gaol.

It was with a great start that he heard a voice speaking from the
silence--a harsh, yet cultivated voice, but he could not imagine which
of his companions was speaking. He had a vision of that man tormented by
the mental imprisonment of the darkness, trying to get away from his
ghosts and slimy enemies, goaded into speech in his own despite lest he
should be submerged and finally possessed by the abysmal demons. For a
while the voice spoke of the strangeness of life and the cruelty of men
to each other--disconnected sentences, odd words of self-pity and
self-encouragement, and then the matter became more connected and a
story grew in the dark cell-

"I knew a man," said the voice, "and he was a clerk. He had thirty
shillings a week, and for five years he had never missed a day going to
his work. He was a careful man, but a person with a wife and four
children cannot save much out of thirty shillings a week. The rent of a
house is high, a wife and children must be fed, and they have to get
boots and clothes, so that at the end of each week that man's thirty
shillings used to be all gone. But they managed to get along
somehow--the man and his wife and the four children were fed and clothed
and educated, and the man often wondered how so much could be done with
so little money; but the reason was that his wife was a careful woman .
. . and then the man got sick. A poor person cannot afford to get sick,
and a married man cannot leave his work. If he is sick he has to be
sick; but he must go to his work all the same, for if he stayed away who
would pay the wages and feed his family? and when he went back to work
he might find that there was nothing for him to do. This man fell sick,
but he made no change in his way of life: he got up at the same time and
went to the office as usual, and he got through the day somehow without
attracting his employer's attention. He didn't know what was wrong with
him: he only knew that he was sick. Sometimes he had sharp, swift pains
in his head, and again there would be long hours of languor when he
could scarcely bear to change his position or lift a pen. He would
commence a letter with the words 'Dear Sir,' forming the letter 'D' with
painful, accurate slowness, elaborating and thickening the up and down
strokes, and being troubled when he had to leave that letter for the
next one; he built the next letter by hair strokes and would start on
the third with hatred. The end of a word seemed to that man like the
conclusion of an event--it was a surprising, isolated, individual thing,
having no reference to anything else in the world, and on starting a new
word he seemed bound, in order to preserve its individuality, to write
it in a different handwriting. He would sit with his shoulders hunched
up and his pen resting on the paper, staring at a letter until he was
nearly mesmerized, and then come to himself with a sense of fear, which
started him working like a madman, so that he might not be behind with
his business. The day seemed to be so long. It rolled on rusty hinges
that could scarcely move. Each hour was like a great circle swollen with
heavy air, and it droned and buzzed into an eternity. It seemed to the
man that his hand in particular wanted to rest. It was luxury not to
work with it. It was good to lay it down on a sheet of paper with the
pen sloping against his finger, and then watch his hand going to
sleep--it seemed to the man that it was his hand and not himself wanted
to sleep, but it always awakened when the pen slipped. There was an
instinct in him somewhere not to let the pen slip, and every time the
pen moved his hand awakened, and began to work languidly. When he went
home at night he lay down at once and stared for hours at a fly on the
wall or a crack on the ceiling. When his wife spoke to him he heard her
speaking as from a great distance, and he answered her dully as though
he was replying through a cloud. He only wanted to be let alone, to be
allowed to stare at the fly on the wall, or the crack on the ceiling.

"One morning he found that he couldn't get up, or rather, that he didn't
want to get up. When his wife called him he made no reply, and she
seemed to call him every ten seconds--the words, 'get up, get up,' were
crackling all round him; they were bursting like bombs on the right hand
and on the left of him: they were scattering from above and all around
him, bursting upwards from the floor, swirling, swaying, and jostling
each other. Then the sounds ceased, and one voice only said to him 'You
are late!' He saw these words like a blur hanging in the air, just
beyond his eyelids, and he stared at the blur until he fell asleep."

The voice in the cell ceased speaking for a few minutes, and then it
went on again.

"For three weeks the man did not leave his bed--he lived faintly in a
kind of trance, wherein great forms moved about slowly and immense words
were drumming gently for ever. When he began to take notice again
everything in the house was different. Most of the furniture, paid for
so hardly, was gone. He missed a thing everywhere--chairs, a mirror, a
table: wherever he looked he missed something; and downstairs was
worse--there, everything was gone. His wife had sold all her furniture
to pay for doctors, for medicine, for food and rent. And she was changed
too: good things had gone from her face; she was gaunt, sharp-featured,
miserable--but she was comforted to think he was going back to work
soon.

"There was a flurry in his head when he went to his office. He didn't
know what his employer would say for stopping away. He might blame him
for being sick--he wondered would his employer pay him for the weeks he
was absent. When he stood at the door he was frightened. Suddenly the
thought of his master's eye grew terrible to him: it was a steady, cold,
glassy eye; but he opened the door and went in. His master was there
with another man and he tried to say 'Good morning, sir,' in a natural
and calm voice; but he knew that the strange man had been engaged
instead of himself, and this knowledge posted itself between his tongue
and his thought. He heard himself stammering, he felt that his whole
bearing had become drooping and abject. His master was talking swiftly
and the other man was looking at him in an embarrassed, stealthy, and
pleading manner: his eyes seemed to be apologising for having supplanted
him--so he mumbled 'Good day, sir,' and stumbled out.

"When he got outside he could not think where to go. After a while he
went in the direction of the little park in the centre of the city. It
was quite near and he sat down on an iron bench facing a pond. There
were children walking up and down by the water giving pieces of bread to
the swans. Now and again a labouring man or a messenger went by quickly;
now and again a middleaged, slovenly-dressed man drooped past aimlessly:
sometimes a tattered, self-intent woman with a badgered face flopped by
him. When he looked at these dull people the thought came to him that
they were not walking there at all; they were trailing through hell, and
their desperate eyes saw none but devils around them. He saw himself
joining these battered strollers . . . and he could not think what he
would tell his wife when he went home. He rehearsed to himself the terms
of his dismissal a hundred times. How his master looked, what he had
said: and then the fine, ironical things he had said to his master. He
sat in the park all day, and when evening fell he went home at his
accustomed hour.

"His wife asked him questions as to how he had got on, and wanted to
know was there any chance of being paid for the weeks of absence; the
man answered her volubly, ate his supper and went to bed: but he did not
tell his wife that he had been dismissed and that there would be no
money at the end of the week. He tried to tell her, but when he met her
eye he found that he could not say the words--he was afraid of the look
that might come into her face when she heard it--she, standing terrified
in those dismantled rooms . . .!

"In the morning he ate his breakfast and went out again--to work, his
wife thought. She bid him ask the master about the three weeks' wages,
or to try and get an advance on the present week's wages, for they were
hardly put to it to buy food. He said he would do his best, but he went
straight to the park and sat looking at the pond, looking at the
passers-by and dreaming. In the middle of the day he started up in a
panic and went about the city asking for work in offices, shops,
warehouses, everywhere, but he could not get any. He trailed back
heavy-footed again to the park and sat down.

"He told his wife more lies about his work that night and what his
master had said when he asked for an advance. He couldn't bear the
children to touch him. After a little time he sneaked away to his bed.

"A week went that way. He didn't look for work any more. He sat in the
park, dreaming, with his head bowed into his hands. The next day would
be the day he should have been paid his wages. The next day! What would
his wife say when he told her he had no money? She would stare at him
and flush and say--'Didn't you go out every day to work?'--How would he
tell her then so that she could understand quickly and spare him words?

"Morning came and the man ate his breakfast silently. There was no
butter on the bread, and his wife seemed to be apologising to him for
not having any. She said, 'We'll be able to start fair from to-morrow,'
and when he snapped at her angrily she thought it was because he had to
eat dry bread.

"He went to the park and sat there for hours. Now and again he got up
and walked into a neighbouring street, but always, after half an hour or
so, he came back. Six o'clock in the evening was his hour for going
home. When six o'clock came he did not move, he still sat opposite the
pond with his head bowed down into his arms. Seven o'clock passed. At
nine o'clock a bell was rung and every one had to leave. He went also.
He stood outside the gates looking on this side and on that. Which way
would he go? All roads were alike to him, so he turned at last and
walked somewhere. He did not go home that night. He never went home
again. He never was heard of again anywhere in the wide world."

The voice ceased speaking and silence swung down again upon the little
cell. The Philosopher had been listening intently to this story, and
after a few minutes he spoke--

"When you go up this road there is a turn to the left and all the path
along is bordered with trees--there are birds in the trees, Glory be to
God! There is only one house on that road, and the woman in it gave us
milk to drink. She has but one son, a good boy, and she said the other
children were dead; she was speaking of a husband who went away and left
her--'Why should he have been afraid to come home?' said she--'sure, I
loved him.'"

After a little interval the voice spoke again-

"I don't know what became of the man I was speaking of. I am a thief,
and I'm well known to the police everywhere. I don't think that man
would get a welcome at the house up here, for why should he?"

Another, a different, querulous kind of voice came from the silence-

"If I knew a place where there was a welcome I'd go there as quickly as
I could, but I don't know a place and I never will, for what good would
a man of my age be to any person? I am a thief also. The first thing I
stole was a hen out of a little yard. I roasted it in a ditch and ate
it, and then I stole another one and ate it, and after that I stole
everything I could lay my hands on. I suppose I will steal as long as I
live, and I'll die in a ditch at the heel of the hunt. There was a time,
not long ago, and if any one had told me then that I would rob, even for
hunger, I'd have been insulted: but what does it matter now? And the
reason I am a thief is because I got old without noticing it. Other
people noticed it, but I did not. I suppose age comes on one so
gradually that it is seldom observed. If there are wrinkles on one's
face we do not remember when they were not there: we put down all kind
of little infirmities to sedentary living, and you will see plenty of
young people bald. If a man has no occasion to tell any one his age, and
if he never thinks of it himself, he won't see ten years' difference
between his youth and his age, for we live in slow, quiet times, and
nothing ever happens to mark the years as they go by, one after the
other, and all the same.

"I lodged in a house for a great many years, and a little girl grew up
there, the daughter of my landlady. She used to slide down the
bannisters very well, and she used to play the piano very badly. These
two things worried me many a time. She used to bring me my meals in the
morning and the evening, and often enough she'd stop to talk with me
while I was eating. She was a very chatty girl and I was a talkative
person myself. When she was about eighteen years of age I got so used to
her that if her mother came with the food I would be worried for the
rest of the day. Her face was as bright as a sunbeam, and her lazy,
careless ways, big, free movements, and girlish chatter were pleasant to
a man whose loneliness was only beginning to be apparent to him through
her company. I've thought of it often since, and I suppose that's how it
began. She used to listen to all my opinions and she'd agree with them
because she had none of her own yet. She was a good girl, but lazy in
her mind and body; childish, in fact. Her talk was as involved as her
actions: she always seemed to be sliding down mental bannisters; she
thought in kinks and spoke in spasms, hopped mentally from one subject
to another without the slightest difficulty, and could use a lot of
language in saying nothing at all. I could see all that at the time, but
I suppose I was too pleased with my own sharp business brains, and sick
enough, although I did not know it, of my sharp-brained, business
companions--dear Lord! I remember them well. It's easy enough to have
brains as they call it, but it is not so easy to have a little gaiety or
carelessness or childishness or whatever it was she had. It is good,
too, to feel superior to some one, even a girl.

"One day this thought came to me--'It is time that I settled down.' I
don't know where the idea came from; one hears it often enough and it
always seems to apply to some one else, but I don't know what brought it
to roost with me. I was foolish, too: I bought ties and differently
shaped collars, and took to creasing my trousers by folding them under
the bed and lying on them all night--It never struck me that I was more
than three times her age. I brought home sweets for her and she was
delighted. She said she adored sweets, and she used to insist on my
eating some of them with her; she liked to compare notes as to how they
tasted while eating them. I used to get a toothache from them, but I
bore with it although at that time I hated toothache almost as much as I
hated sweets. Then I asked her to come out with me for a walk. She was
willing enough and it was a novel experience for me. Indeed, it was
rather exciting. le went out together often after that, and sometimes
we'd meet people I knew, young men from my office or from other offices.
I used to be shy when some of these people winked at me as they saluted.
It was pleasant, too, telling the girl who they were, their business and
their salaries: for there was little I didn't know. I used to tell her
of my own position in the office and what the chief said to me through
the day. Sometimes we talked of the things that had appeared in the
evening papers. A murder perhaps, some phase of a divorce case, the
speech a political person had made, or the price of stock. She was
interested in anything so long as it was talk. And her own share in the
conversation was good to hear. Every lady that passed us had a hat that
stirred her to the top of rapture or the other pinnacle of disgust. She
told me what ladies were frights and what were ducks. Under her
scampering tongue I began to learn something of humanity, even though
she saw most people as delightfully funny clowns or superb, majestical
princes, but I noticed that she never said a bad word of a man, although
many of the men she looked after were ordinary enough. Until I went
walking with her I never knew what a shop window was. A jeweller's
window especially: there were curious things in it. She told me how a
tiara should be worn, and a pendant, and she explained the kind of studs
I should wear myself; they were made of gold and had red stones in them;
she showed me the ropes of pearl or diamonds that she thought would look
pretty on herself: and one day she said that she liked me very much. I
was pleased and excited that day, but I was a business man and I said
very little in reply. I never liked a pig in a poke.

"She used to go out two nights in the week, Monday and Thursday, dressed
in her best clothes. I didn't know where she went, and I didn't ask--I
thought she visited an acquaintance, a girl friend or some such. The
time went by and I made up my mind to ask her to marry me. I had watched
her long enough and she was always kind and bright. I liked the way she
smiled, and I liked her obedient, mannerly bearing. There was something
else I liked, which I did not recognise then, something surrounding all
her movements, a graciousness, a spaciousness: I did not analyse it; but
I know now that it was her youth. I remember that when we were out
together she walked slowly, but in the house she would leap up and down
the stairs--she moved furiously, but I didn't.

"One evening she dressed to go out as usual, and she called at my door
to know had I everything I wanted. I said I had something to tell her
when she came home, something important. She promised to come in early
to hear it, and I laughed at her and she laughed back and went sliding
down the bannisters. I don't think I have had any reason to laugh since
that night. A letter came for me after she had gone, and I knew by the
shape and the handwriting that it was from the office. It puzzled me to
think why I should be written to. I didn't like opening it somehow....
It was my dismissal on account of advancing age, and it hoped for my
future welfare politely enough. It was signed by the Senior. I didn't
grip it at first, and then I thought it was a hoax. For a long time I
sat in my room with an empty mind. I was watching my mind: there were
immense distances in it that drowsed and buzzed; large, soft movements
seemed to be made in my mind, and although I was looking at the letter
in my hand I was really trying to focus those great, swinging spaces in
my brain, and my ears were listening for a movement of some kind. I can
see back to that time plainly. I went walking up and down the room.
There was a dull, subterranean anger in me. I remember muttering once or
twice, 'Shameful!' and again I said, 'Ridiculous!' At the idea of age I
looked at my face in the glass, but I was looking at my mind, and it
seemed to go grey, there was a heaviness there also. I seemed to be
peering from beneath a weight at something strange. I had a feeling that
I had let go a grip which I had held tightly for a long time, and I had
a feeling that the letting go was a grave disaster . . . that strange
face in the glass! how wrinkled it was! there were only a few hairs on
the head and they were grey ones. There was a constant twitching of the
lips and the eyes were deep-set, little and dull. I left the glass and
sat down by the window, looking out. I saw nothing in the street: I just
looked into a blackness. My mind was as blank as the night and as
soundless. There was a swirl outside the window, rain tossed by the
wind; without noticing, I saw it, and my brain swung with the rain until
it heaved in circles, and then a feeling of faintness awakened me to
myself. I did not allow my mind to think, but now and again a word
swooped from immense distances through my brain, swinging like a comet
across a sky and jarring terribly when it struck: 'Sacked' was one word,
'Old' was another word.

"I don't know how long I sat watching the flight of these dreadful words
and listening to their clanking impact, but a movement in the street
aroused me. Two people, the girl and a young, slender man, were coming
slowly up to the house. The rain was falling heavily, but they did not
seem to mind it. There was a big puddle of water close to the kerb, and
the girl, stepping daintily as a cat, went round this, but the young man
stood for a moment beyond it. He raised both arms, clenched his fists,
swung them, and jumped over the puddle. Then he and the girl stood
looking at the water, apparently measuring the jump. I could see them
plainly by a street lamp. They were bidding each other good-bye. The
girl put her hand to his neck and settled the collar of his coat, and
while her hand rested on him the young man suddenly and violently flung
his arms about her and hugged her; then they kissed and moved apart. The
man walked to the rain puddle and stood there with his face turned back
laughing at her, and then he jumped straight into the middle of the
puddle and began to dance up and down in it, the muddy water splashing
up to his knees. She ran over to him crying 'Stop, silly!' When she came
into the house, I bolted my door and I gave no answer to her knock.

"In a few months the money I had saved was spent. I couldn't get any
work, I was too old; they put it that they wanted a younger man. I
couldn't pay my rent. I went out into the world again, like a baby, an
old baby in a new world. I stole food, food, food anywhere and
everywhere. At first I was always caught. Often I was sent to gaol;
sometimes I was let go; sometimes I was kicked; but I learned to live
like a wolf at last. I am not often caught now when I steal food. But
there is something happening every day, whether it is going to gaol or
planning how to steal a hen or a loaf of bread. I find that it is a good
life, much better than the one I lived for nearly sixty years, and I
have time to think over every sort of thing. . . ."

When the morning came the Philosopher was taken on a car to the big City
in order that he might be put on his trial and hanged. It was the
custom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 6--The Thin Woman's Journey](cog06)
