[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mla07)  [Next](mla09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Why the Whale Spouts, the Starfish is Ragged, and the Native Bear has Strong Arms

Many years ago, when this old world was young, all the animals now
living in Australia were men.

At that time, they lived in a distant land across the ocean, and, having
heard of the wonderful hunting grounds in Australia, they determined to
leave their country and sail to this sunny land in a canoe. They knew
that the voyage would be a long and dangerous one; storms would sweep
across the sea and lash the waves into a white fury; the wind would howl
like the evil spirits of the forest, the lightning flash across the sky
like writhing golden snakes, and death would hide in waiting for them
beneath the brown sea kelp. It was therefore necessary for them to have
a very strong canoe for the journey.

The whale, who was the biggest of all the men, had a great strong canoe
that could weather the wildest storm. But he was a very selfish fellow
and would not allow anybody the use of it. As it was necessary to have
the canoe, his companions watched for a suitable opportunity to steal it
and start on their long and lonely journey. But the whale was a cunning
creature. He always kept very strict guard over the canoe and would not
leave it alone for a moment. The other people were at their wits' end to
solve the problem of stealing the canoe, and, as a last resource, they
held a great council to consider the question. Many suggestions were put
forward, but none was practical. It seemed an impossible task, until the
starfish came forward to place his suggestion before the council.

Now, the starfish was a very intimate friend of the whale, so, when he
spoke, everybody was very silent and attentive. He hesitated for a
moment, and then said:

"Unless we get a very big canoe, it will be impossible to sail to the
new hunting-grounds, where the fire of the sun never dies, the sea sand
is soft and golden, and there is plenty of food. I shall get my friend,
the whale, to leave his canoe and I shall keep him interested for a long
time. When I give you the signal, steal silently away with it as fast as
you can."

The other men were so excited at the proposal that they all spoke at
once and asked: "How will you do it?" But the starfish looked very wise
and said, "Your business is to steal the canoe and mine to keep the
whale occupied while you do it."

Some days later the starfish paid a friendly visit to the whale, and,
after talking for some time, he said, "I have noticed what a great
number of vermin you have in your hair. They must be very uncomfortable.
Let me catch them for you."

The whale being greatly troubled with vermin in his head, readily agreed
to the kind offer of his friend, the starfish. The whale moored his
canoe in deep water and sat on a rock. Starfish placed his friend's head
in his lap and proceeded to hunt diligently for the vermin. While he was
doing so, he told many funny stories and occupied the attention of the
whale. The starfish then gave the signal to the men who were waiting,
and they seized the canoe and sailed off.

But the whale was very suspicious. For a short time he would forget his
canoe, but then he would suddenly remember it and say: "Is my canoe all
right?" The starfish had cunningly provided himself with a piece of
bark, and, tapping it on the rock in imitation of the boat bumping with
the rise and fall of the sea, he would answer, "Yes, this is it I am
tapping with my hand. It is a very fine canoe."

He continued to tell funny stories to the whale. At the same time, he
scratched very hard around his ears in order to silence the sound of the
oars splashing in the water as the other men rowed away with the canoe.
After some time, the whale grew tired of his friend's attention and
story-telling, and decided to have a look at the canoe himself. When he
looked around and found the canoe missing, he could hardly believe it.
He rubbed his eyes and looked again. Away in the distance, he could see
the vanishing shape of his canoe. Then the truth dawned upon him-he had
been tricked.

The whale was very angry and beat the starfish unmercifully. Throwing
him upon the rocks, he made great ragged cuts in the faithless creature.
The starfish was so exhausted, that he rolled off the rocks and hid
himself in the soft sand. It is on account of this cruel beating that,
even to the present day, the starfish has a very ragged and torn
appearance, and always hides himself in the sand.

After beating the friend who had betrayed him, the whale jumped into the
water and chased the men in the canoe. Great white waves rose and fell,
as he churned his way through the water, and, out of a wound in his head
which the starfish had made, he spouted water high into the air.

The whale continued his relentless chase, and, when the men in the canoe
saw him, they said, "He is gaining on us, and, when he catches us, we
shall all be drowned." But the native bear, who was in charge of the
oars, said, "There is no need to be afraid; look at my arms. They are
strong enough to row the canoe out of danger." This reassured his
companions, and the chase continued.

The voyage lasted many days and nights. During the day, the hot sun beat
down on the men in the canoe, and, at night, the cold winds chilled
them. But there was no escape; they must go on. By day and night, they
could see the whale spouting in his fury, and churning the sea into foam
with the lashing of his tail.

At last land was sighted, and the men rowed very fast towards it. When
they landed from the canoe, they were very weary, and sat down on the
sand to rest. But the native companion, who was always a very lively
fellow and fond of dancing, danced upon the bottom of the canoe until he
made a hole in it. He then pushed it a short distance from the shore,
where it settled down in the water -and became the small island that is
now at the entrance of Lake Illawarra.

When the whale arrived at the landing place, he saw the men on shore and
his canoe wrecked. He travelled along the coast and spouted water with
anger as he thought of the trick that had been played on him, and of the
wreck of his beloved canoe.

Even to the present day whales spout, the starfish is ragged and torn,
the native bear has very strong fore paws, and the blackfellow still
roams across the wild wastes of Australia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Legend of the Great Flood](mla09)
