[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mla02)  [Next](mla04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Story of the Seven Sisters and the Faithful Lovers

In the dream time, many ages ago, the cluster of stars which we now know
as the Pleiades, or the Seven Sisters, were seven beautiful ice maidens.
Their parents were a great rugged mountain whose dark head was hidden in
the clouds, and an ice-cold stream that flowed from the snow-clad hills.
The Seven Sisters wandered across the land, with their long hair flying
behind them like storm clouds before the breeze. Their cheeks were
flushed with the kiss of the sun, and in their eyes was hidden the soft,
grey light of the dawn. So entrancing was their beauty, that all men
loved them, but the maidens' affections were as cold as the stream which
gave them birth, and they never turned aside in their wanderings to
gladden the hearts of men.

One day a man named Wurrunnah, by a cunning device, captured two of the
maidens, and forced them to live with him, while their five sisters
travelled to their home in the sky. When Wurrunnah discovered that the
sisters whom he had captured were ice-maidens, whose beautiful tresses
were like the icicles that drooped from the trees in winter time, he was
disappointed. So he took them to a camp fire, and endeavored to melt the
cold crystals from their beautiful limbs. But, as the ice melted, the
water quenched the fire, and he succeeded only in dimming their icy
brightness.

The two sisters were very lonely and sad in their captivity, and longed
for their home in the clear blue sky. When the shadow of night was over
the land, they could see their five sisters beckoning to them as they
twinkled afar off. One day Wurrunnah told them to gather pine-bark in
the forest. After a short journey, they came to a great pine tree, and
commenced to strip the bark from it. As they did so, the pine tree
(which belonged to the same totem as the maidens) extended itself to the
sky. The maidens took advantage of this friendly act, and climbed to the
home of their sisters. But they never regained their original
brightness, and that is the reason why there are five bright stars and
two dim ones in the group of the Pleiades. The Seven Sisters have not
forgotten the earth folk. When the snow falls softly they loose their
wonderful tresses to the caress of the breeze, to remind us of their
journey across our land.

When the Seven Sisters were on earth, of all the men who loved them the
Berai Berai, or two brothers, were the most faithful. When they hunted
in the forest, or waited in the tall reeds for the wild ducks, they
always brought the choicest morsels of the chase as an offering to the
Sisters. When the maidens wandered far across the mountains, the Berai
Berai followed them, but their love was not favored.

When the maidens set out on their long journey to the sky, the Berai
Berai were grieved, and said: "Long have we loved you and followed in
your foot steps, O maidens of the dawn, and, when you have left us' we
will hunt no more." And they laid aside their weapons and mourned for
the maidens until the dark shadow of death fell upon them. When they
died, the fairies pitied them, and placed them in the sky, where they
could hear the Sisters singing. Thus were they happily rewarded for
their constancy. On a starry night, you will see them listening to the
song of the Seven Sisters. We call them Orion's Sword and Belt, but it
is a happier thought to remember them as the faithful lovers who have
listened to the song of the stars from the birth of time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Legend of the Sacred Bullroarer](mla04)
