<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlms03)  [Next](dlms05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dore Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f02"></span>

INDIVIDUALITY.

Individuality is the necessary complement of the Universal Spirit, which
was the subject of our consideration last Sunday. The whole problem of
life consists in finding the true relation of the individual to the
Universal Originating Spirit; and the first step towards ascertaining
this is to realize what the Universal Spirit must be in itself. We have
already done this to some extent, and the conclusions we have arrived at
are:—

That the essence of the Spirit is Life, Love, and Beauty.

That its Motive, or primary moving impulse, is to express the Life, Love
and Beauty which it feels itself to be.

That the Universal cannot act on the plane of the Particular except by
becoming the particular, that is by expression through the individual.

If these three axioms are clearly grasped, we have got a solid
foundation from which to start our consideration of the subject for
to-day.

The first question that naturally presents itself is,

If these things be so, why does not every individual express the life,
love, and beauty of the Universal Spirit? The answer to this question is
to be found in the Law of Consciousness. We cannot be conscious of
anything except by realizing a certain relation between it and
ourselves. It must affect us in some way, otherwise we are not conscious
of its existence; and according to the way in which it affects us we
recognize ourselves as standing related to it. It is this
self-recognition on our own part carried out to the sum total of all our
relations, whether spiritual, intellectual, or physical, that
constitutes our realization of life. On this principle, then, for the
REALIZATION of its own Livingness, the production of centres of life,
through its relation to which this conscious realization can be
attained, becomes a necessity for the Originating Mind. Then it follows
that this realization can only be complete where the individual has
perfect liberty to withhold it; for otherwise no true realization could
have taken place. For instance, let us consider the working of Love.
Love must be spontaneous, or it has no existence at all. We cannot
imagine such a thing as mechanically induced love. But anything which is
formed so as to automatically produce an effect without any volition of
its own, is.nothing but a piece of mechanism. Hence if the Originating
Mind is to realize the reality of Love, it can Only be by relation to
some being which has the power to withhold love. The same applies to the
realization of all the other modes of livingness; so that it is only in
proportion, as the individual life is an independent centre of action,
with the option of acting either positively or negatively, that any real
life has been produced at all. The further the created thing is from
being a merely mechanical arrangement, the higher is the grade of
creation. The solar system is a perfect work of mechanical creation, but
to constitute centres which can reciprocate the highest nature of the
Divine Mind, requires not a mechanism, however perfect, but a mental
centre which is, in itself, an independent source of action. Hence by
the requirements of the case man should be capable of placing himself
either in a positive or a negative relation to the Parent Mind, from
which he originates; otherwise he would be nothing more than a clockwork
figure.

In this necessity of the case, then, we find the reason why the life,
love, and beauty of the Spirit are not visibly reproduced in every human
being. They ARE reproduced in the world of nature, so far as a
mechanical and automatic action can represent them, but their perfect
reproduction can only take place on the basis of a liberty akin to that
of the Originating Spirit itself, which therefore implies the liberty of
negation as well as of affirmation.

Why, then, does the individual make a negative choice? Because he does
not understand the law of his own individuality, and believes it to be a
law of limitation, instead of a Law of Liberty. He does not expect to
find the starting point of the Creative Process reproduced within
himself, and so he looks to the mechanical side of things for the basis
of his reasoning about life. Consequently his reasoning lands him in the
conclusion that life is limited, because he has assumed limitation in
his premises, and so-logically cannot escape from it in his conclusion.
Then he thinks that this is the law and so ridicules the idea of
transcending it. He points to the sequence of cause and effect, by which
death, disease, and disaster, hold their sway over the individual, and
says that sequence is law. And he is perfectly right so far as he
goes—it is a law; but not THE Law. When we have only reached this stage
of comprehension, we have yet to learn that a higher law can include a
lower one so completely as entirely to swallow it up.

The fallacy involved in this negative argument, is the assumption that
the law of limitation is essential in all grades of being. It is the
fallacy of the old shipbuilders as to the impossibility of building iron
ships. What is required is to get at the PRINCIPLE which is at the back
of the Law in its affirmative working, and specialize it under higher
conditions than are spontaneously presented by nature, and this can only
be done by the introduction of the personal element, that is to say an
individual intelligence capable of comprehending the principle. The
question, then, is, what is the principle by which we came into being?
and this is only a personal application of the general question, How did
anything come into being? Now, as I pointed out in the preceding
article, the ultimate deduction from physical science is that the
originating movement takes place in the Universal Mind, and is analogous
to that of our own imagination; and as we have just seen, the perfect
ideal can only be that of a being capable of reciprocating ALL the
qualities of the Originating Mind. Consequently man, in his inmost
nature, is the product of the Divine Mind imaging forth an image of
itself on the plane of the relative as the complementary to its own
sphere of the absolute.

If we will therefore go to the INMOST principle in ourselves, which
philosophy and Scripture alike declare to be made in the image and
likeness of God, instead of to the outer vehicles which it externalizes
as instruments through which to function on the various planes of being,
we shall find that we have reached a principle in ourselves which stands
in loco dei towards all our vehicles and also towards our environment.
It is above them all, and creates them, however unaware we may be of the
fact, and relatively to them it occupies the place of first cause. The
recognition of this is the discovery of our own relation to the whole
world of the relative. On the other hand this must not lead us into the
mistake of supposing that there is nothing higher, for, as we have
already seen, this inmost principle or ego is itself the effect of an
antecedent cause, for it proceeds from the imaging process in the Divine
Mind.

We thus find ourselves holding an intermediate position between true
First Cause, on the one hand, and the world of secondary causes on the
other, and in order to understand the nature of this position, we must
fall back on the axiom that the Universal can only work on the plane of
the Particular through the individual. Then we see that the function of
the individual is to DIFFERENTIATE the undistributed flow of the
Universal into suitable directions for starting different trains of
secondary causation.

Man's place in the cosmic order is that of a distributor of the Divine
power, subject, however, to the inherent Law of the power which he
distributes. We see one instance of this in ordinary science, in the
fact that we never create force; all we can do is to distribute it. The
very word Man means distributor or measurer, as in common with all words
derived from the Sanderit root MN., it implies the idea of measurement,
just as in the words moon, month, mens, mind, and "man," the Indian
weight of 80 1bs.; and it is for this reason that man is spoken of in
Scripture as a "steward," or dispenser of the Divine gifts. As our minds
become open to the full meaning of this position, the immense
possibilities and also the responsibility contained in it will become
apparent.

It means that the individual is the creative centre of his own world.
Our past experience affords no evidence against this, but on the
contrary, is evidence for it. Our true nature is always present, only we
have hitherto taken the lower and mechanical side of things for our
starting point, and so have created limitation instead of expansion. And
even with the knowledge of the Creative Law which we have now attained,
we shall continue to do this, if we seek our starting point in the
things which are below us and not in the only thing which is above us,
namely the Divine Mind, because it is only there that we can find
illimitable Creative Power. Life is BEING, it is the experience of
states of consciousness, and there is an unfailing correspondence
between these inner states and our outward conditions. Now we see from
the Original Creation that the state of consciousness must be the cause,
and the corresponding conditions the effect, because at the starting of
the creation no conditions existed, and the working of the Creative Mind
upon itself can only have been a state of consciousness. This, then, is
clearly the Creative Order—from states to conditions. But we invert this
order, and seek to create from conditions to states. We say, If I had
such and such conditions they would produce the state of feeling which I
desire; and in so saying we run the risk of making a mistake as to the
correspondence, for it may turn out that the particular conditions which
we fixed on are not such as would produce the desired state. Or, again,
though they might produce it in a certain degree, other conditions might
produce it in a still greater degree, while at the same time opening the
way to the attainment of still higher states and still better
conditions. Therefore our wisest plan is to follow the pattern of the
Parent Mind and make mental self-recognition our starting point, knowing
that by the inherent Law of Spirit the corelated conditions will come by
a natural process of growth. Then the great self-recognition is that of
our relation to the Supreme Mind. That is the generating centre and we
are distributing centres; just as electricity is generated at the
central station and delivered in different forms of power by reason of
passing through appropriate centres of distribution, so that in one
place it lights a room, in another conveys a message, and in a third
drives a tram car. In like manner the power of the Universal Mind takes
particular forms through the particular mind of the individual. It does
not interfere with the lines of his individuality, but works along them,
thus making him, not less, but more himself. It is thus, not a
compelling power, but an expanding and illuminating one; so that the
more the individual recognizes the reciprocal action between it and
himself, the more full of life he must become.

Then also we need not be troubled about future conditions because we
know that the All-originating Power is working through us and for us,
and that according to the Law proved by the whole existing creation, it
produces all the conditions required for the expression of the Life,
Love and Beauty which it is, so that we can fully trust it to open the
way as we go along. The Great Teacher's words, "Take no thought for the
morrow"—and note that the correct translation is "Take no anxious
thought"—are the practical application of the soundest philosophy. This
does not, of course, mean that we are not to exert ourselves. We must do
our share in the work, and not expect God to do FOR us what He can only
do THROUGH us. We are to use our common sense and natural faculties in
working upon the conditions now present. We must make use of them, AS
FAR AS THEY GO, but we must not try and go further than the present
things require; we must not try to force things, but allow them to grow
naturally, knowing that they are doing so under the guidance of the
All-Creating Wisdom.

Following this method we shall grow more and more into the habit of
looking to mental attitude as the Key to our progress in Life, knowing
that everything else must come out of that; and we shall further
discover that our mental attitude is eventually determined by the way in
which we regard the Divine Mind. Then the final result will be that we
shall see the Divine Mind to be nothing else than Life, Love and
Beauty—Beauty being identical with Wisdom or the perfect adjustment of
parts to whole—and we shall see ourselves to be distributing centres of
these primary energies and so in our turn subordinate centres of
creative power. And as we advance in this knowledge we shall find that
we transcend one law of limitation after another by finding the higher
law, of which the lower is but a partial expression, until we shall see
clearly before us, as our ultimate goal, nothing less than the Perfect
Law of Liberty—not liberty without Law which is anarchy, but Liberty
according to Law. In this way we shall find that the Apostle spoke the
literal truth, when he said, that we shall become like Him when we see
Him AS HE IS, because the whole process by which our individuality is
produced is one of reflection of the image existing in the Divine Mind.
When we thus learn the Law of our own being we shall be able to
specialize it in ways of which we have hitherto but little conception,
but as in the case of all natural laws the specialization cannot take
place until the fundamental principle of the generic law has been fully
realized. For these reasons the student should endeavour to realize more
and more perfectly, both in theory and practice, the law of the relation
between the Universal and the Individual Minds. It is that of RECIPROCAL
action. If this fact of reciprocity is grasped, it will be found to
explain both why the individual falls short of expressing the fulness of
Life, which the Spirit is, and why he can attain to the fulness of that
expression; just as the same law explains why iron sinks in water, and
how it can be made to float. It is the individualizing of the Universal
Spirit, by recognizing its reciprocity to ourselves, that is the secret
of the perpetuation and growth of our own individuality.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The New Thought and the New Order](dlms05)

</div>
