[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe071.md) 
[Next](fbe073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXVII.

"*Then Satan began to lead astray Adam and Eve*. . . ."

BUT when Adam and Eve went down to the land of black mud, and came near
to the wheat God had showed them, and saw it ripe and ready for reaping,
as they had no sickle to reap it withal--they girt themselves, and began
to pull up the wheat, until it was all done.

2 Then they made it into a heap; and, faint from heat and from thirst,
they went under a shady tree, where the breeze fanned them to sleep.

3 But Satan saw what Adam and Eve had done. And he called his hosts, and
said to them, "Since God has shown to Adam and Eve all about this wheat,
wherewith to strengthen their bodies--and, lo, they are come and have
made a heap of it, and faint from the toil are now asleep--come, let us
set fire to this heap of corn, and burn it, and let us take that bottle
of water that is by them, and empty it out, so that they may find
nothing to drink, and we kill them with hunger and thirst.

4 "Then, when they wake up from their sleep, and seek to return to the
cave, we will come to them in the way, and will lead them astray; so
that they die of hunger and thirst; when they may, perhaps, deny God,
and He destroy them. So shall we be rid of them."

5 Then Satan and his hosts threw fire upon the wheat and consumed it.

6 But from the heat of the flame Adam and Eve awoke from their sleep,
and saw the wheat burning, and the bucket of water by them, poured out.

7 Then they wept and went back to the cave.

8 But as they were going up from below the mountain where they were,
Satan and his hosts met them in the form of angels, praising God.

9 Then Satan said to Adam, "O Adam, why art thou so pained with hunger
and thirst? It seems to me that Satan has burnt up the wheat." And Adam
said to him, "Ay."

10 Again Satan said to Adam, "Come back with us; we are angels of God.
God sent us to thee, to show thee another field of corn, better than
that; and

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

beyond it is a fountain of good water, and many trees, where thou shalt
dwell near it, and work the corn-field to better purpose than that which
Satan has consumed."

11 Adam thought that he was true, and that they were angels who talked
with him; and he went back with them.

12\. Then Satan began to lead astray Adam and Eve eight days, until they
both fell down as if dead, from hunger, thirst, and faintness. Then he
fled with his hosts, and left them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII](fbe073.md)
