[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe079) 
[Next](fbe081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### CHAP. LXXV.

The family revisits the Cave of Treasures. Birth of Abel and Aklemia.

THEN Adam prepared an offering, and he and Eve offered it up for their
children, and brought it to the altar they had built at first.

2 And Adam offered up the offering, and besought God to accept his
offering.

3 Then God accepted Adam's offering, and sent a light from heaven that
shone upon the offering. And Adam and the son drew near to the offering,
but Eve and the daughter did not approach unto it.

4 Then Adam came down from upon the altar, and they were joyful; and
Adam and Eve waited until the daughter was eighty days old; then Adam
prepared an offering and took it to Eve and to the children; and they
went to the altar, where Adam offered it up, as he was wont, asking the
Lord to accept his offering.

5 And the Lord accepted the offering of Adam and Eve. Then Adam, Eve,
and the children, drew near together, and came down from the mountain,
rejoicing.

6 But they returned not to the cave in which they were born; but came to
the Cave of Treasures, in order that the children should go round it,
and be blessed with the tokens brought from the garden.

7 But after they had been blessed with these tokens, they went back to
the cave in which they were born.

8 However, before Eve had offered up the offering, Adam had taken her,
and had gone with her to the river of water, in which they threw
themselves at first; and there they washed themselves. Adam washed his
body and Eve hers also clean, after the suffering and distress that had
come upon them.

9 But Adam and Eve, after washing themselves in the river of water,
returned every night to the Cave of Treasures, where they prayed and
were blessed; and then went back to their cave where the children were
born

10 So did Adam and Eve until the children had done sucking. Then, when
they were weaned, Adam made an offering for the souls of his children;
other than the three times he made an offering for them, every week.

11 When the days of nursing the children were ended, Eve again
conceived, and when her days were accomplished she brought forth another
son and daughter; and they named the son Abel, and the daughter Aklia.

12 Then at the end of forty days, Adam made an offering for the son, and
at the end of eighty days he made another offering for the daughter, and
did by them, as he had done before by Cain and his sister Luluwa.

13 He brought them to the Cave of Treasures, where they received a
blessing, and then returned to the cave where they were born. After the
birth of these, Eve ceased from childbearing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVI](fbe081)
