[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe048) 
[Next](fbe050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. XLIV.

The power of fire over man.

YET Adam and Eve were standing and looking at the fire, and unable to
come near the cave from their dread of the fire.

2 And Satan kept on bringing trees and throwing them into the fire,
until the flame thereof rose up on high, and covered the whole cave,
thinking, as he did in his own mind, to consume the cave with much fire.
But the angel of the Lord was guarding it.

3 And yet he could not curse Satan, nor injure him by word, because he
had no authority over him, neither did he take to doing so with words
from his mouth.

4 Therefore did the angel bear with him, without saying one bad word
until the Word of God came who said to Satan, "Go hence; once before
didst thou deceive My servants, and this time thou seekest to destroy
them.

5 "Were it not for My mercy I would have destroyed thee and thy hosts
from off the earth. But I have had patience with thee, unto the end of
the world."

6 Then Satan fled from before the Lord. But the fire went on burning
around the cave like a coal-fire the whole day; which was the
forty-sixth day Adam and Eve had spent since they came out of the
garden.

7 And when Adam and Eve saw that the heat of the fire had somewhat
cooled down, they began to walk towards the cave to get into it as they
were wont; but they could not, by reason of the heat of the fire.

8 Then they both took to weeping because of the fire that made
separation between them and the cave, and that drew towards them,
burning. And they were afraid.

9 Then Adam said to Eve, "See this fire of which we have a portion in
us: which formerly yielded to us, but no longer does so, now that we
have transgressed the limit of creation, and changed our condition, and

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

our nature is altered. But the fire is not changed in its nature, nor
altered from its creation. Therefore has it now power over us; and when
we come near it, it scorches our flesh."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](fbe050)
