[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe078) 
[Next](fbe080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXXIV.

The birth of Cain and Luluwa. Why they received those names.

AND they dwelt on the earth working, in order to continue in the
well-being of their bodies; and were so until the nine months of Eve's
childbearing were ended, and the time drew near when she must be
delivered.

2 Then she said unto Adam, "This cave is a pure spot by reason of the
signs wrought in it since we left the garden; and we shall again pray in
it. It is not meet, then, that I should bring forth in it; let us rather
repair to that of the sheltering rock, which Satan hurled at us, when he
wished to kill us with it; but that was held up and spread as an awning
over us by the command of God; and formed a cave."

3 Then Adam removed Eve to that cave; and when the time came that she
should bring forth, she travailed much. So was Adam sorry, and his heart
suffered for her sake; for she was nigh unto death; that the word of God
to her should be fulfilled: "In suffering shalt thou bear a child, and
in sorrow shalt thou bring forth thy child."

4 But when Adam saw the strait in which Eve was, he arose and prayed to
God, and said, "O Lord, look upon me with the eye of Thy mercy, and
bring her out of her distress."

5 And God looked at His maid-servant Eve, and delivered her, and she
brought forth her first-born son, and with him a daughter.

6 Then Adam rejoiced at Eve's deliverance, and also over the children
she had borne him. And Adam ministered unto Eve in the cave, until the
end of eight days; when they named the son Cain, and the daughter
Luluwa.

7 The meaning of Cain is "hater," because he hated his sister in their
mother's womb; ere they came out of it. Therefore did Adam name him
Cain.

8 But Luluwa means "beautiful," because she was more beautiful than her
mother.

9 Then Adam and Eve waited until Cain and his sister were forty days
old, when Adam said unto Eve, "We will make an offering and offer it up
in behalf of the children."

10 And Eve said, "We will make one offering for the firstborn son; and
afterwards we shall make one for the daughter."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXV](fbe080)
