[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe082.md) 
[Next](fbe084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXXVIII.

Jealousy overcomes Cain. He makes trouble in the family. How the first
murder was planned.

THEN Adam said to Eve, "Behold the children are grown up; we must think
of finding wives for them."

2 Then Eve answered, "How can we do it?"

3 Then Adam said to her, "We will join Abel's sister in marriage to
Cain, and Cain's sister to Abel."

4 Then said Eve to Adam, "I do not like Cain because he is hard-hearted;
but let them bide until we offer up unto the Lord in their behalf."

5 And Adam said no more.

6 Meanwhile Satan came to Cain in the figure of a man of the field, and
said to him, "Behold Adam and Eve have taken counsel together about the
marriage of you two; and they have agreed to marry Abel's sister to
thee, and thy sister to him.

7 "But if it was not that I love thee, I would not have told thee this
thing. Yet if thou wilt take my advice, and hearken to me, I will bring:
thee on thy wedding day beautiful robes, gold and silver in plenty, and
my relations will attend thee."

8 Then Cain said with joy, "Where are thy relations?"

9 And Satan answered, "My relations are in a garden in the north,
whither I once meant to bring thy father Adam; but he would not accept
my offer.

10 "But thou, if thou wilt receive my words and if thou wilt come unto
me after thy wedding, thou shalt rest from the misery in which thou art;
and thou shalt rest and be better off than thy father Adam."

11 At these words of Satan Cain opened his ears, and leant towards his
speech.

12 And he did not remain in the field, but he went to Eve, his mother,
and beat her, and cursed her, and said to her, "Why are ye about taking
my sister to wed her to my brother? Am I dead""

13 His mother, however, quieted him, and sent him to the field where be
had been.

14 Then when Adam came, she told him of what Cain had done.

15 But Adam grieved and held his peace, and said not a word.

16 Then on the morrow Adam said unto Cain his son, "Take of thy sheep,
young and good, and offer them up unto thy God; and I will speak to thy
brother, to make unto his God an offering of corn."

17 They both hearkened to their father Adam, and they

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

took their offerings, and offered them up on the mountain by the altar.

18 But Cain behaved haughtily towards his brother, and thrust him from
the altar, and would not let him offer up his gift upon the altar; but
he offered his own upon it, with a proud heart, full of guile, and
fraud.

19 But as for Abel, he set up stones that were near at hand, and upon
that, he offered up his gift with a heart humble and free from guile.

20 Cain was then standing by the altar on which he had offered up his
gift; and he cried unto God to accept his offering; but God did not
accept it from him; neither did a divine fire come down to consume his
offering.

21 But he remained standing over against the altar, out of humour and
wroth, looking towards his brother Abel, to see if God would accept his
offering or not.

22 And Abel prayed unto God to accept his offering. Then a divine fire
came down and consumed his offering. And God smelled the sweet savour of
his offering; because Abel loved Him and rejoiced in Him.

23 And because God was well pleased with him He sent him an angel of
light in the figure of man who had partaken of his offering, because He
had smelled the sweet savour of his offering, and they comforted Abel
and strengthened his heart.

24 But Cain was looking on all that took place at his brother's
offering, and was wroth on account of it.

25 Then he opened his mouth and blasphemed God, because He had not
accepted his offering.

26 But God said unto Cain, "Wherefore is thy countenance sad? Be
righteous, that I may accept thy offering. Not against

Me hast thou murmured, but against thyself."

27 And God said this to Cain in rebuke, and because He abhorred him and
his offering.

28 And Cain came down from the altar, his colour changed and of a woeful
countenance, and came to his father and mother and told them all that
had befallen him. And Adam grieved much because God had not accepted
Cain's offering.

29 But Abel came down rejoicing, and with a gladsome heart, and told his
father and mother how God had accepted his offering. And they rejoiced
at it and kissed his face.

30 And Abel said to his father, "Because Cain thrust me from the altar,
and would not allow me to offer my gift upon it, I made an altar for
myself and offered my gift upon it."

31 But when Adam heard this he was very sorry, because it was the altar
he had built at first, and upon which he had offered his own gifts.

32 As to Cain, he was so sullen and so angry that he went into the
field, where Satan came to him and said to him, "Since thy brother Abel
has taken refuge with thy father Adam, because thou didst thrust him
from the altar, they have kissed his face, and they rejoice over him,
far more than over thee."

33 When Cain heard these words of Satan, he was filled with rage; and he
let no one know. But he was laying wait to kill his brother, until he
brought him into the cave, and then said to him:--

34 "O brother, the country is so beautiful, and there are such beautiful
and pleasurable trees in it, and charming to look at! But brother, thou
hast never been one day in the field to take thy pleasure therein.

35 "To-day, O, my brother, I very much wish thou wouldest

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

come with me into the field, to enjoy thyself and to bless our fields
and our flocks, for thou art righteous, and I love thee much, O my
brother! but thou hast estranged thyself from me."

36 Then Abel consented to go with his brother Cain into the field.

37 But before going out, Cain said to Abel, "Wait for me, until I fetch
a staff, because of wild beasts."

38 Then Abel stood waiting in his innocence. But Cain, the forward,
fetched a staff and went out.

39 And they began, Cain and his brother Abel, to walk in the way; Cain
talking to him, and comforting him, to make him forget everything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIX](fbe084.md)
