[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe080) 
[Next](fbe082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXXVI.

Cain becomes jealous because of his sisters.

A ND the children began to wax stronger, and to grow in stature; but
Cain was hardhearted, and ruled over his younger brother.

2 And oftentimes when his father made an offering, he would remain
behind and not go with them, to offer up.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

3 But, as to Abel, he had a meek heart, and was obedient to his father
and mother, whom he often moved to make an offering, because he loved
it; and prayed and fasted much.

4 Then came this sign to Abel. As he was coming into the Cave of
Treasures, and saw the golden rods, the incense and the myrrh, he
inquired of his parents Adam and Eve concerning them, and said unto
them, "How did you come by these?"

5 Then Adam told him all that had befallen them. And Abel felt deeply
about what his father told him.

6 Furthermore his father Adam, told him of the works of God, and of the
garden; and after that, he remained behind his father the whole of that
night in the Cave of Treasures.

7 And that night, while he was praying, Satan appeared unto him under
the figure of a man, who said to him, "Thou hast oftentimes moved thy
father to make an offering, to fast and to pray, therefore I will kill
thee, and make thee perish from this world."

8 But as for Abel, he prayed to God, and drove away Satan from him; and
believed not the words of the devil. Then when it was day, an angel of
God appeared unto him, who said to him, "Shorten neither fasting,
prayer, nor offering up an oblation unto thy God. For, lo, the Lord has
accepted thy prayer. Be not afraid of the figure which appeared unto
thee in the night, and who cursed thee unto death." And the angel
departed from him.

9 Then when it was day, Abel came to Adam and Eve, and told them of the
vision he had seen. But when they heard it, they grieved much over it,
yet said nothing to him about it; they only comforted him.

10 But as to hard-hearted Cain, Satan came to him by night, showed
himself and said unto him, "Since Adam and Eve love thy brother Abel
much more than they love thee, and wish to join him in marriage to thy
beautiful sister, because they love him; but wish to join thee in
marriage to his ill-favoured sister, because they hate thee;

11 "Now, therefore, I counsel thee, when they do that, to kill thy
brother; then thy sister will be left for thee; and his sister will be
cast, away."

12 And Satan departed from him. But the wicked One remained behind in
the heart of Cain, who sought many a time, to kill his brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVII](fbe082)
