[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe076) 
[Next](fbe078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXXII.

Adam's heart is set on fire.

THEN Satan, and ten from his hosts, transformed themselves into maidens,
unlike any others in the whole world for grace.

2 They came up out of the river in presence of Adam and Eve, and they
said among themselves, "Come, we will look at the faces of Adam and of
Eve, who are of the men upon earth. How beautiful they are, and how
different is their look from our own faces." Then they came to Adam and
Eve, and greeted them; and stood wondering at them.

3 Adam and Eve looked at them also, and wondered at their beauty, and
said, "Is there, then, under us, another world, with such beautiful
creatures as these in it"'

4 And those maidens said to Adam and Eve, "Yes, indeed, we are an
abundant creation."

5 Then Adam said to them, "But how do you multiply?"

6 And they answered him, "We have husbands who wedded us, and we bear
them children, who grow up, and who in their turn wed and are wedded,
and also bear children; and thus we increase. And if so be, O Adam, thou
wilt not believe us, we will show thee our husbands and our children."

7 Then they shouted over the river as if to call their husbands and
their children, who came up from the river, men and children; and every
one came to his wife, his children being with him.

8 But when Adam and Eve saw them, they stood dumb, and wondered at them.

9 Then they said to Adam and Eve, "You see our husbands and our
children, wed Eve as we wed our wives, and you shall have children the
same as we." This was a device of Satan to deceive Adam.

10 Satan also thought within himself, "God at first commanded Adam
concerning the fruit of the tree, saying to him, 'Eat not of it; else of
death thou shalt die.' But Adam ate of it, and yet God did not kill him;
He only decreed upon him death, and plagues and trials, until the day he
shall come out of his body.

11 "Now, then, if I deceive him to do this thing, and to wed Eve without
God's commandment, God will kill him then."

12 Therefore did Satan work this apparition before Adam and Eve; because
he sought to kill him, and to make him disappear from off the face of
the earth.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

13 Meanwhile the fire of sin came upon Adam, and he thought of
committing sin. But he restrained himself, fearing lest if he followed
this advice of Satan God would put him to death.

14 Then Adam and Eve arose, and prayed to God, while Satan and his hosts
went down into the river, in presence of Adam and Eve; to let them see
that they were going back to their own regions.

15 Then Adam and Eve went back to the Cave of Treasures, as they were
wont; about evening time.

16 And they both arose and prayed to God that night. Adam remained
standing in prayer, yet not knowing how to pray, by reason of the
thoughts of his heart regarding his wedding Eve; and he continued so
until morning.

17 And when light arose, Adam said unto Eve, "Arise, let us go below the
mountain, where they brought us gold, and let us ask the Lord concerning
this matter."

18 Then Eve said, "What is that matter, O Adam?"

19 And he answered her, "That I may request the Lord to inform me about
wedding thee; for I will not do it without His order, lest He make us
perish, thee and me. For those devils have set my heart on fire, with
thoughts of what they showed us, in their sinful apparitions."

20 Then Eve said to Adam, "Why need we go below the mountain? Let us
rather stand up and pray in our cave to God, to let us know whether this
counsel is good or not."

21 Then Adam rose up in prayer and said, "O God, thou knowest that we
transgressed against Thee, and from the moment we transgressed, we were
bereft of our bright nature; and our body became brutish, requiring food
and drink; and with animal desires.

22 "Command us, O God, not to give way to them without Thy order, lest
Thou bring us to nothing. For if Thou give us not the order, we shall be
overpowered, and follow that advice of Satan; and Thou wilt again make
us perish.

23 "If not, then take our souls from us; let us be rid of this animal
lust. And if Thou give us no order respecting this thing, then sever Eve
from me, and me from her; and place us each far away from the other.

24 "Yet again, O God, when Thou hast put us asunder from each other, the
devils will deceive us with their apparitions, and destroy our hearts,
and defile our thoughts towards each other. Yet if it is not each of us
towards the other, it will, at all events, be through their appearance
when they show themselves to us." Here Adam ended his prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIII](fbe078)
