[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe017.md) 
[Next](fbe019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. XIII.

The fall of Adam. Why night and day were created.

THEN when God, who is merciful and full of pity, heard Adam's voice, He
said unto him:--

2 "O Adam, so long as the good angel was obedient to Me, a bright light
rested on him and on his hosts.

3 "But when he transgressed My commandment, I deprived him of that
bright nature, and he became dark.

4 "And when he was in the heavens, in the realms of light, he knew
naught of darkness.

5 "But he transgressed, and I made him fall from heaven upon the earth;
and it was this darkness that came upon him.

6 "And on thee, O Adam, while in My garden and obedient to Me, did that
bright light rest also.

7 "But when I heard of thy transgression, I deprived thee of that bright
light. Yet, of My mercy, I did not turn thee into darkness, but I made
thee thy body of flesh, over which I spread this skin, in order that it
may bear cold and heat.

8 "If I had let My wrath fall

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

heavily upon thee, I should have destroyed thee; and had I turned thee
into darkness, it would have been as if I killed thee.

9 "But in My mercy, I have made thee as thou art; when thou didst
transgress My commandment, O Adam, I drove thee from the garden, and
made thee come forth into this land; and commanded thee to dwell in this
cave; and darkness came upon thee, as it did upon him who transgressed
My commandment.

10 "Thus, O Adam, has this night deceived thee. It is not to last for
ever; but is only of twelve hours; when it is over, daylight will
return.

11 "Sigh not, therefore, neither be moved; and say not in thy heart that
this darkness is long and drags on wearily; and say not in thy heart
that I plague thee with it.

12 "Strengthen thy heart, and be not afraid. This darkness is not a
punishment. But, O Adam, I have made the day, and have placed the sun in
it to give light; in order that thou and thy children should do your
work.

13 "For I knew thou shouldest sin and transgress, and come out into this
land. Yet would I not force thee, nor be heard upon thee, nor shut up;
nor doom thee through thy fall; nor through thy coming out from light
into darkness; nor yet through thy coining from the garden into this
land.

14 "For I made thee of the light; and I willed to bring out children of
light from thee and like unto thee.

15 "But thou didst not keep one day My commandment; until I had finished
the creation and blessed everything in it.

16 "Then I commanded thee concerning the tree, that thou eat not
thereof. Yet I knew that Satan, who deceived himself, would also deceive
thee.

17 "So I made known to thee by means of the tree, not to come near him.
And I told thee not to eat of the fruit thereof, nor to taste of it, nor
yet to sit under it, nor to yield to it.

18 "Had I not been and spoken to thee, O Adam, concerning the tree, and
had I left thee without a commandment, and thou hadst sinned--it would
have been an offence on My part, for not having given thee any order;
thou wouldst turn round and blame Me for it.

19 "But I commanded thee, and warned thee, and thou didst fall. So that
My creatures cannot blame me; but the blame rests on them alone.

20 "And, O Adam, I have made the day for thee and for thy children after
thee, for them to work, and toil therein. And I have made the night for
them to rest in it from their work; and for the beasts of the field to
go forth by night and seek their food.

21 "But little of darkness now remains, O Adam; and daylight will soon
appear."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](fbe019.md)
