[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe083) 
[Next](fbe085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXXIX.

A wicked plan is carried to a tragic conclusion. Cain is frightened. "Am
I my brother's keeper?" The seven punishments. Peace is shattered.

AND so they went on, until they came to a lonely place, where there were
no sheep; then Abel said to Cain, "Behold, my brother, we are weary of
walking; for we see none of the trees, nor of the fruits, nor of the
verdure, nor of the sheep, nor any one of the things of which thou didst
tell me. Where are those sheep of thine thou didst tell me to bless?"

2 Then Cain said to him, "Come on, and presently thou shalt see many
beautiful things. but go before me, until I come up to thee."

3 Then went Abel forward, but Cain remained behind him.

4 And Abel was walking in his innocence, without guile; not believing
his brother would kill him.

5 Then Cain, when he came up to him, comforted him with his talk,
walking a little behind him; then he hastened, and smote him with the
staff, blow upon blow, until he was stunned,

6 But when Abel fell down upon the ground, seeing that his brother meant
to kill him, he said to Cain, "O, my brother, have pity on me. By the
breasts we have sucked, smite me not! By the womb that bare us and that
brought us into the world, smite me not unto death with that staff! If
thou wilt kill me, take one of these large stones, and kill me
outright."

7 Then Cain, the hard-hearted, and cruel murderer, took a large stone,
and smote his brother with it upon the head, until his brains oozed out,
and he weltered in his blood, before him.

8 And Cain repented not of what he had done.

9 But the earth, when the blood of righteous Abel fell upon it,
trembled, as it drank his blood, and would have brought Cain to naught
for it.

10 And the blood of Abel cried mysteriously to God, to avenge him of his
murderer.

11 Then Cain began at once to dig the earth wherein to lay his brother;
for he was trembling from the fear that came upon him, when he saw the
earth tremble on his account.

12 He then cast his brother into the pit he made, and covered him with
dust. But the earth would not receive him; but it threw him up at once.

13 Again did Cain dig the earth and hid his brother in it; but again did
the earth throw him up on itself; until three times did the earth thus
throw up on itself the body of Abel.

14 The muddy earth threw him up the first time, because he was not the
first creation; and it threw him up the second

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

time and would not receive him, because he was righteous and good, and
was killed without a cause; and the earth threw him up the third time
and would not receive him, that there might remain before his brother a
witness against him.

15 And so did the earth mock Cain, until the Word of God, came to him
concerning his brother.

16 Then was God angry, and much displeased at Abel's death; and He
thundered from heaven, and lightnings went before Him, and the Word of
the Lord God came from heaven to Cain, and said unto him, "Where is Abel
thy brother?"

17 Then Cain answered with a proud heart and a gruff voice, "How, O God?
am I my brother's keeper?"

18 Then God said unto Cain, "Cursed be the earth that has drunk the
blood of Abel thy brother; and thou, be thou trembling and shaking; and
this will be a sign unto thee, that whosoever finds thee, shall kill
thee."

19 But Cain wept because God had said those words to him; and Cain said
unto Him "O God, whosoever finds me shall kill me, and I shall be
blotted out from the face of the earth."

20 Then God said unto Cain, "Whosoever shall find thee shall not kill
thee;" because before this, God had been saying to Cain, "I shall forego
seven punishments on him who kills Cain." For as to the word of God to
Cain, "Where is thy brother?" God said it in mercy for him, to try and
make him repent.

21 For if Cain had repented at that time, and had said, "O God, forgive
me my sin, and the murder of my brother," God would then have forgiven
him his sin.

22 And as to God saying to Cain, "Cursed be the ground that has drunk
the blood of thy brother" that also, was God's mercy on Cain. For God
did not curse him, but He cursed the ground; although it was not the
ground that had killed Abel, and had committed iniquity.

23 For it was meet that the curse should fall upon the murderer; yet in
mercy did God so manage His thoughts as that no one should know it, and
turn away from Cain.

24 And He said to him, "Where is thy brother?" To which he answered and
said, "I know not." Then the Creator said to him, "Be trembling and
quaking."

25 Then Cain trembled and became terrified; and through this sign did
God make him an example before all the creation, as the murderer of his
brother. Also did God bring trembling and terror upon him, that he might
see the peace in which he was at first, and see also the trembling and
terror he endured at the last; so that he might humble himself before
God, and repent of his sin, and seek the peace he enjoyed at first.

26 And in the word of God that said, "I will forego seven punishments on
whomsoever kills Cain," God was not seeking to kill Cain with the sword,
but He sought to make him die of fasting, and praying and weeping by
hard rule, until the time that he was delivered from his sin.

27 And the seven punishments are the seven generations during which God
awaited Cain for the murder of his brother.

28 But as to Cain, ever since he had killed his brother, he could find
no rest in any place; but went back to Adam and Eve, trembling,
terrified, and defiled with blood. . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](fbe085)
