[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe003) 
[Next](fbe005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO THE FORGOTTEN BOOKS OF EDEN

By WILLIAM N. GUTHRIE, D.D.

Rector of St. Mark's-in-the-Bouwerie.

AN American Indian's Song is his very own. No other man can sing it
without his explicit permission. It is impregnate with his aura. It is
not in our sense, however, property. It is believed to invest magically
the singer with the mood whence it proceeded, and must, therefore, merge
in some way the performer's identity with that of the originator's. To
sing another's song is an invasion of his personality, a sort of
spiritual piracy involving sacrilege.

When last year in Arcady and Andritzena, I induced primitive shepherds
to sing and play for me lustily all sorts of occasional songs and
rituals, they refused to do a burial chant, most positively. For to
perform one would surely cause a death in the house.

A little reflection on these two paragraphs may perhaps, make the reader
realize that authorship was once a thing of great hazards. If one had
something great and new to say, and wanted it to circulate widely, one
would naturally prefer anonymity.

Indeed, by the Hebrews a story was popularly presumed to have its hero
for its author. Moses wrote the account of his own death. Deuteronomy
was of course, his own work, although obviously intended to alter the
traditional religion. Jonah wrote the little novel about himself. David
was the author of the Psalms because reported to have instituted the
first temple choir, and as a lad to have played the harp soothing the
nerves of King Saul. When an author for the book of Job was wanted,
though the whole discussion of the work proves it was written to refute
the Wisdom literature which by tradition began with the Proverbs of
Solomon, Moses was chosen as a suitable author!

So for centuries among the Jews, writers sought to shelter themselves
behind the names of the great dead. In this

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

they were guilty of no fraud. They imagined what Solomon or Enoch would
say, or sing, upon a particular theme under given circumstances. It was
not really they themselves, but their Solomon, their Enoch, Solomon or
Enoch in them, who uttered the new prophesies or temple praises.

Thus arose that body of literature, called by modern scholars,
"Pseudepigrapha," that is, writings erroneously, unhistorically, and yet
sincerely, ascribed to heroic figures summed from the vasty deep by a
self-denying imagination, eager to alter man's belief and custom, to
interpret his hope and sorrow, without personal gain or fame, and also,
may one add, without the deterrent of persecution to arrest free
utterance!

Now it is a foolish modern prejudice against an ancient piece of
literature that its author veiled his person in this fashion. The only
question is: Was the writing of inherent value? Did it exercise
influence?

It is not too much to say that no modern can intelligently understand
the New Testament, unless he is acquainted with the so-called
"Apocrypha," and with the "Pseudepigrapha" as well. The very words of
Jesus were in many instances, suggested by sayings current in his day,
more or less as unconscious quotations from the Testaments of the 12
Patriarchs.

The figure of the Messiah which Jesus adapted to his creative purpose,
cannot be imagined by a modern without a perusal of the book of Enoch
which is its classic and most entrancing glorification. Without the Odes
and Songs of Solomon the atmosphere breathed by the earliest church
cannot be divined.

Hitherto access to this literature has been confined to technical
scholars. Its assembly would require special information and
considerable expenditure. With this enterprise of the Alpha House, Inc.,
it becomes democratic property. We shall have a more intelligent clergy
and laity, when this volume has taken its place in every library, and is
familiarly brought into every discussion of the historic Christ and of
His times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Book of Adam and Eve](fbe005)
