[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe065) 
[Next](fbe067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### CHAP. LXI.

They begin to follow Satan.

THEN he took Adam and Eve by the hand, and began to bring them out of
the cave.

2 But when they were come a little way out of it, God knew that Satan
had overcome them, and had brought them out ere the forty days were
ended, to take them to some distant place, and to destroy them.

3 Then the Word of the Lord God again came and cursed Satan, and drove
him away from them.

4 And God began to speak unto Adam and Eve, saying to them, "What made
you come out of the cave, unto this place?"

5 Then Adam said unto God, "Didst thou create a man before us? For when
we were in the cave there suddenly came unto us a good old man who said
to us, 'I am a messenger from God unto you, to bring you back to some
place of rest.'

6 "And we did believe, O God, that he was a messenger from Thee; and we
came out with him; and knew not whither we should go with him."

7 Then God said unto Adam, "See, that is the father of evil arts, who
brought thee and Eve out of the Garden of Delights. And now, indeed,
when he saw that thou and Eve both joined together in fasting and
praying, and that you came not out of the cave before the end of the
forty days, he wished to make your purpose vain, to break your mutual
bond; to cut off all hope from you, and to drive you to some place where
he might destroy you.

8 "Because he was unable to do aught to you, unless he showed himself in
the likeness of you.

9 "Therefore did he come to you with a face like your own, and began to
give you tokens as if they were all true.

10 "But I in mercy and with the favour I had unto you, did not allow him
to destroy you; but I drove him away from you.

11 "Now, therefore, O Adam, take Eve, and return to your cave, and
remain in it until the morrow of the fortieth day. And when ye come out,
go towards the eastern gate of the garden."

12 Then Adam and Eve worshipped God, and praised and blessed Him for the
deliverance that had come to them from Him. And they returned towards
the cave. This happened at eventide of the thirty-ninth day.

13 Then Adam and Eve stood up and with great zeal, prayed to God, to be
brought out of their want for strength; for their strength had departed
from them, through hunger and thirst and prayer. But they watched the
whole of that night praying, until morning.

14 Then Adam said unto Eve, "Arise, let us go towards the eastern gate
of the garden as God told us."

15 And they said their prayers as they were wont to do every day; and
they went out of the cave, to go near to the eastern gate of the garden.

16 Then Adam and Eve stood up and prayed, and besought God to strengthen
them, and to send them something to satisfy their hunger.

17 But when they had ended their prayers, they remained where they were
by reason of their failing strength.

18\. Then came the Word of God again, and said unto them, "O Adam,
arise, go and bring hither two figs."

19 Then Adam and Eve arose, and went until they drew near to the cave.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXII](fbe067)
