[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe073.md) 
[Next](fbe075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXIX.

Twelfth apparition of Satan to Adam and Eve, while Adam was praying over
the offering upon the altar; when Satan smote him.

THEN Satan, the hater of all good, envious of Adam and of his offering
through which he found favour with God, hastened and took a sharp stone
from among sharp iron-stones; appeared in the form of a man, and went
and stood by Adam and Eve.

2 Adam was then offering on the altar, and had begun to pray, with his
hands spread unto God.

3 Then Satan hastened with the sharp iron-stone he had with him, and
with it pierced Adam on the right side, when flowed blood and water,
then Adam fell upon the altar like a corpse. And Satan fled.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

4 Then Eve came, and took Adam and placed him below the altar. And there
she stayed, weeping over him; while a stream of blood flowed from Adam's
side upon his offering.

5 But God looked upon the death of Adam. He then sent His Word, and
raised him up and said unto him, "Fulfil thy offering, for indeed, Adam,
it is worth much, and there is no shortcoming in it."

6 God said further unto Adam, "Thus will it also happen to Me, on the
earth, when I shall be pierced and blood shall flow blood and water from
My side and run over My body, which is the true offering; and which
shall be offered on the altar as a perfect offering."

7 Then God commanded Adam to finish his offering, and when he had ended
it he worshipped before God, and praised Him for the signs He had showed
him.

8 And God healed Adam in one day, which is the end of the seven weeks;
and that is the fiftieth day.

9 Then Adam and Eve returned from the mountain, and went into the Cave
of Treasures, as they were used to do. This completed for Adam and Eve,
one hundred and forty days since their coming out of the garden.

10 Then they both stood up that night and prayed to God. And when it was
morning, they went out, and went down westward of the cave, to the place
where their corn was, and there rested under the shadow of a tree, as
they were wont.

11 But when there a multitude of beasts came all round them. It was
Satan's doing, in his wickedness; in order to wage war against Adam
through marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXX](fbe075.md)
