[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe063.md) 
[Next](fbe065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LIX.

Eighth apparition of Satan to Adam and Eve.

BUT Satan, the hater of all good, did not allow them to end their
prayers. For he called to his hosts, and they came, all of them. He then
said to them, "Since Adam and Eve, whom we beguiled, have agreed
together to pray to God night and day, and to entreat Him to deliver
them, and since they will not come out of the cave until the end of the
fortieth day.

2 "And since they will continue their prayers as they have both agreed
to do, that He will deliver them out of our hands, and restore them to
their former state, see what we shall do unto them." And his hosts said
unto him, "Power is thine, O our Lord, to do what thou listest."

3 Then Satan, great in wickedness, took his hosts and came into the
cave, in the thirtieth night of the forty days and one; and he smote
Adam and Eve, until he left them dead.

4 Then came the Word of God unto Adam and Eve, who raised them from
their suffering, and God said unto Adam, "Be strong, and be not afraid
of him who has just come to thee."

5 But Adam wept and said, "Where wast Thou, O my God, that they should
smite me with such blows, and that this suffering should come upon us;
upon me and upon Eve, Thy handmaid?"

6 Then God said unto him, "O Adam, see, he is lord and master of all
thou hast, he who said, he would give thee divinity.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

Where is this love for thee? And where is the gift he promised?

7 "For once has it pleased him, O Adam, to come to thee, to comfort
thee, and to strengthen thee, and to rejoice with thee, and to send his
hosts to guard thee; because thou hast hearkened to him, and hast
yielded to his counsel; and hast transgressed My commandment but has
followed his behest?"

8 Then Adam wept before the Lord, and said, "O Lord because I
transgressed a little, Thou hast sorely plagued me in return for it, I
ask Thee to deliver me out of his hands; or else have pity on me, and
take my soul out of my body now in this strange land."

9 Then God said unto Adam, "If only there had been this sighing and
praying before, ere thou didst transgress! Then wouldst thou have rest
from the trouble in which thou art now."

10 But God had patience with Adam, and let him and Eve remain in the
cave until they had fulfilled the forty days.

11 But as to Adam and Eve, their strength and flesh withered from
fasting and praying, from hunger and thirst; for they had not tasted
either food or drink since they left the garden; nor were the functions
of their bodies yet settled; and they had no strength left to continue
in prayer from hunger, until the end of the next day to the fortieth.
They were fallen down in the cave; yet what speech escaped from their
mouths, was only in praises.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LX](fbe065.md)
