[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe011) 
[Next](fbe013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chap. VII.

The beasts are reconciled.

WHEN Adam and Eve heard these words from God, they wept and sobbed yet
more; but they strengthened their hearts in God, because they now felt
that the Lord was to them like a father and a mother; and for this very
reason, they wept before Him, and sought mercy from Him.

2 Then God had pity on them, and said: "O Adam, I have made My covenant
with thee, and I will not turn from it; neither will I let thee return
to the garden, until My covenant of the great five days and a half is
fulfilled."

3 Then Adam said unto God, "O Lord, Thou didst create us, and make us
fit to be in the garden; and before I transgressed, Thou madest all
beasts come to me, that I should name them.

4 "Thy grace was then on me; and I named every one according to Thy
mind; and Thou madest them all subject unto me.

5 "But now, O Lord God, that I have transgressed Thy commandment,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

all beasts will rise against me and will devour me, and Eve Thy
handmaid; and will cut off our life from the face of the earth.

6 "I therefore beseech Thee, O God, that, since Thou hast made us come
out of the garden, and hast made us be in a strange land, Thou wilt not
let the beasts hurt us."

7 When the Lord heard these words from Adam, He had pity on him, and
felt that he had truly said that the beasts of the field would rise and
devour him and Eve, because He, the Lord, was angry with them two on
account of their transgression.

8 Then God commanded the beasts, and the birds, and all that moves upon
the earth, to come to Adam and to be familiar with him, and not to
trouble him and Eve; nor yet any of the good and righteous among their
posterity.

9 Then the beasts did obeisance to Adam, according to the commandment of
God; except the serpent, against which God was wroth. It did not come to
Adam, with the beasts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](fbe013)
