[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe050.md) 
[Next](fbe052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. XLVI.

"*How many times have I delivered thee out of his hand* . . ."

THEN Adam and Eve began again to come into the cave. And when they came
to the way between the fire, Satan blew into the fire like a whirlwind,
and made on Adam and Eve a burning coal-fire; so that their bodies were
singed; and the coal-fire scorched them.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

2 And from the burning of the fire Adam and Eve cried aloud, and said,
"O Lord, save us! Leave us not to be consumed and plagued by this
burning fire; neither require us for having transgressed Thy
commandment."

3 Then God looked upon their bodies, on which Satan had caused fire to
bum, and God sent His angel that stayed the burning fire. But the wounds
remained on their bodies.

4 And God said unto Adam, "See Satan's love for thee, who pretended to
give thee the Godhead and greatness; and, behold, he burns thee with
fire, and seeks to destroy thee from off the earth.

5 "Then look at Me, O Adam; I created thee, and how many times have I
delivered thee out of his hand? If not, would he not have destroyed
thee?"

6 God said again to Eve, "What is that he promised thee in the garden,
saying, 'At the time ye shall eat of the tree, your eyes will be opened,
and you shall become like gods, knowing good and evil.' But lo! he has
burnt your bodies with fire, and has made you taste the taste of fire,
for the taste of the garden; and has made you see the burning of fire,
and the evil thereof, and the power it has over you.

7 "Your eyes have seen the good he has taken from you, and in truth he
has opened your eyes; and you have seen the garden in which ye were with
Me, and ye have also seen the evil that has come upon you from Satan.
But as to the Godhead he cannot give it you, neither fulfil his speech
to you. Nay, he was bitter against you and your seed, that will come
after you."

8 And God withdrew His Word from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII](fbe052.md)
