[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe069) 
[Next](fbe071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXV.

Adam and Eve acquire digestive organs. Final hope of returning to the
Garden is quenched.

AND when it was day, they rose and prayed, after their custom, and then
went out of the cave.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

2 But as they felt great trouble from the food they had eaten, and to
which they were not used, they went about in the cave saying to each
other:--

3 "What has happened to us through eating, that this pain should have
come upon us? Woe be to us, we shall die! Better for us to have died
than to have eaten; and to have kept our bodies pure, than to have
defiled them with food."

4 Then Adam said to Eve, "This pain did not come to us in the garden,
neither did we eat such bad food there. Thinkest thou, O Eve, that God
will plague us through the food that is in us, or that our inwards will
come out; or that God means to kill us with this pain before He has
fulfilled His promise to us?"

5 Then Adam besought the Lord and said, "O Lord, let us not perish
through the food we have eaten. O Lord, smite us not; but deal with us
according to Thy great mercy, and forsake us not until the day of the
promise Thou hast made us."

6 Then God looked upon them, and at once fitted them for eating food; as
unto this day; so that they should not perish.

7 Then Adam and Eve came back into the cave sorrowful and weeping
because of the alteration in their nature. And they both knew from that
hour that they were altered beings, that their hope of returning to the
garden was now cut off; and that they could not enter it.

8 For that now their bodies had strange functions; and all flesh that
requires food and drink for its existence, cannot be in the garden.

9 Then Adam said to Eve, "Behold, our hope is now cut off; and so is our
trust to enter the garden. We no longer belong to the inhabitants of the
garden; but henceforth we are earthy and of the dust, and of the
inhabitants of the earth, We shall not return to the garden, until the
day in which God has promised to save us, and to bring us again into the
garden, as He promised us."

10 Then they prayed to God that He would have mercy on them; after
which, their mind was quieted, their hearts were broken, and their
longing was cooled down; and they were like strangers on earth. That
night Adam and Eve spent in the cave, where they slept heavily by reason
of the food they had eaten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI](fbe071)
