[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe067.md) 
[Next](fbe069.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. LXIII

The first joy of trees.

BUT Adam and Eve, as they drew near to the cave, saw two fig-trees,
covered with fruit, and overshadowing the cave.

2 Then Adam said to Eve, "It seems to me we have gone astray. When did
these two trees grow here? It seems to me that the enemy wishes to lead
us astray, Sayest thou that there is in the earth another cave than
this?

3 "Yet, O Eve, let us go into the cave, and find in it the two figs; for
this is our cave, in which we were. But if we should not find the two
figs in it, then it cannot be our cave."

4 They went then into the cave, and looked into the four corners of it,
but found not the two figs.

5 And Adam wept and said to Eve, "Are we come to a wrong cave, then, O
Eve? It seems to me these two fig-trees are the two figs that were in
the cave." And Eve said, "I, for my part, do not know."

6 Then Adam stood up and prayed and said, "O God, Thou didst command us
to come back to the cave, to take the two figs, and then to return to
Thee.

7 "But now, we have not found them. O God, hast Thou taken them, and
sown these two trees, or have we gone astray in the earth; or has the
enemy deceived us? If it be real, then, O God, reveal to us the secret
of these two trees and of the two figs."

8 Then came the Word of God to Adam, and said unto him, "O Adam, when I
sent thee to fetch the figs, Satan went before thee to the cave, took
the figs, and buried them outside, eastward of the cave, thinking to
destroy them; and not sowing them with good intent.

9 "Not for his mere sake, then, have these trees grown up at once; but I
had mercy on thee and I commanded them to grow. And they grew to be two
large trees, that you be overshadowed by their branches, and find rest;
and that I make you see My power and My marvellous works.

10 "And, also, to show you Satan's meanness, and his evil

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

works, for ever since ye came out of the garden, he has not ceased, no,
not one day, from doing you some harm. But I have not given him power
over you."

11 And God said, "Henceforth, O Adam, rejoice on account of the trees,
thou and Eve; and rest under them when ye feel weary. But eat not of
their fruit, nor come near them."

12 Then Adam wept, and said, "O God, wilt Thou again kill us, or wilt
Thou drive us away from before Thy face, and cut our life from off the
face of the earth?

13 "O God, I beseech Thee, if Thou knowest that there be in these trees
either death or some other evil, as at the first time, root them up from
near our cave, and wither them; and leave us to die of the heat, of
hunger and of thirst.

14 "For we know Thy marvellous works, O God, that they are great, and
that by Thy power Thou canst bring one thing out of another, without
one's wish. For Thy power can make rocks to become trees, and trees to
become rocks."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIV.](fbe069.md)
