[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe122.md) 
[Next](fbe124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XVI.

They took Enoch and again placed him in the east at the course of the
moon.

THOSE men showed me the other course, that of the moon, twelve great
gates, crowned from west to east, by which the moon goes in and out of
the customary times.

2 It goes in at the first gate to the western places of the sun, by the
first gates with thirty-one days exactly, by the second gates with
*thirty*-one *days* exactly, by the third with thirty days exactly, by
the fourth with thirty days exactly, by the fifth with thirty-one days
exactly, by the sixth with thirty-one days exactly, by the seventh with
thirty days exactly, by the eighth with thirty-one days perfectly, by
the ninth with thirty-one days exactly, by the tenth with thirty days
perfectly, by the eleventh with thirty-one days exactly, by the twelfth
with twenty-eight days exactly.

3 And it goes through the western gates in the order and number of the
eastern, and accomplishes the three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter
days of the solar year, while the lunar year has three hundred and
fifty-four, and there are wanting *to it* twelve days of the solar
circle, which are the lunar epacts of the whole year.

4 \[Thus, too, the great circle contains five hundred and thirty-two
years.\]

5 The quarter *of a day* is omitted for three years, the fourth fulfils
*it* exactly.

6 Therefore they are taken outside of heaven for three years and are not
added to the number of days, because they change the time of the years
to two new months towards completion, to two others towards diminution.

7 And when the western gates are finished, it returns and goes to the
eastern to the lights, and goes thus day and night about the heavenly
circles, lower than all circles, swifter than the heavenly winds, and
spirits and elements and angels flying; each angel has six wings.

8 It has a sevenfold course in nineteen years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](fbe124.md)
