[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe128.md) 
[Next](fbe130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXII.

In the tenth Heaven the archangel Michael led Enoch to before the Lord's
face.

ON the tenth Heaven, Aravoth, I saw the appearance of the Lord's face,
like iron made to glow in fire, and brought out, emitting sparks, and it
burns.

2 Thus I saw the Lord's face,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

but the Lord's face is ineffable, marvellous and very awful, and very,
very terrible.

3 And who am I to tell of the Lord's unspeakable being, and of his very
wonderful face? And I cannot tell the quantity of his many instructions,
and various voices, the Lord's throne very great and not made with
hands, nor the quantity of those standing round him, troops of cherubim
and seraphim, nor their incessant singing, nor his immutable beauty, and
who shall tell of the ineffable greatness of his glory?

4 And I fell prone and bowed down to the Lord, and the Lord with his
lips said to me:

5 'Have courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise and stand before my face into
eternity.'

6 And the archistratege Michael lifted me up, and led me to before the
Lord's face.

7 And the Lord said to his servants tempting them: 'Let Enoch stand
before my face into eternity,' and the glorious ones bowed down to the
Lord, and said: 'Let Enoch go according to Thy word.'

8 And the Lord said to Michael: 'Go and take Enoch from out his earthly
garments, and anoint him with my sweet ointment, and put him into the
garments of My glory.'

9 And Michael did thus, as the Lord told him. He anointed me, and
dressed me, and the appearance of that ointment is more than the great
light, and his ointment is like sweet dew, and its smell mild, shining
like the sun's ray, and I looked at myself, and was like one of his
glorious ones.

10 And the Lord summoned one of his archangels by name Pravuil, whose
knowledge was quicker in wisdom than the other archangels, who wrote all
the deeds of the Lord; and the Lord said to Pravuil:

11 'Bring out the books from my store-houses, and a reed of
quick-writing, and give *it* to Enoch, and deliver to him the choice and
comforting books out of thy hand.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](fbe130.md)
