[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe259.md) 
[Next](fbe261.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. II.

A "Poor Richard's Almanac" of ancient days. Immortal precepts of human
conduct concerning money, women, dress, business, friends. Especially
interesting proverbs are found in Verses 12, 17, 23, 37, 45, 47. Compare
Verse 63 with some of the cynicism of today.

THUS he taught him, saying: 'O my son! hear my speech and follow my
advice and remember what I say.

2 O my son! if thou hearest a word, let it die in thy heart, and reveal
it not to another, lest it become a live coal and burn thy tongue and
cause a pain in thy body, and thou gain a reproach, and art shamed
before God and man.

3 O my son! if thou hast heard a report, spread it not; and if thou hast
seen something, tell it not.

4 O my son! make thy eloquence easy to the listener, and be not hasty to
return an answer.

5 O my son! when thou hast heard anything, hide it not.

6 O my son! loose not a sealed knot, nor untie it, and seal not a
loosened knot.

7 O my son! covet not outward beauty, for it wanes and passes away, but
an honourable remembrance lasts for aye.

8 O my son! let not a silly woman deceive thee with her speech, lest
thou die the most miserable of deaths, and she entangle thee in the net
till thou art ensnared.

9 O my son! desire not a woman bedizened with dress and with ointments,
who is despicable and silly in her soul. Woe o thee if thou bestow on
her anything that is thine, or commit to her what is in thine hand and
she entice thee into sin, and God be wroth with thee.

10 O my son! be not like the almond-tree, for it brings forth leaves
before all the trees, and edible fruit after them all, but be like the
mulberry-tree, which brings forth edible fruit before all the trees, and
leaves after them all.

11 O my son! bend thy head low down, and soften thy voice, and be
courteous, and walk in the straight path, and be not foolish. And raise
not thy voice when thou laughest for if it were by a loud voice that a
house was built, the ass would build many houses every day; and if it
were by dint of strength that the plough were driven, the plough would
never be removed from under the shoulders of the camels.

12 O m son! the removing of stones with a wise man is better

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

than the drinking of wine with a sorry man.

13 O my son! pour out thy wine on the tombs of the just, and drink not
with ignorant, contemptible people.

14 O my son! cleave to wise men who fear God and be like them, and go
not near the ignorant, lest thou become like him and learn his ways.

15 O my son! when thou hast got thee a comrade or a friend, try him, and
afterwards make him a comrade and a friend; and do not praise him
without a trial; and do not spoil thy speech with a man who lacks
wisdom.

16 O my son! while a shoe stays on thy foot, walk with it on the thorns,
and make a road for thy son, and for thy household and thy children, and
make thy ship taut before she goes on the sea and its waves and sinks
and cannot he saved.

17 O my son! if the rich man eat a snake, they say,--"It is by his
wisdom," and if a poor man eat it, the people say, "From his hunger."

18 O my son! he content with thy daily bread and thy goods, and covet
not what is another's.

19 O my son! be not neighbour to the fool, and eat not bread with him,
and rejoice not in the calamities of thy neighbours. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md) If thine enemy wrong thee, show him
kindness.

20 O my son! a man who fears God do thou fear him and honour him.

21 O my son! the ignorant man falls and stumbles, and the wise man, even
if he stumbles, he is not shaken, and even if he falls he gets up
quickly, and if he is sick, he can take care of his life. But as for the
ignorant, stupid man, for his disease there is no drug.

22 O my son! if a man approach thee who is inferior to thyself, go
forward to meet him, and remain standing, and if he cannot recompense
thee, his Lord will recompense thee for him.

23 O my son! spare not to beat thy son, for the drubbing of thy son is
like manure to the garden, and like tying the mouth of a purse, and like
the tethering of beasts, and like the bolting of the door.

24 O my son! restrain thy son from wickedness, and teach him manners
before he rebels against thee and brings thee into contempt amongst the
people and thou hang thy head in the streets and the assemblies and thou
be punished for the evil of his wicked deeds.

25 O my son! get thee a fat ox with a foreskin, and an ass great with
its hoofs, and get not an ox with large horns, nor make friends with a
tricky man, nor get a quarrelsome slave, nor a thievish handmaid, for
everything which thou committest to them they will ruin.

26 O my son! let not thy parents curse thee, and the Lord be pleased
with them; for it hath been said, "He who despiseth his father or his
mother let him die the death (I mean the death of sin); and he who
honoureth his parents shall prolong his days and his life and shall see
all that is good."

27 O my son! walk not on the road without weapons, for thou knowest not
when the foe may meet thee, so that thou mayst be ready for him.

28 O my son! be not like a bare, leafless tree that doth not grow, but
be like a tree covered with its leaves and its boughs; for the man who
has neither wife nor children is disgraced in the world and is hated by
them, like a leafless and fruitless tree.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

29 O my son! be like a fruitful tree on the roadside, whose fruit is
eaten by all who pass by, and the beasts of the desert rest under its
shade and eat of its leaves.

30 O my son! every sheep that wanders from its path and its companions
becomes food for the wolf.

31 O my son! say not, "My lord is a fool and I am wise," and relate not
the speech of ignorance and folly, lest thou be despised by him.

32 O my son! be not one of those servants, to whom their lords say, "Get
away from us," but be one of those to whom they say, "Approach and come
near to us."

33 O my son! caress not thy slave in the presence of his companion, for
thou knowest not which of them shall be of most value to thee in the
end.

34 O my son! be not afraid of thy Lord who created thee, lest He be
silent to thee.

35 O my son! make thy speech fair and sweeten thy tongue; and permit not
thy companion to tread on thy foot, lest he tread at another time on thy
breast.

36 O my son! if thou beat a wise man with a word of wisdom, it will lurk
in his breast like a subtle sense of shame; but if thou drub the
ignorant with a stick he will neither understand nor hear.

37 O my son! if thou send a wise man for thy needs, do not give him many
orders, for he will do thy business as thou desirest: and if thou send a
fool, do not order him, but go thyself and do thy business, for if thou
order him, he will not do what thou desirest. If they send thee on
business, hasten to fulfil it quickly.

38 O my son! make not an enemy of a man stronger than thyself, for he
will take thy measure, and his revenge on thee.

39 O my son! make trial of thy son, and of thy servant, before thou
committest thy belongings to them, lest they make away with them; for he
who hath a full hand is called wise, even if he be stupid and ignorant,
and he who hath an empty hand is called poor, ignorant, even if he be
the prince of sages.

40 O my son! I have eaten a colocynth, and swallowed aloes, and I have
found nothing more bitter than poverty and scarcity.

41 O my son! teach thy son frugality and hunger, that he may do well in
the management of his household.

42 O my son! teach not to the ignorant the language of wise men, for it
will be burdensome to him.

43 O my son! display not thy condition to thy friend, lest thou be
despised by him.

44 O my son! the blindness of the heart is more grievous than the
blindness of the eyes, for the blindness of the eyes may be guided
little by little, but the blindness of the heart is not guided, and it
leaves the straight path, and goes in a crooked way.

45 O my son! the stumbling of a man with his foot is better than the
stumbling of a n with his tongue.

46 O my son! a friend who is near is better than a more excellent
brother who is far away.

47 O my son! beauty fades but learning lasts, and the world wanes and
becomes vain, but a good name neither becomes vain nor wanes.

48 O my son! the man who hath no rest, his death were better than his
life; and the sound of weeping is better than the sound of singing; for
sorrow and weeping, if the fear of God be in them, are better than the
sound of singing and rejoicing.

49 O my child! the thigh of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

a frog in thy hand is better than a goose in the pot of thy neighbour;
and a sheep near thee is better than an ox far away; and a sparrow in
thy hand is better than a thousand sparrows flying; <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) and poverty which gathers is better than
the scattering of much provision; and a living fox is better than a dead
lion; and a pound of wool is better than a pound of wealth, I mean of
gold and silver; for the gold and the silver are hidden and covered up
in the earth, and are not seen; but the wool stays in the markets and it
is seen, and it is a beauty to him who wears it.

50 O my son! a small fortune is better than a scattered fortune.

51 O my son! a living dog is better than a dead poor man.

52 O my son! a poor man who does right is better than a rich man who is
dead in sins.

53 O my son! keep a word in thy heart, and it shall be much to thee, and
beware lost thou reveal the secret of thy friend.

54 O my son! let not a word issue from thy mouth till thou hast taken
counsel with thy heart. And stand not betwixt persons quarrelling,
because from a bad word there comes a quarrel, and from a quarrel there
comes war, and from war there comes fighting, and thou wilt be forced to
bear witness; but run from thence and rest thyself.

55 O my son! withstand not a man stronger than thyself, but get thee a
patient spirit, and endurance and an upright conduct, for there is
nothing more excellent than that.

56 O my son! hate not thy first friend, for the second one may not last.

57 O my son! visit the poor in his affliction, and speak of him in the
Sultan's presence, and do thy diligence to save him from the mouth of
the lion. <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md)

58 O my son! rejoice not in the death of thine enemy, for after a little
while thou shalt be his neighbour, and him who mocks thee do thou
respect and honour and be beforehand with him in greeting.

59 O my son! if water would stand still in heaven, and a black crow
become white, and myrrh grow sweet as honey, then ignorant men and fools
might understand and become wise.

60 O my son! if thou desire to be wise, restrain thy tongue from lying,
and thy hand from stealing, and thine eyes from beholding evil; then
thou wilt be called wise.

61 O my son! let the wise man beat thee with a rod, but let not the fool
anoint thee with sweet salve. Be humble in thy youth and thou shalt be
honoured in thine old age.

62 O my son! withstand not a man in the days of his power, nor a river
in the days of its flood.

63 O my son! be not hasty in the wedding of a wife, for if it turns out
well, she will say, 'My lord, make provision for me'; and if it turns
out ill, she will rate at him who was the cause of it.

64 O my son! whosoever is elegant in his dress, he is the same in his
speech; and he who has a mean appearance in his dress, he also is the
same in his speech.

65 O my son! if thou hast committed a theft, make it known to the
Sultan, and give him a share of it, that thou mayst be delivered from
him, for otherwise thou wilt endure bitterness.

66 O my son! make a friend of the man whose hand is satisfied

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

and filled, and make no friend of the man whose hand is closed and
hungry.

67 There are four things in which neither the king nor his army can be
secure: oppression by the vizier, and bad government, and perversion of
the will, and tyranny over the subject; and four things which cannot be
hidden: the prudent, and the foolish, and the rich, and the poor.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[201:1](fbe260.htm#fr_13.md) Cf. Psalms CXLI. 4.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[203:1](fbe260.htm#fr_14.md) Cf. "A bird in the
hand is worth two in the bush."

<span id="fn_15"></span>[203:2](fbe260.htm#fr_15.md) Cf. 2 Timothy, IV, 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](fbe261.md)
