[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe256.md) 
[Next](fbe258.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. VIII.

The famous "Athletes of Righteousness." Here ends the story of courage
called the Fourth Book of Maccabees.

SOME of the guards declared that when she also was about to be seized
and put to death, she cast herself on the pyre in order that no man
might touch her body.

2 O mother, that together with thy seven sons didst break the tyrant's
force, and bring to nought his evil devices, and gavest an example of
the nobleness of faith.

3 Thou wert nobly set as a roof upon thy sons as pillars, and the
earthquake of the torments shook thee not at all.

4 Rejoice therefore, pure-souled mother, having the hope of thy
endurance certain at the hand of God.

5 Not so majestic stands the moon amid the stars in heaven as thou,
having lit the path of thy seven starlike sons unto righteousness,
standest in honour with God; and thou art set in heaven with them.

6 For thy child-bearing was from the son of Abraham.

7 And had it been lawful for us to paint, as might some artist, the tale
of thy piety, would not the spectators have shuddered at the mother of
seven sons suffering for righteousness' sake multitudinous tortures even
unto death?

8 And indeed it were fitting to inscribe these words over their
resting-place, speaking for a memorial to future generations of our
people:

HERE LIE AN AGED PRIEST  
AND A WOMAN FULL OF YEARS  
AND HER SEVEN SONS  
THROUGH THE VIOLENCE OF A TYRANT  
DESIRING TO DESTROY THE HEBREW NATION.  
THEY VINDICATED THE RIGHTS OF OUR PEOPLE  
LOOKING UNTO GOD AND ENDURING  
THE TORMENTS EVEN UNTO  
DEATH.

9 For truly it was a holy war which was fought by them. For on that day
virtue, proving them

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

through endurance, set before them the prize of victory in incorruption
in everlasting life.

10 But the first in the fight was Eleazar, and the mother of the seven
sons played her part, and the brethren fought.

11 The tyrant was their adversary and the world and the life of man were
the spectators.

12 And righteousness won the victor and gave the crown to her athletes.
Who but wondered at the athletes of the true Law?

13 Who were not amazed at them? The tyrant himself and his whole council
admired their endurance, whereby they now do both Stand beside the
throne of God and live the blessed age.

14 For Moses says, 'All also who have sanctified themselves are under
thy hands.'

15 And these men, therefore, having sanctified themselves for God's
sake, not only have received this honour, but also the honour that
through them the enemy had no more power over our people, and the tyrant
suffered punishment, and our country was purified, they having as it
were become a ransom for our nation's sin; and through the blood of
these righteous men and the propitiation of their death, the divine
Providence delivered Israel that before was evil entreated.

16 For when the tyrant Antiochus saw the heroism of their virtue, and
their endurance under the tortures, he publicly held up their endurance
to his soldiers as an example; and he thus inspired his men with a sense
of honour and heroism on the field of battle and in the labours of
besieging, so that he plundered and overthrew all his enemies.

17 O Israelites, children born of the seed of Abraham, obey this Law,
and be righteous in all ways, recognizing that Inspired Reason is lord
over the passions, and over pains, not only from within, but from
without ourselves; by which means those men, delivering up their bodies
to the torture for righteousness' sake, not only won the admiration of
mankind, but were deemed worthy of a divine inheritance.

18 And through them the nation obtained peace and restoring the
observance of the Law in our country hath captured the city from the
enemy.

19 And vengeance hath pursued the tyrant Antiochus upon earth, and in
death he suffers punishment.

20 For when he failed utterly to constrain the people of Jerusalem to
live like Gentiles and abandon the customs of our fathers, he thereupon
left Jerusalem and marched away against the Persians.

21 Now these are the words that the mother of the seven sons, the
righteous woman, spake to her children:

22 'I was a pure maiden, and I strayed not from my father's house, and I
kept guard over the rib that was builded into Eve.

23 No seducer of the desert, no deceiver in the field, corrupted me; nor
did the false, beguiling Serpent sully the purity of my maidenhood; I
lived with my husband all the days of my youth; but when these my sons
were grown up, their father died.

24 Happy was he; for he lived a life blessed with children, and he never
knew the pain of their loss.

25 Who, while he was yet with us, taught you the Law and the prophets.
He read to us of Abel who was slain by Cain, and of Isaac who was
offered as a burnt-offering, and of Joseph in the prison.

26 And he spake to us of Phineas, the zealous priest, and he taught you
the song of

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Ananias, Azarias, and Mishael in the fire.

27 And he glorified also Daniel in the den of lions, and blessed him;
and he called to your minds the saying of Isaiah,

28 "Yea even though thou pass through the fire, the flame shall not hurt
thee."

29 He sang to us the words of David the psalmist, "Many are the
afflictions of the just."

30 He quoted to us the proverb of Solomon, "He is a tree of life to all
them that do his will."

31 He confirmed the words of Ezekiel, "Shall these dry bones live?" For
he forgat not the song that Moses taught, which teaches, "I will slay
and I will make alive. This is your life and the blessedness of your
days."'

32 Ah, cruel was the day, and yet not cruel, when the cruel tyrant of
the Greeks set the fire blazing for his barbarous braziers, and with his
passions boiling brought to the catapult and back again to his tortures
the seven sons of the daughter of Abraham, and blinded the eyeballs of
their eyes, and cut out their tongues, and slew them with many kinds of
torment.

33 For which cause the judgement of God pursued, and shall pursue, the
accursed wretch.

34 But the sons of Abraham, with their victorious mother, are gathered
together unto the place of their ancestors, having received pure and
immortal souls from God, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](fbe258.md)
