[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe252.md) 
[Next](fbe254.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. IV.

This so called "Age of Reason" may in this chapter read that the
Philosophy of Reason is 2000 years old. The story of seven sons and
their mother.

FOR the Reason of our father Eleazar, like a fine steersman steering the
ship of sanctity on the sea of the passions, though buffeted by the
threats of the tyrant and swept by the swelling waves of the tortures,
never shifted for one moment the helm of sanctity until he sailed into
the haven of victory over death.

2 No city besieged with many and cunning engines ever defended itself so
well as did that holy man when his sacred soul was attacked with scourge
and rack and flame, and he moved them who were laying siege to his soul
through his Reason that was the shield of sanctity.

3 For our father Eleazar, setting his mind film as a beetling sea-cliff,
broke the mad onset of the surges of the passions.

4 O priest worthy of thy priesthood, thou didst not defile thy holy
teeth, nor didst thou befoul with unclean meat thy belly that had room
only for piety and purity.

5 O confessor of the Law and philosopher of the Divine life! Such should
those be whose office is to serve the Law and defend it with their own
blood and honourable sweat in the face of sufferings to the death.

6 Thou, O father, didst fortify our fidelity to the Law through thy
steadfastness unto glory; and having spoken in honour of holiness thou
didst not belie thy speech, and didst confirm the words of divine
philosophy by

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

thy deeds, O aged man that wast more forceful than the tortures.

7 O reverend elder that wast tenser-strung than the flame, thou great
king over the passions, Eleazar.

8 For as our father Aaron, armed with the censer, ran through the massed
congregation against the fiery angel and overcame him, so the son of
Aaron, Eleazar, being consumed by the melting heat of the fire, remained
unshaken in his Reason.

9 And yet most wonderful of all, he, being an old man, with the sinews
of his body unstrung and his muscles relaxed and his nerves weakened,
grew a young man again in the spirit of his Reason and with Isaac-like
Reason turned the hydra-headed torture to impotence.

10 O blessed age, O reverend grey head, O life faithful to the Law and
perfected by the seal of death!

11 Assuredly, then, if an old man despised the torments unto death for
righteousness' sake it must be admitted that the Inspired Reason is able
to guide the passions.

12 But some perhaps may answer that not all men are masters of the
passions because not all men have their Reason enlightened.

13 But as many as with their whole heart make righteousness their first
thought, these alone are able to master the weakness of the flesh,
believing that unto God they die not, as our patriarchs, Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob, died not, but that they live unto God.

14 Therefore there is-nothing contradictory in certain persons appearing
to be slaves to passion in consequence of the weakness of their Reason.

15 For who is there that being a philosopher following righteously the
whole rule of philosophy, and having put his trust in God, and knowing
that it is a blessed thing to endure all hardness for the sake of
virtue, would not conquer his passions for the sake of righteousness?

16 For the wise and self-controlled man alone is the brave ruler of the
passions.

17 Yea, by this means even young boys, being philosophers by virtue of
the Reason which is according to righteousness, have triumphed over yet
more grievous tortures.

18 For when the tyrant found himself notably defeated in his first
attempt, and impotent to compel an old man to eat unclean meat, then
truly in violent rage he ordered the guards to bring others of the young
men of the Hebrews, and if they would eat unclean meat to release them
after eating it, but if they refused, to torture them yet more savagely.

19 And under these orders of the tyrant seven brethren together with
their aged mother were brought prisoners before him, all handsome, and
modest, and well-born,--and generally attractive.

20 And when the tyrant saw them there, standing as if they were a festal
choir with their mother in the midst, he took notice of them, and struck
by their noble and distinguished bearing he smiled at them, and calling
them nearer said:

21 'O young men, I wish well to each one of you, and admire your beauty,
and honour highly so large a band of brothers; so not only do I advise
you not to persist in the madness of that old man who has already
suffered, but I even entreat of you to yield to me and become partakers
in my friendship.

22 For, as I am able to punish those who disobey my orders, so am I able
to advance those who do obey me.

23 Be assured then that you

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

shall be given positions of importance and authority in my service if
you will reject the ancestral law of your polity.

24 Share in the Hellenic life, and walk in a new way, and take some
pleasure in your youth; for if you drive me to anger with your
disobedience you will compel me to resort to terrible penalties and put
every single one of you to death by torture.

25 Have pity then on yourselves, whom even I, your opponent, pity for
your youth and your beauty.

26 Will you not consider with yourselves this thing, that if you disobey
me there is nothing before you but death in torments?'

27 With these words he ordered the instruments of torture to be brought
forward in order to persuade them by fear to eat unclean meat.

28 But when the guards had produced wheels, and joint-dislocators, and
racks, and bone-crushers, and catapults, and cauldrons, and braziers,
and thumb-screws, and iron claws, and wedges, and branding irons, the
tyrant spoke again and said:

29 'You had better feel fear, my lads, and the justice you worship will
pardon your unwilling transgression.'

30 But they, hearing his persuasions, and seeing his dreadful engines,
not only showed no fear but actually arrayed their philosophy in
opposition to the tyrant, and by their right Reason did abase his
tyranny.

31 And yet consider; supposing some amongst them to have been
faint-hearted and cowardly, what sort of language would they have used?
would it not have been to this effect?

32 'Alas! miserable creatures that we are and foolish above measure!
When the king invites us and appeals to us on terms of kind treatment
shall we not obey him?

33 Why do we encourage ourselves with vain desires and dare a
disobedience that is to cost us our lives? Shall we not, O men my
brothers, fear the dread instruments and weigh well his threats of the
tortures, and abandon these empty vaunts and this fatal bragging?

34 Let us take pity on our own youth and have compassion on our mother's
age; and let us lay to heart that if we disobey we shall die.

35 And even the divine justice will have mercy on us, if compelled by
necessity we yield to the king in fear. Why should we cast away from us
this dear life and rob ourselves of this sweet world?

36 Let us not strive against necessity nor with vain confidence invite
our torture.

37 Even the Law itself does not willingly condemn us to death, we being
in terror of the instruments of torture.

38 Why does such contentiousness inflame us and a fatal obstinacy find
favour with us, when we might have a peaceful life by obeying the king?'

39 But no such words escaped these young men at the prospect of the
torture, nor did such thoughts enter into their minds.

40 For they were despisers of the passions and masters over pain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](fbe254.md)
