[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe240.md) 
[Next](fbe242.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP IV.

Vivid details of the sacrifice. The unerring accuracy of the priests is
notable. A savage orgy. A description of the temple and its water-works.

I HAVE given you this description of the presents because I thought it
was necessary.

2 The next point in the narrative is an account of our journey to
Eleazar, but I will first of all give you a description of the whole
country.

3 When we arrived in the land of the Jews we saw the city situated in
the middle of the whole of Judea on the top of a mountain of
considerable altitude.

4 On the summit the temple had been built in all its splendour.

5 It was surrounded by three walls more than seventy cubits high and in
length and breadth corresponding to the structure of the edifice.

6 All the buildings were characterised by a magnificence and costliness
quite unprecedented.

7 It was obvious that no expense had been spared on the door and the
fastenings, which connected it with the door-posts, and the stability of
the lintel.

8 The style of the curtain too was thoroughly in proportion to that of
the entrance.

9 Its fabric owing to the draught of wind was in perpetual motion, and
as this motion was communicated from the bottom and the curtain bulged
out to its highest extent, it afforded a pleasant spectacle from which a
man could scarcely tear himself away.

10 The construction of the altar was in keeping with the place itself
and with the burnt offerings which were consumed by fire upon it, and
the approach to it was on a similar scale.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

11 There was a *gradual* slope up to it, conveniently arranged for the
purpose of decency, and the ministering priests were robed in linen
garments, down to their ankles.

12 The Temple faces the east and its back is toward the west.

13 The whole of the floor is paved with stones and slopes down to the
appointed places, that water may be conveyed to wash away the blood from
the sacrifices, for many thousand beasts are sacrificed there on the
feast days.

14 And there is an inexhaustible supply of water, because an abundant
natural spring gushes up from within the temple area.

15 There are moreover wonderful and indescribable cisterns underground,
as they pointed out to me, at a distance of five furlongs all round the
site of the temple, and each of them has countless pipes so that the
different streams converge together.

16 And all these were fastened with lead at the bottom and at the
sidewalls, and over them a great quantity of plaster had been spread,
and every part of the work had been most carefully carried out.

17 There are many openings for water at the base *of the altar* which
are invisible to all except to those who are engaged in the
ministration, so that all the blood of the sacrifices which is collected
in great quantities is washed away in the twinkling of an eye.

18 Such is my opinion with regard to the character of the reservoirs and
I will now show you how it was confirmed.

19 They led me more than four furlongs outside the city and bade me peer
down towards a certain spot and listen to the noise that was made by the
meeting of the waters, so that the great size of the reservoirs became
manifest to me, as has already been pointed out.

20 The ministration of the priests is in every way unsurpassed both for
its physical endurance and for its orderly and silent service.

21 For they all work spontaneously, though it entails much painful
exertion, and each one has a special task allotted to him.

22 The service is carried on without interruption--some provide the
wood, others the oil, others the fine wheat flour, others the spices;
others again bring the pieces of flesh for the burnt offering,
exhibiting a wonderful, degree of strength.

23 For they take up with both hands the limbs of a calf, each of them
weighing more than two talents, and throw them with each hand in a
wonderful way on to the high place *of the altar* and never miss placing
them on the proper spot.

24 In the same way the pieces of the sheep and also of the goats are
wonderful both for their weight and their fatness.

25 For those, whose business it is, always select *the beasts* which are
without blemish and specially fat, and thus the sacrifice which I have
described, is carried out.

26 There is a special place set apart for them to rest in, where those
who are relieved from duty sit.

27 When this takes place, those who have already rested and are ready
*to resume their duties* rise up *spontaneously* since there is no one
to give orders with regard to the arrangement of the sacrifices.

28 The most complete silence reigns so that one might imagine that there
was not a single person present, though there are actually seven hundred
men engaged in the work, besides the vast number of those who are

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

occupied in bringing up the sacrifices.

29 Everything is carried out with reverence and in a way worthy of the
great God.

30 We were greatly astonished, when we saw Eleazar engaged in the
ministration, at the mode of his dress, and the majesty *of his
appearance*, which was revealed in the robe which he wore and the
precious stones upon his person.

31 There were golden bells *upon the garment* which reached down to his
feet, giving forth a peculiar kind of melody, and on both sides of them
there were pomegranates with variegated flowers of a wonderful hue.

32 He was girded with a girdle of conspicuous beauty, woven in the most
beautiful colours.

33 On his breast he wore the oracle of God, as it is called, on which
twelve stones, of different kinds, were inset, fastened together with
gold, containing the names of the leaders of the tribes, according to
their original order, each one flashing forth in an indescribable way
its own particular colour.

34 On his head he wore a tiara, as it is called, and upon this in the
middle of his forehead an inimitable turban, the royal diadem full of
glory with the name of God inscribed in sacred letters on a plate of
gold . . . having been judged worthy to wear these *emblems* in the
ministrations.

35 Their appearance created such awe and confusion *of mind* as to make
one feel that one had come into the presence of a man who belonged to a
different world.

36 I am convinced that any one who takes part in the spectacle which I
have described will he filled with astonishment and indescribable wonder
and be profoundly affected in his mind at the thought of the sanctity
which is attached to each detail of the service.

37 But in order that we might gain complete information, we ascended to
the summit of the neighboring citadel and looked around us.

38 It is situated in a very lofty spot, and is fortified with many
towers, which have been built up to the very top, of immense stones,
with the object, as we were informed, of guarding the temple precincts,
so that if there were an attack, or an insurrection or an onslaught of
the enemy, no one would be able to force an entrance within the walls
that surround the temple.

39 On the towers of the citadel engines of war were placed and different
kinds of machines, and the position was much higher than the circle of
walls which I have mentioned.

40 The towers were guarded too by most trusty men who had given the
utmost proof of their loyalty to their country.

41 these men were never allowed to leave the citadel, except on feast
days and then only in detachments, nor did they permit any stranger to
enter it.

42 They were also very careful when any command came from the chief
officer to admit any visitors to inspect the place, as our own
experience taught us.

43 They were very reluctant to admit us--though we were but two unarmed
men--to view the offering of the sacrifices.

44 And they asserted that they were bound by an oath when the trust was
committed to them, for they had all sworn and were bound to carry out
the oath sacredly to the letter, that though they were five hundred in
number they would not permit more than five men to enter at one time.

45 The citadel was the special

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

protection of the temple and its founder had fortified it so strongly
that it might efficiently protect it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](fbe242.md)
