[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe245) 
[Next](fbe247) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. IX

Verse 8 epitomizes the value of knowledge. Verse 28, parental affection.
Note especially the question in Verse 26 and the answer. Also note the
question in Verse 47 and the answer. This is sage advice for business
men.

ON the following day the same arrangements were e for the banquet, and
the king, as soon as an opportunity occurred, began to put questions to
the men who sat next to those who had already responded, and he said to
the first 'Is wisdom capable of being taught?'

2 And he said, 'The soul is so constituted that it is able by the divine
power to receive all the good and reject the contrary.'

3 The king expressed approval and asked the next man, What is it that is
most beneficial to health?

4 And he said, 'Temperance, and it is not possible to acquire this
unless God create a disposition towards it.'

5 The king spoke kindly to the man and said to another, 'How can a man
worthily pay the debt of gratitude to his parents?'

6 And he said, 'By never causing them pain, and this is not possible
unless God dispose the mind to the pursuit of the noblest ends.'

7 The king expressed agreement and asked the next, how he could become
an eager listener?

8 And he said, 'By remembering

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

that all knowledge is useful, because it enables you by the help of God
in a time of emergency to select some of the things which you have
learned and apply them to the crisis which confronts you. And so the
efforts of men are fulfilled by the assistance of God.'

9 The king praised him and asked the next How he could avoid doing
anything contrary to law?

10 And he said, 'If you recognize that it is God who has put the
thoughts into the hearts of the lawgivers that the lives of men might be
preserved, you will follow them.'

11 The king acknowledged the man's answer and said to another, 'What is
the advantage of kinship?'

12 And he replied, 'If we consider that we ourselves are afflicted by
the misfortunes which fall upon our relatives and if their sufferings
become our own--then the strength of kinship is apparent at once, for it
is only when such feeling is shown that we shall win honour and esteem
in their eyes. For help, when it is linked with kindliness, is of itself
a bond which is altogether indissoluble. And in the day of their
prosperity we must not crave their possessions, but must pray God to
bestow all manner of good upon them.'

13 And having accorded to him the same praise as to the rest, the king
asked another, how he could attain freedom from fear?

14 And he said, 'When the mind is conscious that it has wrought no evil,
and when God directs it to all noble counsels.'

15 The king expressed his approval and asked another, how he could
always maintain a right judgement?

16 And he replied, 'If he constantly set before his eyes the misfortunes
which befall men and recognized that it is God who takes away prosperity
from some and brings others to great honour and glory.'

17 The king gave a kindly reception to the man and asked the next to
answer the question, how he could avoid a life of ease and pleasure?

18 And he replied, 'If he continually remembered that he was the ruler
of a great empire and the lord of vast multitudes, and that his mind
ought not to be occupied with other things, but, he ought always to be
considering how he could best promote their welfare. He must pray, too,
to God that no duty might be neglected.'

19 Having bestowed praise upon him, the king asked the tenth, how he
could recognize those who were dealing treacherously with him?

20 And he replied to the question, 'If he observed whether the bearing
of those about him was natural and whether they maintained the proper
rule of precedence at receptions and councils, and in their general
intercourse, never going beyond the bounds of propriety in
congratulations or in other matters of deportment. But God will incline
your mind, O King, to all that is noble.'

21 When the king had expressed his loud approval and praised them all
individually (amid the plaudits of all who were present), they turned to
the enjoyment of the feast.

22 And on the next day, when the opportunity offered, the king asked the
next man, What is the grossest form of neglect?

23 And he replied, 'If a man does not care for his children and devote
every effort to their education. For we always pray to God not so much
for ourselves as for our children that every blessing may be theirs. Our
desire that our children may

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

possess self-control is only realized by the power of God.'

24 The king said that he had spoken well and then asked another, how he
could be patriotic?

25 'By keeping before your mind,' he replied, 'the thought that it is
good to live and die in one's own country. Residence abroad <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) brings contempt upon the poor and shame
upon the rich as though they had been banished for a crime. If you
bestow benefits upon all, as you continually do, God will give you
favour with all and you will be accounted patriotic."

26 After listening to this man, the king asked the next in order, how he
could live amicably with his wife?

27 And he answered, 'By recognizing that womankind are by nature
headstrong and energetic in the pursuit of their own desires, and
subject to sudden changes of opinion through fallacious reasoning, and
their nature is essentially weak. It is necessary to deal wisely with
them and not to provoke strife. For the successful conduct of life. the
steersman must know the goal toward which he ought to direct his course.
It is only by calling upon the help of God that men can steer a true
course of life at all times.'

28 The king expressed his agreement and asked the next, how he could be
free from error?

29 And he replied, 'If you always act with deliberation and never give
credence to slanders, but prove for yourself the things that are said to
you and decide by your own judgement the requests which are made to you
and carry out everything in the light of your judgement, you will be
free from error, O King. But the knowledge and practice of these things
is the work of the Divine power.'

30 Delighted with these words, the king asked another, how he could be
free from wrath?

31 And he said in reply to the question, 'If he recognized that he had
power over all even to inflict death upon them, if he gave way to wrath,
and that it would be useless and pitiful if he, just because he was
lord, deprived many of life.

32 What need was there for wrath, when all men were in subjection and no
one was hostile to him? It is necessary to recognize that God rules the
whole world in the spirit of kindness and without wrath at all, and
you,' said he, 'O King, must of necessity copy His example.'

33 The king said that he had answered well and then inquired of the next
man, What is good counsel?

34 'To act well at all times and with due reflection,' he explained,
'comparing what is advantageous to our own policy with the injurious
effects that would result from the adoption of the opposite view, in
order that by weighing every point we may be well advised and our
purpose may be accomplished. And most important of all, by the power of
God every plan of yours will find fulfilment because you practise
piety.'

35 The king said that this man had answered well, and asked another,
What is philosophy?

36 And he explained, 'To deliberate well in reference to any question
that emerges and never to be carried away by impulses, but to ponder
over the injuries that result from the passions, and to act rightly as
the circumstances demand, practising moderation. But we must pray to God
to instil into our mind a regard for these things.'

37 The king signified his consent and asked another, how he

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

could meet with recognition when traveling abroad?

38 'By being fair to all men,' he replied, 'and by appearing to be
inferior rather than superior to those amongst whom he was traveling.
For it is a recognized principle that God by His very nature accepts the
humble. And the human race loves those who are willing to be in
subjection to them.'

39 Having expressed his approval at this reply, the king asked another,
how he could build in such a way that his structures would endure after
him?

40 And he replied to the question, 'If his creations were on a great and
noble scale, so that the beholders would spare them for their beauty,
and if he never dismissed any of those who wrought such works and never
compelled others to minister to his needs without wages.

41 For observing how God provides for the human race, granting them
health and mental capacity and. all other gifts, he himself should
follow His example by rendering to men a recompense for their arduous
toil. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) For it is the deeds that are
wrought in righteousness that abide continually!

42 The king said that this man, too, had answered well and asked the
tenth, What is the fruit of wisdom?

43 And he replied, 'That a man should be conscious in himself that he
has wrought no evil and that he should live his life in the truth. Since
it is from these, O mighty King, that the greatest joy and steadfastness
of soul and strong faith in God accrue to you if you rule your realm in
piety.'

4.4 And when they heard the answer they all shouted with loud acclaim,
and afterwards the king in the fullness of his joy began to drink their
healths.

45 And on the next day the banquet followed the same course as on
previous occasions, and when the opportunity presented itself the king
proceeded to put questions to the remaining guests, and he said to the
first, 'How can a man keep himself from pride?'

46 And he replied, 'If he maintains equality and remembers on all
occasions that he is a man ruling over men. And God brings the proud to
nought, and exalts the meek and humble!

47 The king spoke kindly to him and asked the next, Whom ought a man to
select as his counsellors?

48 And he replied, 'Those who have been tested in many affairs and
maintain unmingled goodwill towards him and partake of his own
disposition. And God manifests Himself to those who are worthy that
these ends may be attained.'

49 The king praised him and asked another, What is the most necessary
possession for a king?

50 'The friendship and love of his subjects,' he replied, 'for it is
through this that the bond of goodwill is rendered indissoluble. And it
is God who ensures that this may come to pass in accordance with *your*
wish.'

51 The king praised him and inquired of another, What is goal of speech?
And he replied, 'To convince your opponent by showing him his mistakes
in a well-ordered army of *arguments*.

52 For in this way you will win your hearer, not by opposing him, but by
bestowing praise upon him with a view to persuading him. And it is by
the power of God that persuasion is accomplished.'

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

53 The king said that he had given a good answer, and asked another, how
he could live amicably with the many different races who formed the
population of his kingdom?

54 'By acting the proper part towards each,' he replied, 'and taking
righteousness as your guide, as you are now doing with the help of the
insight which God bestows upon you.'

55 The king was delighted by this reply, and asked another, 'Under what
circumstances ought a man to suffer grief?'

56 'In the misfortunes that befall our friends,' he replied, 'when we
see that they are protracted and irremediable. Reason does not allow us
to grieve for those who are dead and set free from evil, but all men do
grieve *over them* because they think only of themselves and their own
advantage. It is by the power of God alone that we can escape all evil!

57 The king said that he had given a fitting answer, and asked another,
how is reputation lost?

58 And he replied, 'When pride and unbounded self-confidence hold sway,
dishonour and loss of reputation are engendered. For God is the Lord of
all reputation and bestows it where He will.'

59 The king gave his confirmation to the answer, and asked the next man,
To whom ought men to entrust themselves?

60 'To those,' he replied, 'who serve you from goodwill and not from
fear or self-interest, thinking only of their own gain. For the one is
the sign of love, the other the mark of ill will and time-serving.

61 For the man who is always watching for his own gain is a traitor at
heart. But you possess the affection of all your subjects by the help of
the good counsel which God bestows upon you.'

62 The king said that he had answered wisely, and asked another, What is
it that keeps a kingdom safe?

63 And he replied to the question, 'Care and forethought that no evil
may be wrought by those who are placed in a position of authority over
the people, and this you always do by the help of God who inspires you
with grave judgement.'

64 The king spoke words of encouragement to him, and asked another, What
is it that maintains gratitude and honour?

65 And he replied, 'Virtue, for it is the creator of good deeds, and by
it evil is destroyed, even as you exhibit nobility of character towards
all by the gift which God bestows upon you.'

66 The king graciously acknowledged the answer and asked the eleventh
(since there were two more than seventy), how he could in time of war
maintain tranquillity of soul?

67 And he replied, 'By remembering that he had done no evil to any of
his subjects, and that all would fight for him in return for the
benefits which they had received, knowing that even if they lose their
lives, you will care for those dependent on them. For you never fail to
make reparation to any--such is the kind-heartedness with which God has
inspired you.'

68 The king loudly applauded them all and spoke very kindly to them and
then drank a long draught to the health of each, giving himself up to
enjoyment, and lavishing the most generous and joyous friendship upon
his guests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[169:1](fbe246.htm#fr_10) There were foreign
residents in those days too.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[170:1](fbe246.htm#fr_11) The policy of a fair
wage for a fair day's work is here seen to be not so modern as we
sometimes think in what we are pleased to call this enlightened age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](fbe247)
