[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe261) 
[Next](fbe263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. IV.

"The Riddles of the Sphinx." What really happened to Ahikar. His return.

AND when the king of Egypt had made sure that Haiqâr was slain, he arose
straightway and wrote a letter to king Sennacherib, reminding him in it
'of the peace and the health and the might and the honour which we wish
specially for thee, my beloved brother, king Sennacherib.

2 I have been desiring to build a castle between the heaven and the
earth, and I want thee to send me a wise, clever man from thyself to
build it for me, and to answer me all my questions, and that I may have
the taxes and the custom duties of Assyria for three years.'

3 Then he sealed the letter and sent it to Sennacherib.

4 He took it and read it and gave it to his viziers and to the nobles of
his kingdom, and they were perplexed and ashamed, and he was wroth with
a great wrath, and was puzzled about how he should act.

5 Then he assembled the old men and the learned men and the wise men and
the philosophers, and the diviners and the astrologers, and every one
who was in his country, and read them the letter and said to them, 'Who
amongst you will go to Pharaoh king of Egypt and answer him his
questions?'

6 And they said to him, 'O our lord the king! know thou that there is
none in thy kingdom who is acquainted with these questions except
Haiqâr, thy vizier and secretary.

7 But as for us, we have no skill in this, unless it be Nadan, his
sister's son, for he taught him all his wisdom and learning and
knowledge. Call him to thee, perchance he may untie this hard knot.'

8 Then the king called Nadan and said to him, 'Look at this letter and
understand what is in it.' And when Nadan read it, he said, 'O my lord!
who is able to build a castle between the heaven and the earth?'

9 And when the king heard the speech of Nadan he sorrowed with a great
and sore sorrow, and stepped down from his throne and sat in the ashes,
and began to weep and wail over Haiqâr.

10 Saying, 'O my grief! O Haiqâr, who didst know the secrets and the
riddles! woe is me for thee, O Haiqâr! O teacher of my country and ruler
of my kingdom, where shall I find thy like? O Haiqâr, O teacher of my
country, where shall I turn for thee? woe is me for thee! how did I
destroy thee! and I listened to the talk of a stupid, ignorant boy
without knowledge, without religion, without manliness.

11 Ah! and again Ah for myself! who can give thee to me

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

just for once, or bring me word that Haiqâr is alive? and I would give
him the half of my kingdom.

12 Whence is this to me? Ah, Haiqâr! that I might see thee just for
once, that I might take my fill of gazing at thee, and delighting in
thee.

13 Ah! O my grief for thee to all time! O Haiqâr, how have I killed
thee! and I tarried not in thy case till I had seen the end of the
matter.'

14 And the king went on weeping night and day. Now when the swordsman
saw the wrath of the king and his sorrow for Haiqâr, his heart was
softened towards him,, and he approached into his presence and said to
him:

15 'O my lord! command thy servants to cut off my head.' Then said the
king to him: 'Woe to thee, Abu Samîk, what is thy fault?'

16 And the swordsman said unto him, 'O my master! every slave who acts
contrary to the word of his master is killed, and I have acted contrary
to thy command.'

17 Then the king said unto him. 'Woe unto thee, O Abu Samîk, in what
hast thou acted contrary to my command?'

18 And the swordsman said unto him, 'O my lord! thou didst command me to
kill Haiqâr, and I knew that thou wouldst repent thee concerning him,
and that he had been wronged, and I hid him in a certain place, and I
killed one of his slaves, and he is now safe in the cistern, and if thou
command me I will bring him to thee.'

19 And the king said unto him. 'Woe to thee, O Abu Samîk! thou hast
mocked me and I am thy lord.'

20 And the swordsman said unto him, 'Nay, but by the life of thy head, O
my lord! Haiqâr is safe and alive.'

21 And when the king heard that saying, he felt sure of the matter, and
his head swam, and he fainted from joy, and he commanded them to bring
Haiqâr.

22 And he said to the swordsman, 'O trusty servant! if thy speech be
true, I would fain enrich thee, and exalt thy dignity above that of all
thy friends.'

23 And the swordsman went along rejoicing till he came to Haiqâr's
house. And he opened the door of the hiding-place, and went down and
found Haiqâr sitting, praising God, and thanking Him.

24 And he shouted to him, saying, 'O Haiqâr, I bring the greatest of
joy, and happiness, and delight!'

25 And Haiqâr said to him, 'What is the news, O Abu Samîk?' And he told
him all about Pharaoh from the beginning to the end. Then he took him
and went to the king.

26 And when the king looked at him, he saw him in a state of want, and
that his hair had grown long like the wild beasts' and his nails like
the claws of an eagle, and that his body was dirty with dust, and the
colour of his face had changed and faded and was now like ashes.

27 And when the king saw him he sorrowed over him and rose at once and
embraced him and kissed him, and wept over him and said: 'Praise be to
God! who hath brought thee back to me.'

28 Then he consoled him and comforted him. And he stripped off his robe,
and put it on the swordsman, and was very gracious to him, and gave him
great wealth, and made Haiqâr rest.

29 Then said Haiqâr to the king, 'Let my lord the king live for ever!
These be the deeds of the children of the world. I have reared me a
palm-tree that I might lean on it, and it bent sideways, and threw me
down.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

30 But, O my Lord! since I have appeared fore thee, let not care oppress
thee! And the king said to him: 'Blessed be God, who showed thee mercy,
and knew that thou wast wronged, and saved thee and delivered thee from
being slain.

31 But go to the warm bath, and shave thy head, and cut thy nails, and
change thy clothes, and amuse thyself for the space of forty days, that
thou mayst do good to thyself and improve thy condition and the colour
of thy face may come back to thee.'

32 Then the king stripped off his costly robe, and put it on Haiqâr, and
Haiqâr thanked God and did obeisance to the king, and departed to his
dwelling glad and happy, praising the Most High God.

33 And the people of his household rejoiced with him, and his friends
and every one who heard that he was alive rejoiced also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](fbe263)
