[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe262.md) 
[Next](fbe264.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. V.

The letter of the "riddles" is shown to Ahikar. The boys on the eagles.
The first "airplane" ride. Off to Egypt. Ahikar, being a man of wisdom
also has a sense of humor. (Verse 27).

AND he did as the king commanded him, and took rest for forty days.

2 Then he dressed himself his gayest dress, and went riding to the king,
with his slaves behind him and before him, rejoicing and delighted.

3 But when Nadan his sister's son perceived what was happening, fear
took hold of him and terror, and he was perplexed, not knowing what to
do.

4 And when Haiqâr saw it he entered into the king's presence and greeted
him, and he returned the greeting, and made him sit down at his side,
saying to him,

'O my darling Haiqâr! look at these letters which the, king of Egypt
sent to us, after he had heard that thou wast slain.

5 They have provoked us and overcome us, and many of the people of our
country have fled to Egypt for fear of the taxes that the king of Egypt
has sent to demand from us.

6 Then Haiqâr took the letter and read it and understood its contents.

7 Then he said to the king. 'Be not wroth, O my lord! I will go to
Egypt, and I will return the answers to Pharaoh, and I will display this
letter to him, and I will reply to him about the taxes, and I will send
back all those who have run away; and I will put thy enemies to shame
with the help of the Most High God, and for the Happiness of thy
kingdom.'

8 And when the king heard this speech from Haiqâr he rejoiced with a
great joy, and his heart was expanded and he showed him favour.

9 And Haiqâr said to the king: 'Grant me a delay of forty days that I
may consider this question and manage it.' And the king permitted this.

10 And Haiqâr went to his dwelling, and he commanded the huntsmen to
capture two young eaglets for him, and they captured them and brought
them to him: and he commanded the weavers of ropes to weave two cables
of cotton for him, each of them two thousand cubits long, and he had the
carpenters brought and ordered them to make two great boxes, and they
did this.

11 Then he took two little lads, and spent every day sacrificing lambs
and feeding the eagles and the boys, and making the boys ride on the
backs of the eagles, and he bound them with a firm knot, and tied the
cable to the feet of the eagles,

 

<span id="img_21000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![JOSEPH'S
PREDICAMENT](tn/21000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21000.jpg.md)  
JOSEPH'S PREDICAMENT  
</span>

(*See page [259](fbe291.htm#page_259) et seq*..md)

 

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

and let them soar upwards little by little every day, to a distance of
ten cubits, till they grew accustomed and were educated to it; and they
rose all the length of the rope till they reached the sky; the boys
being on their backs. Then he drew them to himself.

12 And when Haiqâr saw that his desire was fulfilled he charged the boys
that when they were borne aloft to the sky they were to shout, saying:

13 'Bring us clay and stone, that we may build a castle for king
Pharaoh, for we are idle.'

14 And Haiqâr was never done training them and exercising them till they
had reached the utmost possible point (of skill).

15 Then leaving them he went to the king and said to him, 'O my lord!
the work is finished according to thy desire. Arise with me that I may
show thee the wonder.'

16 So the king sprang up and sat with Haiqâr and went to a wide place
and sent to bring the eagles and the boys, and Haiqâr tied them and let
them off into the air all the length of the ropes, and they began to
shout as he had taught them. Then he drew them to himself and put them
in their places.

17 And the king and those who were with him wondered with a great
wonder: and the king kissed Haiqâr between his eyes and said to him, 'Go
in peace, O my beloved! O pride of my kingdom! to Egypt and answer the
questions of Pharaoh and overcome him by the strength of the Most High
God.'

18 Then he bade him farewell, and took his troops and his army and the
young men and the eagles, and went towards the dwellings of Egypt; and
when he had arrived, he turned towards the country of the king.

19 And when the people of Egypt knew that Sennacherib had sent a man of
his Privy Council to talk with Pharaoh and to answer his questions, they
carried the news to king Pharaoh, and he sent a party of his Privy
Councillors to bring him before him.

20 And he came and entered into the presence of Pharaoh, and did
obeisance to him as it is fitting to do to kings.

21 And he said to him: 'O my lord the king! Sennacherib the king hails
thee with abundance of peace and might, and honour.

22 And he has sent me, who am one of his slaves, that I may answer thee
thy questions, and may fulfil all thy desire: for thou hast sent to seek
from my lord the king a man who will build thee a castle between the
heaven and the earth.

23 And I by the help of the Most High God and thy noble favour and the
power of my lord the king will build it for thee as thou desirest.

24 But, O my lord the king! what thou hast said in it about the taxes of
Egypt for three years--now the stability of a kingdom is strict justice,
and if thou winnest and my hand hath no skill in replying to thee, then
my lord the king will send thee the taxes which thou hast mentioned.

25 And if I shall have answered thee in thy questions, it shall remain
for thee to send whatever thou hast mentioned to my lord the king.'

26 And when Pharaoh heard that speech, he wondered and was perplexed by
the freedom of his tongue and the pleasantness of his speech.

27 And king Pharaoh said to him, 'O man! what is thy name?' And he said,
'Thy servant is Abiqâm, and I a little ant of the ants of king
Sennacherib.'

28 And Pharaoh said to him, 'Had thy lord no one of higher

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

dignity than thee, that he has sent me a little ant to reply to me, and
to converse with me?'

29 And Haiqâr said to him, 'O my lord the king! I would to God Most High
that I may fulfil what is on thy mind, for God is with the weak that He
may confound the strong.'

30 Then Pharaoh commanded that they should prepare a dwelling for Abiqâm
and supply him with provender, meat, and drink, and all that he needed.

31 And when it was finished, three days afterwards Pharaoh clothed
himself in purple and red and sat on his throne, and all his viziers and
the magnates of his kingdom were standing with their hands crossed,
their feet close together, and their heads bowed.

32 And Pharaoh sent to fetch Abiqâm, and when he was presented to him,
he did obeisance before him, and kissed the ground in front of him.

33 And king Pharaoh said to him, 'O Abiqâm, whom am I like? and the
nobles of my kingdom, to whom are they like?'

34 And Haiqâr said to him, 'O my lord the kin I thou art like the idol
Bel, and the nobles of thy kingdom are like his servants.'

35 He said to him, 'Go, and come back hither to-morrow.' So Haiqâr went
as king Pharaoh had commanded him.

36 And on the morrow Haiqâr went into the presence of Pharaoh, and did
obeisance, and stood before the king. And Pharaoh was dressed in a red
colour, and the nobles were dressed in white.

37 And Pharaoh said to him 'O Abiqâm, whom am I like? and the nobles of
my kingdom, to whom are they like?'

38 And Abiqâm said to him, 'O my lord! thou art like the sun, and thy
servants are like its beams.' And Pharaoh said to him, 'Go to thy
dwelling, and come hither to-morrow.'

39 Then Pharaoh commanded his Court to wear pure white, and Pharaoh was
dressed like them and sat upon his throne, and he commanded them to
fetch Haiqâr. And he entered and sat down before him.

40 And Pharaoh said to him, 'O Abiqâm, whom am I like? and my nobles, to
whom are they like?'

41 And Abiqâm said to him, 'O my lord! thou art like the moon, and thy
nobles are like the planets and the stars.' And Pharaoh said to him,
'Go, and to-morrow be thou here.'

42 Then Pharaoh commanded his servants to wear robes of various colours,
and Pharaoh wore a red velvet dress, and sat on his throne, and
commanded them to fetch Abiqâm. And he entered and did obeisance before
him.

43 And he said, 'O Abiqâm, whom am I like? and my armies, to whom are
they like?' And he said, 'O my lord! thou art like the month of April,
and thy armies are like its flowers.'

44 And when the king heard it he rejoiced with a great joy and said, 'O
Abiqâm! the first time thou didst compare me to the idol Bel, and my
nobles to his servants.

45 And the second time thou didst compare me to the sun, and my nobles
to the sunbeams.

46 And the third time thou didst compare me to the moon, and my nobles
to the planets and the stars.

47 And the fourth time thou didst compare me to the month of April, and
my nobles to its flowers. But now, O Abiqâm! tell me, thy lord, king
Sennacherib, whom is he like? and his nobles, to whom are they like?'

48 And Haiqâr shouted with a loud voice and said: 'Be it far from me to
make mention of

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

my lord the king and thou seated on thy throne. But get up on thy feet
that I may tell thee whom my lord the king is like and to whom his
nobles are like.'

49 And Pharaoh was perplexed by the freedom of his tongue and his
boldness in answering. Then Pharaoh arose from his throne, and stood
before Haiqâr, and said to him, 'Tell me now, that I may perceive whom
thy lord the king is like, and his nobles, to whom they are like.'

50 And Haiqâr said to him: 'My lord is the God of heaven, and his nobles
are the lightnings and the thunder, and when he wills the winds blow and
the rain falls.

51 And he commands the thunder, and it lightens and rains, and he holds
the sun, and it gives not its light, and the moon and the stars, and
they circle not.

52 And he commands the tempest, and it blows and the rain falls and it
tramples on April and destroys its flowers and its houses.'

53 And when Pharaoh heard this speech, he was greatly perplexed and was
wroth with a great wrath, and said to him: 'O man! tell me the truth,
and let me know who thou really art.'

54 And he told him the truth. 'I am Haiqâr the scribe, greatest of the
Privy Councillors of king Sennacherib, and I am his vizier and the
Governor of his kingdom, and his Chancellor.'

55 And he said to him, 'Thou hast told the truth in this saying. But we
have heard of Haiqâr, that king Sennacherib has slain him, yet thou dost
seem to be alive and well.'

56 And Haiqâr said to him, 'Yes, so it was, but praise be to God, who
knoweth what is hidden, for my lord the king commanded me to be killed,
and he believed the word of profligate men, but the Lord delivered me,
and blessed is he who trusteth in Him.'

57 And Pharaoh said to Haiqâr, 'Go, and to-morrow be thou here, and tell
me a word that I have never heard from my nobles nor from the people of
my kingdom and my country.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](fbe264.md)
