[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Apocrypha](../../chr/apo/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](fbe258.md) 
[Next](fbe260.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSJWK/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Forgotten Books of Eden*, by Rutherford H. Platt, Jr., \[1926\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. I.

Ahikar, Grand Vizier of Assyria, has 60 wives but is fated to have no
son. Therefore he adopts his nephew. He crams him full of wisdom and
knowledge more than of bread and water.

THE story of Haiqâr the Wise, Vizier of Sennacherib the King, and of
Nadan, sister's son to Haiqâr the Sage.

2 There was a Vizier in the days of King Sennacherib, son

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

of Sarhadum, King of Assyria and Nineveh, a wise man named Haiqâr, and
he was Vizier of the king Sennacherib.

3 He had a fine, fortune and much goods, and he was skilful, wise, a
philosopher, in knowledge, in opinion and in government, and he had
married sixty women, and had built a castle for each of them.

4 But with it all he had no child by any. of these women, who might be
his heir.

5 And he was very sad on account of this, and one day he assembled the
astrologers and the learned men and the wizards and explained to them
his condition and the matter of his barrenness.

6 And they said to him, 'Go, sacrifice to the gods and beseech them that
perchance they may provide thee with a boy.'

7 And he did as they told him and offered sacrifices to the idols, and
besought them and implored them with request, and entreaty.

8 And they answered him not one word. And he went away sorrowful and
dejected, departing with a pain at his heart.

9 And he returned, and implored the Most High God, and believed,
beseeching Him with a burning in his heart, saying, 'O Most High God, O
Creator of the Heavens and of the earth, O Creator of all created
things!

10 I beseech Thee to give me a boy, that I may be consoled by him that
he may be present at my heath, that he may close my eyes, and that he
may bury me.'

11 Then there came to him a voice saying, 'Inasmuch as thou hast relied
first of all on graven images, and hast offered sacrifices to them, for
this reason thou shalt remain childless thy life long.

12 But take Nadan thy sister's son, and make him thy child and teach him
thy learning and thy good breeding, and at thy death he shall bury
thee.'

13 Thereupon he took Nadan his sister's son, who was a little suckling.
And he handed him over to eight wet-nurses, that they might suckle him
and bring him up.

14 And they brought him up with good food and gentle training and silken
clothing, and purple and crimson. And he was seated upon couches of
silk.

15 And when Nadan grew big and walked, shooting up like a tall cedar, he
taught him good manners and writing and science and philosophy.

16 And after many days King Sennacherib looked at Haiqâr and saw that he
had grown very old, and moreover he said to him.

17 'O my honoured friend, the skilful, the trusty, the wise, the
governor, my secretary, my vizier, my Chancellor and director; verily
thou art grown very old and weighted with years; and thy departure from
this world must be near.

18 Tell me who shall have a place in my service after thee.' And Haiqâr
said to him, 'O my lord, may thy head live for ever! There is Nadan my
sister's son, I have made him my child.

19 And I have brought him up and taught him my wisdom and my knowledge.'

20 And the king said to him, 'O Haiqâr! bring him to my presence, that I
may see him, and if I find him suitable, put him in thy place; and thou
shalt go thy way, to take a rest and to live the remainder of thy life
in sweet repose.'

21 Then Haiqâr went and presented Nadan his sister's son. And he did
homage and wished him power and honour.

22 And he looked at him and admired him and rejoiced in him

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

and said to Haiqâr: 'Is this thy son, O Haiqâr? I pray that God may
preserve him. And as thou hast served me and my father Sarhadum so may
this boy of thine serve me and fulfil my undertakings, my needs, and my
business, so that I may honour him and make him powerful for thy sake.'

23 And Haiqâr did obeisance to the king and said to him, 'May thy head
live, O my lord the king, for ever! I seek from thee that thou mayst be
patient with my boy Nadan and forgive his mistakes that he may serve
thee as it is fitting.'

24 Then the king swore to him that he would make him the greatest of his
favourites, and the most powerful of his friends, and that he should be
with him in all honour and respect. And he kissed his hands and bade him
farewell.

25 And he took Nadan. his sister's son with him and seated him in a
parlour and set about teaching him night and day till he had crammed him
with wisdom and knowledge more than with bread and water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](fbe260.md)
