[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans035)  [Next](ans037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.III"></span>

### <span id="v.III-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER III.

<span id="v.III-p1"></span>

<span id="v.III-p2"></span>There is a certain Nature through which
whatever is exists, and which exists through itself, and is the highest
of all existing beings.

<span id="v.III-p3"></span>

<span id="v.III-p4"></span>THEREFORE, not only are all good things such
through something that is one and the same, and all great things such
through something that is one and the same; but whatever is, apparently
exists through something that is one and the same. For, everything that
is, exists either through something, or through nothing. But nothing
exists through nothing. For it is altogether inconceivable that anything
should not exist by virtue of something.

<span id="v.III-p5"></span>Whatever is, then, does not exist except
through something. Since this is true, either there is one being, or
there are more than one, through which all things that are exist. But if
there are more than one, either these are themselves to be referred to
some one being, through which they exist, or they exist separately, each
through itself, or they exist mutually through one another.

<span id="v.III-p6"></span>But, if these beings exist through one being,
then all things do not exist through more than one, but rather through
that one being through which these exist.

<span id="v.III-p7"></span>If, however, these exist separately, each
through itself, there is, at any rate, some power or property of
existing through self (*existendi per se*), by which <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="v.III-Page_41"></span>they are able
to exist each through itself. But, there can be no doubt that, in that
case, they exist through this very power, which is one, and through
which they are able to exist, each through itself. More truly, then, do
all things exist through this very being, which is one, than through
these, which are more than one, which, without this one, cannot exist.

<span id="v.III-p8"></span>But that these beings exist mutually through
one another, no reason can admit; since it is an irrational conception
that anything should exist through a being on which it confers
existence. For not even beings of a relative nature exist thus mutually,
the one through the other. For, though the terms *master* and *servant*
are used with mutual reference, and the men thus designated are
mentioned as having mutual relations, yet they do not at all exist
mutually, the one through the other, since these relations exist through
the subjects to which they are referred.

<span id="v.III-p9"></span>Therefore, since truth altogether excludes
the supposition that there are more beings than one, through which all
things exist, that being, through which all exist, must be one. Since,
then, all things that are exist through this one being, doubtless this
one being exists through itself. Whatever things there are else then,
exist through something other than themselves, and this alone through
itself. But whatever exists through another is less than that, through
which all things are, and which alone exists through itself. Therefore,
that which exists through itself exists in the greatest degree of all
things.

<span id="v.III-p10"></span>There is, then, some one being which alone
exists in the greatest and the highest degree of all. But that which is
greatest of all, and through which exists whatever is good or great,
and, in short, whatever <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="v.III-Page_42"></span>has any existence ‑‑ that must be supremely
good, and supremely great, and the highest of all existing beings.

<span id="v.III-p11"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](ans037)
