[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans051)  [Next](ans053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XIX"></span>

### <span id="v.XIX-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XIX.

<span id="v.XIX-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XIX-p2"></span>In what sense nothing existed before or will
exist after this Being.

<span id="v.XIX-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XIX-p4"></span>BUT here we are again confronted by the term
*nothing*, and whatever our reasoning thus far, with the concordant
attestation of truth and necessity, has concluded nothing to be. For, if
the propositions duly set forth above have been confirmed by the
fortification of logically necessary truth, not anything existed before
the supreme Being, nor will anything exist after it. Hence, nothing
existed before, and nothing will exist after, it. For, either something
or nothing must have preceded it; and either something or nothing must
be destined to follow it.

<span id="v.XIX-p5"></span>But, he who says that nothing existed before
it appears to make this statement, “that there was before it a time when
nothing existed, and that there will be after it a time when nothing
will exist.” Therefore, when nothing existed, that Being did not exist,
and when nothing shall exist, that Being will not exist. How is it,
then, that it does not take inception from nothing or how is it that it
will not come to nothing? ‑‑ if that Being did not yet exist, when
nothing already existed; and the same Being shall no longer exist, when
nothing shall still exist. Of what avail is so weighty a mass of
arguments, if this *nothing* so easily demolishes their structure? For,
if it is established that the supreme Being succeeds *nothing* \[Nothing
is here treated as an entity, supposed actually to precede the supreme
Being in existence. The fallacy involved is shown below. ‑‑*Tr.*\],
which <span id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span
id="v.XIX-Page_70"></span>precedes it, and yields its place to
*nothing*, which follows it, whatever has been posited as true above is
necessarily unsettled by empty nothing.

<span id="v.XIX-p6"></span>But, rather ought this *nothing* to be
resisted, lest so many structures of cogent reasoning be stormed by
*nothing*; and the supreme good, which has been sought and found by the
light of truth, be lost for *nothing*. Let it rather be declared, then,
that nothing did not exist before the supreme Being, and that nothing
will not exist after it, rather than that, when a place is given before
or after it to nothing, that Being which through itself brought into
existence what was nothing, should be reduced through nothing to
nothing.

<span id="v.XIX-p7"></span>For this one assertion, namely, that nothing
existed before the supreme Being, carries two meanings. For, one sense
of this statement is that, before the supreme Being, there was a time
when nothing was. But another understanding of the same statement is
that, before the supreme Being, not anything existed. Just as, supposing
I should say, “Nothing has taught me to fly,” I could explain this
assertion either in this way, that nothing, as an entity in itself,
which signifies *not anything*, has taught me actually to fly ‑‑ which
would be false; or in this way, that not anything has taught me to fly,
which would be true.

<span id="v.XIX-p8"></span>The former interpretation, therefore, which
is followed by the inconsistency discussed above, is rejected by all
reasoning as false. But there remains the other interpretation, which
unites in perfect consistency with the foregoing arguments, and which,
from the force of their whole correlation, must be true.

<span id="v.XIX-p9"></span>Hence, the statement that nothing existed
before that Being must be received in the latter sense. Nor <span
id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span id="v.XIX-Page_71"></span>should it be
so explained, that it shall be understood that there was any time when
that Being did not exist, and nothing did exist; but, so that it shall
be understood that, before that Being, there was not anything. The same
sort of double signification is found in the statement that nothing will
exist after that Being.

<span id="v.XIX-p10"></span>If, then, this interpretation of the term
*nothing*, that has been given, is carefully analysed, most truly
neither something nor nothing preceded or will follow the supreme Being,
and the conclusion is reached, that nothing existed before or will exist
after it. Yet, the solidity of the truths already established is in no
wise impaired by the emptiness of *nothing*.

<span id="v.XIX-p11"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.](ans053)
