[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans014)  [Next](ans016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.IX"></span>

<span id="iv.IX-p1"></span>

### <span id="iv.IX-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER IX.

<span id="iv.IX-p2"></span>

<span id="iv.IX-p3"></span>How the all‑just and supremely just God
spares the wicked, and justly pities the wicked. He is better who is
good to the righteous and the wicked than he who is good to the
righteous alone. Although God is supremely just, the source of his
compassion is hidden. God is supremely compassionate, because he is
supremely just. He saveth the just, because justice goes with them; he
frees sinners by the authority of justice. God spares the wicked out of
justice; for it is just that God, than whom none is better or more
powerful, should be good even to the wicked, and should make the wicked
good. If God ought not to pity, he pities unjustly. But this it is
impious to suppose. Therefore, God justly pities.

<span id="iv.IX-p4"></span>

<span id="iv.IX-p5"></span>BUT how dost thou spare the wicked, if thou
art all just and supremely just? For how, being all just and supremely
just, dost thou aught that is not just? Or, what justice is that to give
him who merits eternal death everlasting life? How, then, gracious Lord,
good to the righteous and the wicked, canst thou save the wicked, if
this is not just, and thou dost not aught that is not just? Or, since
thy goodness is incomprehensible, is this hidden in the unapproachable
light wherein thou dwellest? Truly, in the deepest and most secret parts
of thy goodness is hidden the fountain whence the stream of thy
compassion flows.

<span id="iv.IX-p6"></span>For thou art all just and supremely just, yet
thou art kind even to the wicked, even because thou art all supremely
good. For thou wouldst be less good if thou wert not kind to any wicked
being. For, he who is good, both to the righteous and the wicked, is
better than he who is good to the wicked alone; <span id="page_14">p.
14</span> <span id="iv.IX-Page_14"></span>and he who is good to the
wicked, both by punishing and sparing them, is better than he who is
good by punishing them alone. Therefore, thou art compassionate, because
thou art all supremely good. And, although it appears why thou dost
reward the good with goods and the evil with evils; yet this, at least,
is most wonderful, why thou, the all and supremely just, who lackest
nothing, bestowest goods on the wicked and on those who are guilty
toward thee.

<span id="iv.IX-p7"></span>The depth of thy goodness, O God! The source
of thy compassion appears, and yet is not clearly seen! We see whence
the river flows, but the spring whence it arises is not seen. For, it is
from the abundance of thy goodness that thou art good to those who sin
against thee; and in the depth of thy goodness is hidden the reason for
this kindness.

<span id="iv.IX-p8"></span>For, although thou dost reward the good with
goods and the evil with evils, out of goodness, yet this the concept of
justice seems to demand. But, when thou dost bestow goods on the evil,
and it is known that the supremely Good hath willed to do this, we
wonder why the supremely just has been able to will this.

<span id="iv.IX-p9"></span>O compassion, from what abundant sweetness
and what sweet abundance dost thou well forth to us! O boundless
goodness of God how passionately should sinners love thee! For thou
savest the just, because justice goeth with them; but sinners thou dost
free by the authority of justice. Those by the help of their deserts;
these, although their deserts oppose. Those by acknowledging the goods
thou hast granted; these by pardoning the evils thou hatest. O boundless
goodness, which dost so exceed all understanding, let that compassion
come upon me, which proceeds <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="iv.IX-Page_15"></span>from thy so great abundance! Let it flow upon
me, for it wells forth from thee. Spare, in mercy; avenge not, in
justice.

<span id="iv.IX-p10"></span>For, though it is hard to understand how thy
compassion is not inconsistent with thy justice; yet we must believe
that it does not oppose justice at all, because it flows from goodness,
which is no goodness without justice; nay, that it is in true harmony
with justice. For, if thou art compassionate only because thou art
supremely good, and supremely good only because thou art supremely just,
truly thou art compassionate even because thou art supremely just. Help
me, just and compassionate God, whose light seek; help me to understand
what I say.

<span id="iv.IX-p11"></span>Truly, then, thou art compassionate even
because thou art just. Is, then, thy compassion born of thy justice? And
dost thou spare the wicked, therefore, out of justice? If this is true,
my Lord, if this is true, teach me how it is. Is it because it is just,
that thou shouldst be so good that thou canst not be conceived better;
and that thou shouldst work so powerfully that thou canst not be
conceived more powerful? For what can be more just than this? Assuredly
it could not be that thou shouldst be good only by requiting
(*retribuendo*) and not by sparing, and that thou shouldst make good
only those who are not good, and not the wicked also. In this way,
therefore, it is just that thou shouldst spare the wicked, and make good
souls of evil.

<span id="iv.IX-p12"></span>Finally, what is not done justly ought not
to be done; and what ought not to be done is done unjustly. If, then,
thou dost not justly pity the wicked, thou oughtest not to pity them.
And, if thou oughtest not to pity them, thou pityest them unjustly. And
if <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="iv.IX-Page_16"></span>it is
impious to suppose this, it is right to believe that thou justly pityest
the wicked.

<span id="iv.IX-p13"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](ans016.md)
