[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans075)  [Next](ans077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XLIII"></span>

<span id="v.XLIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.XLIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XLIII.

<span id="v.XLIII-p2"></span>

<span id="v.XLIII-p3"></span>Consideration of the common attributes of
both and the individual properties of each.

<span id="v.XLIII-p4"></span>

<span id="v.XLIII-p5"></span>NOW that so many and so important
properties of each have been discovered, whereby a strange plurality, as
ineffable as it is inevitable, is proved to exist in the supreme unity,
I think it most interesting to reflect, again and again, upon so
unfathomable a mystery.

<span id="v.XLIII-p6"></span>For observe: although it is so impossible
that he who begets, and he who is begotten, are the same, and that
parent and offspring are the same ‑‑so impossible that necessarily one
must be the progenitor and the other the begotten, and one the Father,
the other the Son; yet, here it is so necessary that he who begets and
he who is begotten shall be the same, and also that parent and offspring
shall be the same, that the progenitor cannot be any other than what the
begotten is, nor the Father any other than the Son.

<span id="v.XLIII-p7"></span>And although the one is one, and the other
another, so that it is altogether evident that they are two; yet that
which the one and the other are is in such a way one and the same, that
it is a most obscure mystery why they are two. For, in such a way is one
the Father and the other the Son, that when I speak of both I perceive
that I have spoken of two; <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="v.XLIII-Page_105"></span>and yet so identical is that which both
Father and Son are, that I do not understand why they are two of whom I
have spoken.

<span id="v.XLIII-p8"></span>For, although the Father separately is the
perfectly supreme Spirit, and the Son separately is the perfectly
supreme Spirit, yet, so are the Spirit‑Father and the Spirit‑Son one and
the same being, that the Father and the Son are not two spirits, but one
Spirit. For, just as to separate properties of separate beings,
plurality is not attributed, since they are not properties of two
things, so, what is common to both preserves an indivisible unity,
although it belongs, as a whole, to them taken separately.

<span id="v.XLIII-p9"></span>For, as there are not two fathers or two
sons, but one Father and one Son, since separate properties belong to
separate beings, so there are not two spirits, but one Spirit; although
it belongs both to the Father, taken separately, and to the Son, taken
separately, to be the perfect Spirit. For so opposite are their
relations, that the one never assumes the property of the other; so
harmonious are they in nature, that the one ever contains the essence of
the other. For they are so diverse by virtue of the fact that the one is
the Father and the other the Son, that the Father is never called the
Son, nor the Son the Father; and they are so identical, by virtue of
their substance, that the essence of the Son is ever in the Father, and
the essence of the Father in the Son.

<span id="v.XLIII-p10"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV](ans077)
