[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans065)  [Next](ans067.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXXIII"></span>

<span id="v.XXXIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.XXXIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XXXIII.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p2"></span>

<span id="v.XXXIII-p3"></span>He utters himself and what he creates by a
single consubstantial Word.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p4"></span>

<span id="v.XXXIII-p5"></span>BUT here, in my inquiry concerning the
Word, by which the Creator expresses all that he creates, is suggested
the word by which he, who creates all, expresses himself. Does he
express himself, then, by one word, and what he creates by another; or
does <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span
id="v.XXXIII-Page_94"></span>he rather express whatever he creates by
the same word whereby he expresses himself?

<span id="v.XXXIII-p6"></span>For this Word also, by which he expresses
himself, must be identical with himself, as is evidently true of the
Word by which he expresses his creatures. For since, even if nothing but
that supreme Spirit ever existed, urgent reason would still require the
existence of that word by which he expresses himself, what is more true
than that his Word is nothing else than what he himself is? Therefore,
if he expresses himself and what he creates, by a Word consubstantial
with himself, it is manifest that of the Word by which he expresses
himself, and of the Word by which he expresses the created world, the
substance is one.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p7"></span>How, then, if the substance is one, are
there two words? But, perhaps, identity of substance does not compel us
to admit a single Word. For the Creator himself, who speaks in these
words, has the same substance with them, and yet is not the Word. But,
undoubtedly the word by which the supreme Wisdom expresses itself may
most fitly be called its Word on the former ground, namely, that it
contains the perfect likeness of that Wisdom.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p8"></span>For, on no ground can it be denied that
when a rational mind conceives of itself in meditation the image of
itself arises in its thought, or rather the thought of the mind is
itself its image, after its likeness, as if formed from its impression.
For, whatever object the mind, either through representation of the body
or through reason, desires to conceive of truly, it at least attempts to
express its likeness, so far as it is able, in the mental concept
itself. And the more truly it succeeds in this, the more truly does it
think of the object itself; and, indeed, this fact is observed more
<span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="v.XXXIII-Page_95"></span>clearly when it thinks of something else
which it is not, and especially when it thinks of a material body. For,
when I think of a man I know, in his absence, the vision of my thought
forms such an image as I have acquired in memory through my ocular
vision and this image is the word corresponding to the man I express by
thinking of him.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p9"></span>The rational mind, then, when it conceives
of itself in thought, has with itself its image born of itself that is,
its thought in its likeness, as if formed from its impression, although
it cannot, except in thought alone, separate itself from its image,
which image is its word.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p10"></span>Who, then, can deny that the supreme
Wisdom, when it conceives of itself by expressing itself, begets a
likeness of itself consubstantial with it, namely, its Word? And this
Word, although of a subject so uniquely important nothing can be said
with sufficient propriety, may still not inappropriately be called the
image of that Wisdom, its representation, just as it is called his
likeness.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p11"></span>But the Word by which the Creator
expresses the created world is not at all, in the same way, a word
corresponding to the created world, since it is not this world’s
likeness, but its elementary essence. It therefore follows, that he does
not express the created world itself by a word corresponding to the
created world. To what, then, does the word belong, whereby he expresses
it, if he does not express it by a word, belonging to itself? For what
he expresses, he expresses by a word, and a word must belong to
something, that is, it is the likeness of something. But if he expresses
nothing but himself or his created world <span id="page_96">p. 96</span>
<span id="v.XXXIII-Page_96"></span>he can express nothing, except by a
word corresponding to himself or to something else.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p12"></span>So, if he expresses nothing by a word
belonging to the created world, whatever he expresses, he expresses by
the Word corresponding to himself. By one and the same Word, then, he
expresses himself and whatever he has made.

<span id="v.XXXIII-p13"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](ans067.md)
