[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans060)  [Next](ans062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXVIII"></span>

### <span id="v.XXVIII-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XXVIII.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XXVIII-p2"></span>This Spirit exists simply, and created
beings are not comparable with him.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XXVIII-p4"></span>IT seems to follow, then, from the
preceding considerations, that the Spirit which exists in so wonderfully
singular and so singularly wonderful a way of its own is in some sort
unique; while other beings which seem to be comparable with it are not
so.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p5"></span>For, by diligent attention it will be seen
that that Spirit alone exists simply, and perfectly, and absolutely;
while all other beings are almost non‑existent, and hardly exist at all.
For, seeing that of this Spirit, because of its immutable eternity, it
can in no wise be said, in terms of any alteration, that it *was* or
*will be*, but simply that it *is*; it is not now, by mutation, anything
which it either was not at any time, or <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>
<span id="v.XXVIII-Page_87"></span>will not be in the future. Nor does
it fail to be now what it was, or will be, at any time; but, whatever it
is, it is, once for all, and simultaneously, and interminably. Seeing, I
say, that its existence is of this character, it is rightly said itself
to exist simply, and absolutely, and perfectly.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p6"></span>But since, on the other hand, all other
beings, in accordance with some cause, have at some time been, or will
be, by mutation, what they are not now; or, are what they were not, or
will not be, at some time; and, since this former existence of theirs is
no longer a fact; and that future existence is not yet a fact; and their
existence in a transient, and most brief, and scarcely existing, present
is hardly a fact ‑‑ since, then, they exist in such mutability, it is
not unreasonably denied that they exist simply, and perfectly, and
absolutely; and it is asserted that they are almost nonexistent, that
they scarcely exist at all.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p7"></span>Again, since all beings, which are other
than this Spirit himself, have come from non‑existence to existence, not
through themselves, but through another; and, since they return from
existence to non‑existence, so far as their own power is concerned,
unless they are sustained through another being, is it consistent with
their nature to exist simply, or perfectly, or absolutely, and not
rather to be almost non‑existent.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p8"></span>And since the existence of this ineffable
Spirit alone can in no way be conceived to have taken inception from
non‑existence, or to be capable of sustaining any deficiency rising from
what is in nonexistence; and since, whatever he is himself, he is not
through another than himself, that is, than what he is himself, ought
not his existence alone to be conceived of as simple, and perfect, and
absolute?

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="v.XXVIII-Page_88"></span>

<span id="v.XXVIII-p9"></span>But what is thus simply, and on every
ground, solely perfect, simple, and absolute, this may very certainly be
justly said to be in some sort unique. And, on the other hand, whatever
is known to exist through a higher cause, and neither simply, nor
perfectly, nor absolutely, but scarcely to exist, or to be almost
non‑existent ‑‑ this assuredly may be rightly said to be in some sort
non‑existent.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p10"></span>According to this course of reasoning,
then, the creative Spirit alone exists, and all creatures are
nonexistent; yet, they are not wholly non‑existent, because, through
that Spirit which alone exists absolutely, they have been made something
from nothing.

<span id="v.XXVIII-p11"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.](ans062)
