[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans070)  [Next](ans072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXXVIII"></span>

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.XXXVIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XXXVIII.

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p2"></span>

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p3"></span>It cannot be explained why they are two,
although they must be so.

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p4"></span>

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p5"></span>OUR careful attention is therefore
demanded by a peculiarity which, though most unusual in other beings,
seems to belong to the supreme Spirit and his Word. For, it is certain
that in each of these separately and in both simultaneously, whatever
they are so exists that it is separately perfected in both, and yet does
not admit plurality in the two. For although, taken separately, he is
perfectly supreme Truth and Creator, and his Word is supreme Truth and
Creator; yet both at once are not two truths or two creators.

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p6"></span>But although this is true, yet it is most
remarkably clear that neither he, whose is the Word, can be his own
Word, nor can the Word be he, whose Word it is, although in so far as
regards either what they are substantially, or what relation they bear
to the created world, they ever preserve an indivisible unity. But in
respect of the fact that he does not derive existence from that Word,
but that Word from him, they admit an ineffable plurality, ineffable,
certainly, for although necessity requires that they be two, it can in
no wise be explained why they are two.

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p7"></span>For although they may perhaps be called
two equals, or some other mutual relation may in like manner be
attributed to them, yet if it were to be asked what it is in these very
relative expressions with reference to which they are used, it cannot be
expressed plurally, as one speaks of two equal lines, <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="v.XXXVIII-Page_100"></span>or two
like men. For, neither are there two equal spirits nor two equal
creators, nor is there any dual expression which indicates either their
essence or their relation to the created world; and there is no dual
expression which designates the peculiar relation of the one to the
other, since there are neither two words nor two images.

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p8"></span>For the Word, by virtue of the fact that
it is a word or image, bears a relation to the other, because it is Word
and image only as it is the Word and image of something; and so peculiar
are these attributes to the one that they are by no means predicable of
the other. For he, whose is the Word and image, is neither image nor
Word. It is, therefore, evident that it cannot be explained why they are
two, the supreme Spirit and the Word, although by certain properties of
each they are required to be two. For it is the property of the one to
derive existence from the other, and the property of that other that the
first derives existence from him.

<span id="v.XXXVIII-p9"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX](ans072)
