[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans048)  [Next](ans050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XVI"></span>

### <span id="v.XVI-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XVI.

<span id="v.XVI-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XVI-p2"></span>For this Being it is the same to be just that
it is to be justice; and so with regard to attributes that can be
expressed in the same way: and none of these shows of what character, or
how great, but what this Being is.

<span id="v.XVI-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XVI-p4"></span>BUT perhaps, when this Being is called just,
or great, or anything like these, it is not shown what it is, but of
what character, or how great it is. For <span id="page_64">p. 64</span>
<span id="v.XVI-Page_64"></span>every such term seems to be used with
reference to quantity or magnitude; because everything that is just is
so through justness, and so with other like cases, in the same way.
Hence, the supreme Nature itself is not just, except through justness.

<span id="v.XVI-p5"></span>It seems, then, that by *participation* in
this quality, that is, justness, the supremely good Substance is called
just. But, if this is so, it is just through another, and not through
itself. But this is contrary to the truth already established, that it
is good, or great or whatever it is at all, through itself and not
through another. So, if it is not just, except through justness, and
cannot be just, except through itself, what can be more clear than that
this Nature is itself justness? And, when it is said to be just through
justness, it is the same as saying that it is just through itself. And,
when it is said to be just through itself, nothing else is understood
than that it is just through justness. Hence, if it is inquired what the
supreme Nature, which is in question, is in itself, what truer answer
can be given, than *Justness*?

<span id="v.XVI-p6"></span>We must observe, then, how we are to
understand the statement, that the Nature which is itself justness is
just. For, since a man cannot be justness, but can possess justness, we
do not conceive of a just man as *being* justness, but as possessing
justness. Since, on the other hand, it cannot properly be said of the
supreme Nature that it possesses justness, but that it is justness, when
it is called just it is properly conceived of as being justness, but not
as possessing justness. Hence, if, when it is said to be justness, it is
not said of what character it is, but *what* it is, it follows that,
when it is called just, it is not said of what character it is, but what
it is.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="v.XVI-Page_65"></span>

<span id="v.XVI-p7"></span>Therefore, seeing that it is the same to say
of the supreme Being, that it is just and that it is justness; and, when
it is said that it is justness, it is nothing else than saying that it
is just; it makes no difference whether it is said to be justness or to
be just. Hence, when one is asked regarding the supreme Nature, what it
is, the answer, *Just*, is not less fitting than the answer, *Justness*.
Moreover, what we see to have been proved in the case of justness, the
intellect is compelled to acknowledge as true of all attributes which
are similarly predicated of this supreme Nature. Whatever such attribute
is predicated of it, then, it is shown, not of what character, or how
great, but *what* it is.

<span id="v.XVI-p8"></span>But it is obvious that whatever good thing
the supreme Nature is, it is in the highest degree. It is, therefore,
supreme Being, supreme Justness, supreme Wisdom, supreme Truth, supreme
Goodness, supreme Greatness, supreme Beauty, supreme Immortality,
supreme Incorruptibility, supreme Immutability, supreme Blessedness,
supreme Eternity, supreme Power, supreme Unity; which is nothing else
than supremely being, supremely living, etc.

<span id="v.XVI-p9"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.](ans050.md)
