[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans038)  [Next](ans040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.VI"></span>

### <span id="v.VI-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER VI.

<span id="v.VI-p1"></span>

<span id="v.VI-p2"></span>This Nature was not brought into existence
with the help of any external cause, yet it does not exist through
nothing, or derive existence from nothing. ‑‑How existence through self,
and derived from self, is conceivable.

<span id="v.VI-p3"></span>

<span id="v.VI-p4"></span>SINCE the same meaning is not always attached
to the phrase, “existence through” something, or, to the phrase,
“existence derived from” something, very diligent inquiry must be made,
in what way all existing beings exist through the supreme Nature, or
derive existence from it. For, what exists through itself, and what
exists through another, do not admit the same ground of existence. Let
us first consider, separately, this supreme Nature, which exists through
self; then these beings which exist through another.

<span id="v.VI-p5"></span>Since it is evident, then, that this Nature is
whatever it is, through itself, and all other beings are what they are,
through it, how does it exist through itself? For, what is said to exist
through anything apparently exists through an efficient agent, or
through matter, or through some other external aid, as through some
instrument. But, whatever exists in any of these three ways exists
through another than itself, and is of later existence, and, in some
sort, less than that through which it obtains existence.

<span id="v.VI-p6"></span> But, in no wise does the supreme Nature exist
through another, nor is it later or less than itself or anything else.
Therefore, the supreme Nature could be created neither by itself, nor by
another; nor could <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="v.VI-Page_46"></span>itself or any other be the matter whence it
should be created; nor did it assist itself in any way; nor did anything
assist it to be what it was not before.

<span id="v.VI-p7"></span>What is to be inferred? For that which cannot
have come into existence by any creative agent, or from any matter, or
with any external aids, seems either to be nothing, or, if it has any
existence, to exist through nothing, and derive existence from nothing.
And although, in accordance with the observations I have already made,
in the light of reason, regarding the supreme Substance, I should think
such propositions could in no wise be true in the case of supreme
Substance; yet, I would not neglect to give a connected demonstration of
this matter.

<span id="v.VI-p8"></span>For, seeing that this my meditation has
suddenly brought me to an important and interesting point, I am
unwilling to pass over carelessly even any simple or almost foolish
objection that occurs to me, in my argument; in order that by leaving no
ambiguity in my discussion up to this point, I may have the better
assured strength to advance toward what follows; and in order that if,
perchance, I shall wish to convince any one of the truth of my
speculations, even one of the slower minds, through the removal of every
obstacle, however slight, may acquiesce in what it finds here.

<span id="v.VI-p9"></span>That this Nature, then, without which no
nature exists, is nothing, is as false as it would be absurd to say that
whatever is is nothing. And, moreover, it does not exist through
nothing, because it is utterly inconceivable that what is something
should exist through nothing. But, if in any way it derives existence
from nothing, it does so through itself, or through another, or through
nothing. But it is evident that <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span
id="v.VI-Page_47"></span>in no wise does anything exist through nothing.
If, then, in any way it derives existence from nothing, it does so
either through itself or through another.

<span id="v.VI-p10"></span>But nothing can, through itself, derive
existence from nothing, because if anything derives existence from
nothing, through something, then that through which it exists must exist
before it. Seeing that this Being, then, does not exist before itself,
by no means does it derive existence from itself.

<span id="v.VI-p11"></span>But if it is supposed to have derived
existence from some other nature, then it is not the supreme Nature, but
some inferior one, nor is it what it is through itself, but through
another.

<span id="v.VI-p12"></span>Again: if this Nature derives existence from
nothing, through something, that through which it exists was a great
good, since it was the cause of good. But no good can be understood as
existing before that good, without which nothing is good; and it is
sufficiently clear that this good, without which there is no good, is
the supreme Nature which is under discussion. Therefore, it is not even
conceivable that this Nature was preceded by any being, through which it
derived existence from nothing.

<span id="v.VI-p13"></span>Hence, if it has any existence through
nothing, or derives existence from nothing, there is no doubt that
either, whatever it is, it does not exist through itself, or derive
existence from itself, or else it is itself nothing. It is unnecessary
to show that both these suppositions are false. The supreme Substance,
then, does not exist through any efficient agent, and does not derive
existence from any matter, and was not aided in being brought into
existence by any external causes. Nevertheless, it by no means exists
through <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span
id="v.VI-Page_48"></span>nothing, or derives existence from nothing;
since, through itself and from itself, it is whatever it is.

<span id="v.VI-p14"></span>Finally, as to how it should be understood to
exist through itself, and to derive existence from itself: it did not
create itself, nor did it spring up as its own matter, nor did it in any
way assist itself to become what it was not before, unless, haply, it
seems best to conceive of this subject in the way in which one says that
*the light lights* or is *lucent,* through and from itself. For, as are
the mutual relations of *the light* and *to light* and *lucent* (*lux,
lucere, lucens*), such are the relations of *essence,* and *to be* and
*being,* that is, *existing* or *subsisting*. So the supreme *Being,*
and *to be* in the highest degree, and *being* in the highest degree,
bear much the same relations, one to another, as *the light* and *to
light* and *lucent.*

<span id="v.VI-p15"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](ans040)
