[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans061)  [Next](ans063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXIX"></span>

### <span id="v.XXIX-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XXIX.

<span id="v.XXIX-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XXIX-p2"></span>His expression is identical with himself,
and consubstantial with him, since there are not two spirits, but one.

<span id="v.XXIX-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XXIX-p4"></span>BUT now, having considered these questions
regarding the properties of the supreme Nature, which have occurred to
me in following the guidance of reason to the present point, I think it
reasonable to examine this Spirit’s expression (*locutio*), through
which all things were created.

<span id="v.XXIX-p5"></span>For, though all that has been ascertained
regarding this expression above has the inflexible strength of reason, I
am especially compelled to a more careful discussion of this expression
by the fact that it is proved to be identical with the supreme Spirit
himself. For, if this Spirit created nothing except through himself, and
whatever was created by him was created through that expression, how
shall that expression be anything else than what the Spirit himself is?

<span id="v.XXIX-p6"></span>Furthermore, the facts already discovered
declare <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="v.XXIX-Page_89"></span>irrefutably that nothing at all ever could,
or can, exist, except the creative Spirit and its creatures. But it is
impossible that the expression of this Spirit is included among created
beings; for every created being was created through that expression; but
that expression could not be created through itself. For nothing can be
created through itself, since every creature exists later than that
through which it is created, and nothing exists later than itself.

<span id="v.XXIX-p7"></span>The alternative remaining is, then, that
this expression of the supreme Spirit, since it cannot be a creature, is
no other than the supreme Spirit. Therefore, this expression itself can
be conceived of as nothing else than the intelligence (*intelligentia*)
of this Spirit, by which he conceives of (*intelligit*) all things. For,
to him, what is expressing anything, according to this kind of
expression, but conceiving of it? For he does not, like man, ever fail
to express what he conceives.

<span id="v.XXIX-p8"></span>If, then, the supremely simple Nature is
nothing else than what its intelligence is, just as it is identical with
its wisdom, necessarily, in the same way, it is nothing else than what
its expression is. But, since it is already manifest that the supreme
Spirit is one only, and altogether indivisible, this his expression must
be so consubstantial with him, that they are not two spirits, but one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX.](ans063)
