[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans005)  [Next](ans007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="iv-Page_1"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>

# <span id="iv-p1.1"></span>ANSELM’S PROSLOGIUM

<span id="iv-p2"></span>

## <span id="iv-p2.1"></span>OR DISCOURSE ON THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

<span id="iv.i"></span>

### <span id="iv.i-p0.1"></span>PREFACE.

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>In this brief work the author aims at proving
in a single argument the existence of God, and whatsoever we believe of
God. ‑‑The difficulty of the task. ‑‑The author writes in the person of
one who contemplates God, and seeks to understand what he believes. To
this work he had given this title: Faith Seeking Understanding. He
finally named it Proslogium, ‑‑that is, A Discourse.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>AFTER I had published, at the solicitous
entreaties of certain brethren, a brief work (the *Monologium*) as an
example of meditation on the grounds of faith, in the person of one who
investigates, in a course of silent reasoning with himself, matters of
which he is ignorant; considering that this book was knit together by
the linking of many arguments, I began to ask myself whether there might
be found a single argument which would require no other for its proof
than itself alone; and alone would suffice to demonstrate that God truly
exists, and that there is a supreme good requiring nothing else, which
all other things require for their existence and well‑being; and
whatever we believe regarding the divine Being.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>Although I often and earnestly directed my
thought to this end, and at some times that which I sought seemed to be
just within my reach, while again it wholly evaded my mental vision, at
last in despair I was about to cease, as if from the search for a thing
which could not be found. But when I wished to exclude this thought
altogether, lest, by busying my mind to no purpose, it should keep me
from other thoughts, in which I might be successful; then more and more,
though I was unwilling and shunned it, it began to force itself upon me,
with a kind of importunity. So, one day, when I was exceedingly wearied
with resisting its importunity, in the very conflict of my thoughts, the
proof of which I had despaired offered itself, so that I eagerly
embraced the thoughts which I was strenuously repelling.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>Thinking, therefore, that what I rejoiced to
have found, would, if put in writing, be welcome to some readers, of
this very matter, and of some others, I have written the following
treatise, in the person of one who strives to lift his mind to the
contemplation of God, and seeks to understand what he believes. In my
judgment, neither this work nor the other, which I mentioned above,
deserved to be called a book, or to bear the name of an author; and yet
I thought they ought not to be sent forth without some title by which
they might, in some sort, invite one into whose hands they fell to their
perusal. I accordingly gave each a title, that the first might be known
as, An Example of Meditation on the Grounds of Faith, and its sequel as,
Faith Seeking Understanding. But, after, both had been copied by many
under these titles, many urged me, and especially <span
id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>Hugo, the reverend Archbishop of Lyons, who
discharges the apostolic office in Gaul, who instructed me to this
effect on his apostolic authority ‑‑to prefix my name to these writings.
<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="iv.i-Page_2"></span>And that
this might be done more fitly, I named the first, *Monologium*, that is,
A Soliloquy; but the second, *Proslogium*, that is, A Discourse.

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I.](ans007.md)
