[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans089)  [Next](ans091.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LVII"></span> <span id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span
id="v.LVII-Page_117"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.LVII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER LVII.

<span id="v.LVII-p2"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p3"></span>This love is uncreated and creator, as are
Father and Son; and yet it is with them not three, but one uncreated and
creative being. And it may be called the Spirit of Father and Son.

<span id="v.LVII-p4"></span>

<span id="v.LVII-p5"></span>BUT, since this love separately is the
supreme Being, as are Father and Son, and yet at once Father and Son,
and the love of both are not more than one, but one supreme Being, which
alone was created by none, and created all things through no other than
itseIf; since this is true, necessarily, as the Father separately, and
the Son separately, are each uncreated and creator, so, too, love
separately is uncreated and creator, and yet all three at once are not
more than one, but one uncreated and creative being.

<span id="v.LVII-p6"></span>None, therefore, makes or begets or creates
the Father, but the Father alone begets, but does not create, the Son;
while Father and Son alike do not create or beget, but somehow, if such
an expression may be used, *breathe* their love: for, although the
supremely immutable Being does not breathe after our fashion, yet the
truth that this Being sends forth this, its love, which proceeds from
it, not by departing from it, but by deriving existence from it, can
perhaps be no better expressed than by saying that this Being *breathes*
its love.

<span id="v.LVII-p7"></span>But, if this expression is admissible, as
the Word of the supreme Being is its Son, so its love may fittingly
enough be called its breath (*Spiritus*). So that, though it is itself
essentially spirit, as are Father and Son, they are not regarded as the
spirits of anything, since neither is the Father born of any other nor
the Son of the Father, as it were, by *breathing*; while <span
id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span id="v.LVII-Page_118"></span>that love
is regarded as the Breath or Spirit of both since from both breathing in
their transcendent way it mysteriously proceeds.

<span id="v.LVII-p8"></span>And this love, too, it seems, from the fact
there is community of being between Father and Son, may, not
unreasonably, take, as it were its own, some name which is common to
Father and Son; if there is any exigency demanding that it should have a
name proper to itself. And, indeed, if this love is actually designated
by the name Spirit, as by its own name, since this name equally
describes the Father and the Son: it will be useful to this effect also,
that through this name it shall be signified that this love is identical
with Father and Son, although it has its being from them.

<span id="v.LVII-p9"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVIII](ans091.md)
