[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans023)  [Next](ans025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.XVIII"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII-p1"></span>

### <span id="iv.XVIII-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XVIII.

<span id="iv.XVIII-p2"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII-p3"></span>God is life, wisdom, eternity, and every
true good. ‑‑Whatever is composed of parts is not wholly one; it is
capable, either in fact or in concept, of dissolution. In God wisdom,
eternity, etc., are not parts, but one, and the very whole which God is,
or unity itself, not even in concept divisible.

<span id="iv.XVIII-p4"></span>

<span id="iv.XVIII-p5"></span>AND lo, again confusion; lo, again grief
and mourning meet him who seeks for joy and gladness. My <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span id="iv.XVIII-Page_23"></span>soul now
hoped for satisfaction; and lo, again it is overwhelmed with need. I
desired now to feast, and lo, I hunger more. I tried to rise to the
light of God, and I have fallen back into my darkness. Nay, not only
have I fallen into it, but I feel that I am enveloped in it. I fell
before my mother conceived me. Truly, in darkness I was conceived, and
in the cover of darkness I was born. Truly, in him we all fell, in whom
we all sinned. In him we all lost, who kept easily, and wickedly lost to
himself and to us that which when we wish to seek it, we do not know;
when we seek it, we do not find; when we find, it is not that which we
seek.

<span id="iv.XVIII-p6"></span>Do thou help me for thy goodness’ sake!
Lord, I sought thy face; thy face, Lord, will I seek; hide not thy face
far from me (<span id="iv.XVIII-p6.1"></span>[Psalms
27:8](../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#008)<span id="iv.XVIII-p6.1"></span>.md).
Free me from myself toward thee. Cleanse, heal, sharpen, enlighten the
eye of my mind, that it may behold thee. Let my soul recover its
strength, and with all its understanding let it strive toward thee, O
Lord. What art thou, Lord, what art thou? What shall my heart conceive
thee to be?

<span id="iv.XVIII-p7"></span>Assuredly thou art life, thou art wisdom,
thou art truth, thou art goodness, thou art blessedness, thou art
eternity, and thou art every true good. Many are these attributes: my
straitened understanding cannot see so many at one view, that it may be
gladdened by all at once. How, then, O Lord, art thou all these things?
Are they parts of thee, or is each one of these rather the whole, which
thou art? For, whatever is composed of parts is not altogether one, but
is in some sort plural, and diverse from itself; and either in fact or
in concept is capable of dissolution.

<span id="iv.XVIII-p8"></span>But these things are alien to thee, than
whom <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="iv.XVIII-Page_24"></span>nothing better can be conceived of. Hence,
there are no parts in thee, Lord, nor art thou more than one. But thou
art so truly a unitary being, and so identical with thyself, that in no
respect art thou unlike thyself; rather thou art unity itself,
indivisible by any conception. Therefore, life and wisdom and the rest
are not parts of thee, but all are one; and each of these is the whole,
which thou art, and which all the rest are.

<span id="iv.XVIII-p9"></span>In this way, then, it appears that thou
hast no parts, and that thy eternity, which thou art, is nowhere and
never a part of thee or of thy eternity. But everywhere thou art as a
whole, and thy eternity exists as a whole forever.

<span id="iv.XVIII-p10"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](ans025.md)
