[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans076)  [Next](ans078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XLIV"></span>

<span id="v.XLIV-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.XLIV-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER XLIV.

<span id="v.XLIV-p2"></span>

<span id="v.XLIV-p3"></span>How one is the essence of the other.

<span id="v.XLIV-p4"></span>

<span id="v.XLIV-p5"></span>HENCE, even if one is called the essence of
the other, there is no departure from truth; but the supreme <span
id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span id="v.XLIV-Page_106"></span>simplicity
and unity of their common nature is thus honored. For, not as one
conceives of a man’s wisdom, through which man is wise, though he cannot
be wise through himself, can we thus understand the statement that the
Father is essence of the Son, and the Son the essence of the Father. We
cannot understand that the Son is existent through the Father, and the
Father through the Son, as if the one could not be existent except
through the other, just as a man cannot be wise except through wisdom.

<span id="v.XLIV-p6"></span>For, as the supreme Wisdom is ever wise
through itself, so the supreme Essence ever exists through itself. But,
the perfectly supreme Essence is the Father, and the perfectly supreme
Essence is the Son. Hence, the perfect Father and the perfect Son exist,
each through himself, just as each is wise through himself.

<span id="v.XLIV-p7"></span>For the Son is not the less perfect essence
or wisdom because he is an essence born of the essence of the Father,
and a wisdom born of the wisdom of the Father; but he would be a less
perfect essence or wisdom if he did not exist through himself, and were
not wise through himself.

<span id="v.XLIV-p8"></span>For, there is no inconsistency between the
subsistence of the Son through himself, and his deriving existence from
his Father. For, as the Father has essence, and wisdom, and life in
himself; so that not through another’s, but through his own, essence he
exists; through his own wisdom he is wise; through his own life he
lives; so, by generation, he grants to his Son the possession of
essence, and wisdom, and life in himself, so that not through an
extraneous essence, wisdom, and life, but through his own, he subsists,
is wise, and lives; otherwise, the existence of <span id="page_107">p.
107</span> <span id="v.XLIV-Page_107"></span>Father and Son will not be
the same, nor will the Son be equal to the Father. But it has already
been clearly proved how false this supposition is.

<span id="v.XLIV-p9"></span>Hence, there is no inconsistency between the
subsistence of the Son through himself, and his deriving existence from
the Father, since he must have from the Father this very power of
subsisting through himself. For, if a wise man should teach me his
wisdom, which I formerly lacked, he might without impropriety be said to
teach me by this very wisdom of his. But, although my wisdom would
derive its existence and the fact of its being from his wisdom, yet when
my wisdom once existed, it would be no other essence than its own, nor
would it be wise except through itself.

<span id="v.XLIV-p10"></span>Much more, then, the eternal Father’s
eternal Son, who so derives existence from the Father that they are not
two essences, subsists, is wise, and lives through himself. Hence, it is
inconceivable that the Father should be the essence of the Son, or the
Son the essence of the Father, on the ground that the one could not
subsist through itself, but must subsist through the other. But in order
to indicate how they share in an essence supremely simple and supremely
one, it may consistently be said, and conceived, that the one is so
identical with the other that the one possesses the essence of the
other.

<span id="v.XLIV-p11"></span>On these grounds, then, since there is
obviously no difference between possessing an essence and being an
essence, just as the one possesses the essence of the other, so the one
is the essence of the other, that is, the one has the same existence
with the other.

<span id="v.XLIV-p12"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](ans078)
