[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans053)  [Next](ans055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XXI"></span>

### <span id="v.XXI-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XXI.

<span id="v.XXI-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XXI-p2"></span>It exists in no place or time.

<span id="v.XXI-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XXI-p4"></span>BUT, if this is true, either it exists in
every place and at every time, or else only a part of it so exists, the
other part transcending every place and time.

<span id="v.XXI-p5"></span>But, if in part it exists, and in part does
not exist, <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="v.XXI-Page_73"></span>in every place and at every time, it has
parts; which is false. It does not, therefore, exist everywhere and
always in part.

<span id="v.XXI-p6"></span>But how does it exist as a whole, everywhere
and always? For, either it is to be understood that it exists as a whole
at once, in all places or at all times, and by parts in individual
places and times; or, that it exists as a whole, in individual places
and times as well.

<span id="v.XXI-p7"></span>But, if it exists by parts in individual
places or times, it is not exempt from composition and division of
parts; which has been found to be in a high degree alien to the supreme
Nature. Hence, it does not so exist, as a whole, in all places and at
all times that it exists by parts in individual places and times.

<span id="v.XXI-p8"></span>We are confronted, then, by the former
alternative, that is, how the supreme Nature can exist, as a whole, in
every individual place and time. This is doubtless impossible, unless it
either exists at once or at different times in individual places or
times. But, since the law of place and the law of time, the
investigation of which it has hitherto been possible to prosecute in a
single discussion, because they advanced on exactly the same lines, here
separate one from another and seem to avoid debate, as if by evasion in
diverse directions, let each be investigated independently in discussion
directed on itself alone.

<span id="v.XXI-p9"></span>First, then, let us see whether the supreme
Nature can exist, as a whole, in individual places, either at once in
all, or at different times, in different places. Then, let us make the
same inquiry regarding the times at which it can exist.

<span id="v.XXI-p10"></span>If, then, it exists as a whole in each
individual place, then, for each individual place there is an
individual<span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span
id="v.XXI-Page_74"></span> whole. For, just as place is so distinguished
from place that there are individual places, so that which exists as a
whole, in one place, is so distinct from that which exists as a whole at
the same time, in another place, that there are individual wholes. For,
of what exists as a whole, in any place, there is no part that does not
exist in that place. And that of which there is no part that does not
exist in a given place, is no part of what exists at the same time
outside this place.

<span id="v.XXI-p11"></span>What exists as a whole, then, in any place,
is no part of what exists at the same time outside that place. But, of
that of which no part exists outside any given place, no part exists, at
the same time, in another place. How, then, can what exists as a whole,
in any place, exist simultaneously, as a whole, in another place, if no
part of it can at that time exist in another place?

<span id="v.XXI-p12"></span>Since, then, one whole cannot exist as a
whole in different places at the same time, it follows that, for
individual places, there are individual wholes, if anything is to exist
as a whole in different individual places at once. Hence, if the supreme
Nature exists as a whole, at one time, in every individual place, there
are as many supreme Natures as there can be individual places; which it
would be irrational to believe. Therefore, it does not exist, as a
whole, at one time in individual places.

<span id="v.XXI-p13"></span>If, however, at different times it exists,
as a whole, in individual places, then, when it is in one place, there
is in the meantime no good and no existence in other places, since
without it absolutely nothing exists. But the absurdity of this
supposition is proved by the existence of places themselves, which are
not <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="v.XXI-Page_75"></span>nothing, but something. Therefore, the supreme
Nature does not exist, as a whole, in individual places at different
times.

<span id="v.XXI-p14"></span>But, if neither at the same time nor at
different times does it exist, as a whole, in individual places, it is
evident that it does not at all exist, as a whole, in each individual
place. We must now examine, then, whether this supreme Nature exists, as
a whole, at individual times, either simultaneously or at distinct times
for individual times.

<span id="v.XXI-p15"></span>But, how can anything exist, as a whole,
simultaneously, at individual times, if these times are not themselves
simultaneous? But, if this Being exists, as a whole, separately and at
distinct times for individual times, just as a man exists as a whole
yesterday, to‑day, and to‑morrow; it is properly said that it was and is
and will be. Its age, then, which is no other than its eternity, does
not exist, as a whole, simultaneously, but it is distributed in parts
according to the parts of time.

<span id="v.XXI-p16"></span>But its eternity is nothing else than
itself. The supreme Being, then, will be divided into parts, according
to the divisions of time. For, if its age is prolonged through periods
of time, it has with this time present, past, and future. But what else
is its age than its duration of existence, than its eternity? Since,
then, its eternity is nothing else than its essence, as considerations
set forth above irrefutably prove; if its eternity has past, present,
and future, its essence also has, in consequence, past, present, and
future.

<span id="v.XXI-p17"></span>But what is past is not present or future;
and what is present is not past or future; and what is future is not
past or present. How, then, shall that <span id="page_76">p. 76</span>
<span id="v.XXI-Page_76"></span>proposition be valid, which was proved
with clear and logical cogency above, namely, that that supreme Nature
is in no wise composite, but is supremely simple, supremely immutable?
‑‑ how shall this be so, if that Nature is one thing, at one time, and
another, at another, and has parts distributed according to times? Or
rather, if these earlier propositions are true, how can these latter be
possible? By no means, then, is past or future attributable to the
creative Being, either its age or its eternity. For why has it not a
present, if it truly *is*? But *was* means past, and *will be* future.
Therefore that Being never was, nor will be. Hence, it does not exist at
distinct times, just as it does not exist, as a whole, simultaneously in
different individual times.

<span id="v.XXI-p18"></span>If, then, as our discussion has proved, it
neither so exists, as a whole, in all places or times that it exists, as
a whole, at one time in all, or by parts in individual places and times;
nor so that it exists, as a whole, in individual times and places, it is
manifest that it does not in any way exist, as a whole, in every time or
place.

<span id="v.XXI-p19"></span>And, since, in like manner, it has been
demonstrated that it neither so exists in every time or place, that a
part exists in every, and a part transcends every, place and time, it is
impossible that it exists everywhere and always.

<span id="v.XXI-p20"></span>For, in no way can it be conceived to exist
everywhere and always, except either as a whole or in part. But if it
does not at all exist everywhere and always, it will exist either
finitely in some place or time, or in none. But it has already been
proved, that it cannot exist finitely, in any place or time. In no place
or time, that is, nowhere and never does it exist. For <span
id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span id="v.XXI-Page_77"></span>it cannot
exist, except in every or in some place or time.

<span id="v.XXI-p21"></span>But, on the other hand, since it is
irrefutably established, not only that it exists through itself, and
without beginning and without end, but that without it nothing anywhere
or ever exists, it must exist everywhere and always.

<span id="v.XXI-p22"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.](ans055.md)
