[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans032)  [Next](ans034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span> <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span
id="v-Page_34"></span>

# <span id="v-p0.1"></span>ANSELM’S MONOLOGIUM

<span id="v-p1"></span>

## <span id="v-p1.1"></span>ON THE BEING OF GOD.

<span id="v.i"></span>

### <span id="v.i-p0.1"></span>PREFACE.

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>In this book Anselm discusses, under the form
of a meditation, the Being of God, basing his argument not on the
authority of Scripture, but on the force of reason. lt. contains nothing
that is inconsistent with the writings of the Holy Fathers, and
especially nothing that is inconsistent with those of <span
id="v.i-p2.1"></span>St. Augustine. ‑‑The Greek terminology is employed
in Chapter LXXVIII., where it is stated that the Trinity may be said to
consist of three substances, that is, three persons.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>CERTAIN brethren have often and earnestly
entreated me to put in writing some thoughts that I had offered them in
familiar conversation, regarding meditation on the Being of God, and on
some other topics connected with this subject, under the form of a
meditation on these themes. It is in accordance with their wish, rather
than with my ability, that they have prescribed such a form for the
writing of this meditation; in order that nothing in Scripture should be
urged on the authority of Scripture itself, but that whatever the
conclusion of independent investigation should declare to be true,
should, in an unadorned style, with common proofs and with a simple
argument, be briefly enforced by the cogency of reason, and plainly
expounded in the light of truth. It was <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
<span id="v.i-Page_35"></span>their wish also, that I should not disdain
to meet such simple and almost foolish objections as occur to me.

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>This task I have long refused to undertake.
And, reflecting on the matter, I have tried on many grounds to excuse
myself; for the more they wanted this work to be adaptable to practical
use, the more was what they enjoined on me difficult of execution.
Overcome at last, however, both by the modest importunity of their
entreaties and by the not contemptible sincerity of their zeal; and
reluctant as I was because of the difficulty of my task and the weakness
of my talent, I entered upon the work they asked for. But it is with
pleasure inspired by their affection that, so far as I was able, I have
prosecuted this work within the limits they set.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>I was led to this undertaking in the hope that
whatever I might accomplish would soon be overwhelmed with contempt, as
by men disgusted with some worthless thing. For I know that in this book
I have not so much satisfied those who entreated me, as put an end to
the entreaties that followed me so urgently. Yet, somehow it fell out,
contrary to my hope, that not only the brethren mentioned above, but
several others, by making copies for their own use, condemned this
writing to long remembrance. And, after frequent consideration, I have
not been able to find that I have made in it any statement which is
inconsistent with the writings of the Catholic Fathers, or especially
with those of <span id="v.i-p6.1"></span>St. Augustine. Wherefore, if it
shall appear to any man that I have offered in this work any thought
that is either too novel or discordant with the truth, I ask him not to
denounce me at once as one who boldly seizes upon new ideas, or as a
maintainer of falsehood; but let <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="v.i-Page_36"></span>him first read diligently Augustine’s books on
the Trinity, and then judge my treatise in the light of those.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>In stating that the supreme Trinity may be said
to consist of three substances, I have followed the Greeks, who
acknowledge three substances in one Essence, in the same faith wherein
we acknowledge three persons in one Substance. For they designate by the
word *substance* that attribute of God which we designate by the word
*person.*

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>Whatever I have said on that point, however, is
put in the mouth of one debating and investigating in solitary
reflection, questions to which he had given no attention before. And
this method I knew to be in accordance with the wish of those whose
request I was striving to fulfil. But it is my prayer and earnest
entreaty, that if any shall wish to copy this work, he shall be careful
to place this preface at the beginning of the book, before the body of
the meditation itself. For I believe that one will be much helped in
understanding the matter of this book, if he has taken note of the
intention, and the method according to which it is discussed. It is my
opinion, too, that one who has first seen this preface will not
pronounce a rash judgment, if he shall find offered here any thought
that is contrary to his own belief.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I.](ans034.md)
