[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans039)  [Next](ans041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.VII"></span>

### <span id="v.VII-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER VII.

<span id="v.VII-p1"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p2"></span>In what way all other beings exist through
this Nature and derive existence from it.

<span id="v.VII-p3"></span>

<span id="v.VII-p4"></span>THERE now remains the discussion of that
whole class of beings that exist through another, as to how they exist
through the supreme Substance, whether because this Substance created
them all, or because it was the material of all. For, there is no need
to inquire whether all exist through it, for this reason, namely, that
there being another creative agent, or another existing material, this
supreme Substance has merely aided in bringing about the existence of
all things: since it is inconsistent with what has already been shown,
that whatever things are should exist secondarily, and not primarily,
through it.

<span id="v.VII-p5"></span>First, then, it seems to me, we ought to
inquire <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="v.VII-Page_49"></span>whether that whole class of beings which exist
through another derive existence from any material. But I do not doubt
that all this solid world, with its parts, just as we see, consists of
earth, water, fire, and air. These four elements, of course, can be
conceived of without these forms which we see in actual objects, so that
their formless, or even confused, nature appears to be the material of
all bodies, distinguished by their own forms. ‑‑ I say that I do not
doubt this. But I ask, whence this very material that I have mentioned,
the material of the mundane mass, derives its existence. For, if there
is some material of this material, then that is more truly the material
of the physical universe.

<span id="v.VII-p6"></span>If, then, the universe of things, whether
visible or invisible, derives existence from any material, certainly it
not only cannot be, but it cannot even be supposed to be, from any other
material than from the supreme Nature or from itself, or from some third
being ‑‑ but this last, at any rate, does not exist. For, indeed,
nothing is even conceivable except that highest of all beings, which
exists through itself, and the universe of beings which exist, not
through themselves, but through this supreme Being. Hence, that which
has no existence at all is not the material of anything.

<span id="v.VII-p7"></span>From its own nature the universe cannot
derive existence, since, if this were the case, it would in some sort
exist through itself and so through another than that through which all
things exist. But all these suppositions are false.

<span id="v.VII-p8"></span>Again, everything that derives existence from
material derives existence from another, and exists later than that
other. Therefore, since nothing is other <span id="page_50">p. 50</span>
<span id="v.VII-Page_50"></span>than itself, or later than itself, it
follows that nothing derives material existence from itself.

<span id="v.VII-p9"></span>But if, from the material of the supreme
Nature itself, any lesser being can derive existence, the supreme good
is subject to change and corruption. But this it is impious to suppose.
Hence, since everything that is other than this supreme Nature is less
than it, it is impossible that anything other than it in this way
derives existence from it.

<span id="v.VII-p10"></span>Furthermore: doubtless that is in no wise
good, through which the supreme good is subjected to change or
corruption. But, if any lesser nature derives existence from the
material of the supreme good, inasmuch as nothing exists whencesoever,
except through the supreme Being, the supreme good is subjected to
change and corruption through the supreme Being itself. Hence, the
supreme Being, which is itself the supreme good, is by no means good;
which is a contradiction. There is, therefore, no lesser nature which
derives existence in a material way from the supreme Nature.

<span id="v.VII-p11"></span>Since, then, it is evident that the essence
of those things which exist through another does not derive existence as
if materially, from the supreme Essence, nor from itself, nor from
another, it is manifest that it derives existence from no material.
Hence, seeing that whatever is exists through the supreme Being, nor can
aught else exist through this Being, except by its creation, or by its
existence as material, it follows, necessarily, that nothing besides it
exists, except by its creation. And, since nothing else is or has been,
except that supreme Being and the beings created by it, it could create
nothing at all through any other instrument or aid than itself. But all
that <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span id="v.VII-Page_51"></span>it
has created, it has doubtless created either from something, as from
material, or from nothing.

<span id="v.VII-p12"></span>Since, then, it is most patent that the
essence of all beings, except the supreme Essence, was created by that
supreme Essence, and derives existence from no material, doubtless
nothing can be more clear than that this supreme Essence nevertheless
produced from nothing, alone and through itself, the world of material
things, so numerous a multitude, formed in such beauty, varied in such
order, so fitly diversified.

<span id="v.VII-p13"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](ans041.md)
