[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans001)  [Next](ans003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>ANSELM’S
PHILOSOPHY.

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span><span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>(AFTER
WEBER. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) <span id="ii.i-p5.1"></span>.md)

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>“The first really speculative thinker after
<span id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>Scotus is <span id="ii.i-p7.2"></span>St.
Anselmus, the disciple of <span id="ii.i-p7.3"></span>Lanfranc. He was
born at Aosta (1033), <span id="page_iv">p. iv</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_iv"></span>entered the monastery of Bec in Normandy
(1060), succeeded <span id="ii.i-p7.4"></span>Lanfranc as Abbot (1078),
and as Archbishop of Canterbury (1093). He died in 1109. He left a great
number of writings, the most important of which are: the *Dialogus de
grammatico*, the *Monologium de divinitatis essentia sive Exemplum de
ratione fidei*, the *Proslogium sive Fides quoerens intellectum*, the
*De veritate*, the *De fide trinitatis*, and the *Cur Deus Homo?*

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>“The second <span
id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>Augustine, as <span id="ii.i-p8.2"></span>St.
Anselmus had been called, starts out from the same principle as the
first; he holds that faith precedes all reflection and all discussion
concerning religious things. The unbelievers, he says, strive to
understand because they do not believe; we, on the contrary, strive to
understand because we believe. *They and we have the same object in
view;* but inasmuch as they do not believe, they cannot arrive at their
goal, which is to understand the dogma. The unbeliever will never
understand. In religion faith plays the part played by experience in the
understanding of the things of this world. The blind man cannot see the
light, and therefore does not understand it; the deaf‑mute, who has
never perceived sound, cannot have a clear idea of sound. Similarly, not
to believe means not to perceive, and not to perceive means not to
understand. Hence, we do not reflect in order that we may believe; on
the contrary, we believe in order that we may arrive at knowledge. A
Christian ought never to doubt the beliefs and teachings of the Holy
Catholic Church. All he can do is to strive, as humbly as possible, to
understand her teachings by believing them, to love them, and resolutely
to observe them in his daily life. Should he succeed in understanding
the Christian doctrine, let him render thanks to God, the source of all
intelligence! In case he fails, that is no reason why he should
obstinately attack the dogma, but a reason why he should bow his head in
worship. Faith ought not merely to be the starting‑point, ‑‑the
Christian’s aim is not to *depart* from faith but to remain in it, ‑‑but
also the fixed rule and goal of thought, the beginning, the middle, and
the end of all philosophy.

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>“The above almost literal quotations might
give one the impression that <span id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>St. Anselmus
belongs exclusively to the history of theology. Such is not the case,
however. This fervent Catholic is more independent, more of an
investigator and philosopher than he himself imagines. He is a typical
scholastic doctor and a fine exponent of the alliance between reason and
faith which forms the characteristic trait of mediaeval philosophy. He
assumes, *a priori*, <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_v"></span>that revelation and reason are in perfect
accord. These two manifestations of one and the same Supreme
Intelligence cannot possibly contradict each other. Hence, his point of
view is diametrically opposed to the *credo quia absurdum*. Moreover, he
too had been besieged by doubt. Indeed, the extreme ardor which impels
him to search everywhere for arguments favorable to the dogma, is a
confession on his part that the dogma needs support, that it is
debatable, that it lacks self‑evidence, the criterion of truth. Even as
a monk, it was his chief concern to find a simple and conclusive
argument in support of the existence of God and of all the doctrines of
the Church concerning the Supreme Being. Mere affirmation did not
satisfy him; he demanded proofs. This thought was continually before his
mind; it caused him to forget his meals, and pursued him even during the
solemn moments of worship. He comes to the conclusion that it is a
temptation of Satan, and seeks deliverance from it. But in vain. After a
night spent in meditation, he at last discovers what be has been seeking
for years: the incontrovertible argument in favor of the Christian
dogma, and he regards himself as fortunate in having found, not only the
proof of the existence of God, but his peace of soul. His demonstrations
are like the premises of modern rationalism.

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>“Everything that exists, he says, has its
cause, and this cause may be one or many. If it is one, then we have
what we are looking for: God, the unitary being to whom all other beings
owe their origin. If it is manifold, there are three possibilities: (1)
The manifold may depend on unity as its cause; or (2) Each thing
composing the manifold may be self‑caused; or (3) Each thing may owe its
existence to all the other things. The first case is identical with the
hypothesis that everything proceeds from a single cause; for to depend
on several causes, all of which depend on a single cause, means to
depend on this single cause. In the second case, we must assume that
there is a power, force, or faculty of self‑existence common to all the
particular causes assumed by the hypothesis; a power in which all
participate and are comprised. But that would give us what we had in the
first case, an absolute unitary cause. The third supposition, which
makes each of the ‘first causes’ depend on all the rest, is absurd; for
we cannot hold that a thing has for its cause and condition of existence
a thing of which it is itself the cause and condition. Hence we are
compelled to believe in a being which is the cause of every existing
thing, without being caused by anything itself, and which for <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_vi"></span>that very
reason is infinitely more perfect than anything else: it is the most
real (*ens realissimum*), most powerful, and best being. Since it does
not depend on any being or on any condition of existence other than
itself it is *a se* and *per se;* it exists, not because something else
exists, but it exists because it exists; that is, it exists necessarily,
it is necessary being.

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>“It would be an easy matter to deduce
pantheism from the arguments of the *Monologium*. <span
id="ii.i-p11.1"></span>Anselmus, it is true, protests against such an
interpretation of his theology. With <span id="ii.i-p11.2"></span>St.
Augustine he assumes that the world is created *ex nihilo*. But though
accepting this teaching, he modifies it. Before the creation, he says,
things did not exist by themselves, independently of God; hence we say
they were derived from non‑being. But they existed eternally for God and
in God, as ideas; they existed before their creation in the sense that
the Creator foresaw them and predestined them for existence.

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>“The existence of God, the unitary and
absolute cause of the world, being proved, the question is to determine
his nature and attributes. God’s perfections are like human perfections;
with this difference, however, that they are essential to him, which is
not the case with us. Man has received a share of certain perfections,
but there is no necessary correlation between him and these perfections;
it would have been possible for him not to receive them; he could have
existed without them. God, on the contrary, does not get his perfections
from without: he has not received them, and we cannot say that he *has*
them; he *is* and must be everything that these perfections imply; his
attributes are identical with his essence. Justice, an attribute of God,
and God are not two separate things. We cannot say of God that he has
justice or goodness; we cannot even say that be is just; for to be just
is to participate in justice after the manner of creatures. God is
justice as such, goodness as such, wisdom as such, happiness as such,
truth as such, being as such. Moreover, all of God’s attributes
constitute but a single attribute, by virtue of the unity of his essence
(*unum est quidquid essentialiter de summa substantia dicitur*).

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>“All this is pure Platonism. But, not content
with spiritualising theism, Anselmus really discredits it when, like a
new Carneades, he enumerates the difficulties which he finds in the
conception. God is a simple being and at the same time eternal, that is,
diffused over infinite points of time; he is omnipresent, that is, <span
id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_vii"></span>distributed
over all points of space. Shall we say that God is omnipresent and
eternal? This proposition contradicts the notion of the simplicity of
the divine essence. Shall we say that he is nowhere in space and nowhere
in time? But that would be equivalent to denying his existence. Let us
therefore reconcile these two extremes and say that God is omnipresent
and eternal, without being limited by space or time. The following is an
equally serious difficulty: In God there is no change and consequently
nothing accidental. Now, there is no substance without accidents. Hence
God is not a substance; he transcends all substance. <span
id="ii.i-p13.1"></span>Anselmus is alarmed at these dangerous
consequences of his logic, and he therefore prudently adds that, though
the term ‘substance’ may be incorrect, it is, nevertheless, the best we
can apply to God ‑‑*si quid digne dici potest* ‑‑and that to avoid or
condemn it might perhaps jeopardise our faith in the reality of the
Divine Being.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>“The most formidable theological antinomy is
the doctrine of the trinity of persons in the unity of the divine
essence. The Word is the object of eternal thought; it is God in so far
as he is thought, conceived, or comprehended by himself. The Holy Spirit
is the love of God for the Word, and of the Word for God, the love which
God bears himself. But is this explanation satisfactory? And does it not
sacrifice the dogma which it professes to explain to the conception of
unity? <span id="ii.i-p14.1"></span>St. Anselmus sees in the Trinity and
the notion of God insurmountable difficulties and contradictions, which
the human mind cannot reconcile. In his discouragement be is obliged to
confess, with <span id="ii.i-p14.2"></span>Scotus Erigena, <span
id="ii.i-p14.3"></span>St. Augustine, and the Neo‑Platonists, that no
human word can adequately express the essence of the All‑High. Even the
words ‘wisdom’ (*sapientia*) and ‘being’ (*essentia*) are but imperfect
expressions of what he imagines to be the essence of God. All
theological phrases are analogies, figures of speech, and mere
approximations.

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span>“The *Proslogium sive Fides quoerens
intellectum* has the same aim as the *Monologium:* to prove the
existence of God. Our author draws the elements of his argument from
<span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>St. Augustine and Platonism. He sets out
from the idea of a perfect being, from which he infers the existence of
such a being. We have in ourselves, he says, the idea of an absolutely
perfect being. Now, perfection implies existence. Hence God exists. This
argument, which has been termed the *ontological argument*, found an
opponent worthy of <span id="ii.i-p15.2"></span>Anselmus in <span
id="ii.i-p15.3"></span>Gaunilo, a monk of Marmoutiers in <span
id="page_viii">p. viii</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_viii"></span>Touraine.
<span id="ii.i-p15.4"></span>Gaunilo emphasises the difference between
thought and being, and points out the fact that we may conceive and
imagine a being, and yet that being may not exist. We have as much right
to conclude from our idea of an enchanted island in the middle of the
ocean that such an island actually exists. The criticism is just.
Indeed, the ontological argument would be conclusive, only in case the
idea of God and the existence of God in the human mind were identical.
If our idea of God is God himself, it is evident that this idea is the
immediate and incontrovertible proof of the existence of God. But what
the theologian aims to prove is not the existence of the God‑Idea of
<span id="ii.i-p15.5"></span>Plato and <span
id="ii.i-p15.6"></span>Hegel, but the existence of the personal God.
However that may be, we hardly know what to admire most, ‑‑<span
id="ii.i-p15.7"></span>St. Anselmus’s broad and profound conception, or
the sagacity of his opponent who, in the seclusion of his cell,
anticipates the Transcendental Dialectic of <span
id="ii.i-p15.8"></span>Kant.

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>“The rationalistic tendency which we have
just noticed in the *Monologium* and the *Proslogium* meets us again in
the *Cur Deus Homo?* Why did God become man? The first word of the title
sufficiently indicates the philosophical trend of the treatise. The
object is to search for the *causes* of the incarnation. The
incarnation, according to <span id="ii.i-p16.1"></span>St. Anselmus,
necessarily foIlows from the necessity of redemption. Sin is an offence
against the majesty of God. In spite of his goodness, God cannot pardon
sin without compounding with honor and justice. On the other hand, he
cannot revenge himself on man for his offended honor; for sin is an
offence of infinite degree and therefore demands infinite satisfaction;
which means that he must either destroy humanity or inflict upon it the
eternal punishments of hell. Now, in either case, the goal of creation,
the happiness of his creatures, would be missed and the honor of the
Creator compromised. There is but one way for God to escape this dilemma
without affecting his honor, and that is to arrange for some kind of
*satisfaction*. He must have infinite satisfaction, because the offence
is immeasurable. Now, in so far as man is a finite being and incapable
of satisfying divine justice in an infinite measure, the infinite being
himself must take the matter in charge; he must have recourse to
*substitution.* Hence, the necessity of the *incarnation.* God becomes
man in Christ; Christ suffers and dies in our stead; thus he acquires an
infinite merit and the right to an equivalent recompense. But since the
world belongs to the Creator, and nothing can be added to its treasures,
the recompense which by right belongs to Christ <span id="page_ix">p.
ix</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_ix"></span>falls to the lot of the human
race in which he is incorporated: humanity is pardoned, forgiven, and
saved.

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span>“Theological criticism has repudiated <span
id="ii.i-p17.1"></span>Anselmus’s theory, which bears the stamp of the
spirit of chivalry and of feudal customs. But, notwithstanding the
attacks of a superficial rationalism, there is an abiding element of
truth in it: over and above each personal and variable will there is an
absolute, immutable, and incorruptible will, called justice, honor, and
duty, in conformity with the customs of the times.”

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[iii:1](ans002.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span> <span id="ii.i-p4.1"></span>From Weber’s
*History of Philosophy.* Trans. by F. Thilly. New York Scribner’s.
Price, 2 50.

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Criticisms of Anselm's Ontological Argument for the Being of
God](ans003.md)
