[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans097)  [Next](ans099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.LXV"></span>

<span id="v.LXV-p1"></span>

### <span id="v.LXV-p1.1"></span>CHAPTER LXV.

<span id="v.LXV-p2"></span>

<span id="v.LXV-p3"></span>How real truth may be reached in the
discussion of an ineffable subject.

<span id="v.LXV-p4"></span>

<span id="v.LXV-p5"></span>BUT again, if such is the character of its
ineffability, ‑‑ nay, since it is such, ‑‑ how shall whatever
conclusion<span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="v.LXV-Page_127"></span> our discussion has reached regarding it in
terms of Father, Son, and emanating Spirit be valid? For, if it has been
explained on true grounds, how is it ineffable? Or, if it is ineffable,
how can it be such as our discussion has shown? Or, could it be
explained to a certain extent, and therefore nothing would disprove the
truth of our argument; but since it could not be comprehended at all,
for that reason it would be ineffable?

<span id="v.LXV-p6"></span>But how shall we meet the truth that has
already been established in this very discussion, namely, that the
supreme Being is so above and beyond every other nature that, whenever
any statement is made concerning it in words which are also applicable
to other natures, the sense of these words in this case is by no means
that in which they are applied to other natures.

<span id="v.LXV-p7"></span>For what sense have I conceived of, in all
these words that I have thought of, except the common and familiar
sense? If, then, the familiar sense of words is alien to that Being,
whatever I have inferred to be attributable to it is not its property.
How, then, has any truth concerning the supreme Being been discovered,
if what has been discovered is so alien to that Being? What is to be
inferred?

<span id="v.LXV-p8"></span>Or, has there in some sort been some truth
discovered regarding this incomprehensible object, and in some sort has
nothing been proved regarding it? For often we speak of things which we
do not express with precision as they are; but by another expression we
indicate what we are unwilling or unable to express with precision, as
when we speak in riddles. And often we see a thing, not precisely as it
is in itself, but through a likeness or image, as when we <span
id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span id="v.LXV-Page_128"></span>look upon a
face in a mirror. And in this way, we often express and yet do not
express, see and yet do not see, one and the same object; we express and
see it through another; we do not express it, and do not see it by
virtue of its own proper nature.

<span id="v.LXV-p9"></span>On these grounds, then, it appears that there
is nothing to disprove the truth of our discussion thus far concerning
the supreme Nature, and yet this Nature itself remains not the less
ineffable, if we believe that it has never been expressed according to
the peculiar nature of its own being, but somehow described through
another.

<span id="v.LXV-p10"></span>For whatever terms seem applicable to that
Nature do not reveal it to me in its proper character, but rather
intimate it through some likeness. For, when I think of the meanings of
these terms, I more naturally conceive in my mind of what I see in
created objects, than of what I conceive to transcend all human
understanding. For it is something much less, nay, something far
different, that their meaning suggests to my mind, than that the
conception of which my mind itself attempts to achieve through this
shadowy signification.

<span id="v.LXV-p11"></span>For, neither is the term *wisdom* sufficient
to reveal to me that Being, through which all things were created from
nothing and are preserved from nothingness; nor is the term *essence*
capable of expressing to me that Being which, through its unique
elevation, is far above all things, and through its peculiar natural
character greatly transcends all things.

<span id="v.LXV-p12"></span>In this way, then, is that Nature ineffable,
because it is incapable of description in words or by any other means;
and, at the same time, an inference regarding it, which can be reached
by the instruction of reason <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="v.LXV-Page_129"></span>or in some other way, as it were in a riddle,
is not therefore necessarily false.

<span id="v.LXV-p13"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI](ans099)
