[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ans052)  [Next](ans054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481094/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Works of St. Anselm*, tr. by Sidney Norton Deane, \[1903\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.XX"></span>

### <span id="v.XX-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER XX.

<span id="v.XX-p1"></span>

<span id="v.XX-p2"></span>It exists in every place and at every time.

<span id="v.XX-p3"></span>

<span id="v.XX-p4"></span>BUT, although it has been concluded above that
this creative Nature exists everywhere, and in all things, and through
all; and from the fact that it neither began, nor will cease to be, it
follows that it always has been, and is, and will be; yet, I perceive a
certain secret murmur of contradiction which compels me to inquire more
carefully where and when that Nature exists.

<span id="v.XX-p5"></span>The supreme Being, then, exists either
everywhere and always, or merely at some place and time, or nowhere and
never: or, as I express it, either in every place and at every time, or
finitely, in some place and at some time, or in no place and at no time.

<span id="v.XX-p6"></span>But what can be more obviously contradictory,
than that what exists most really and supremely exists nowhere and
never? It is, therefore, false that it exists<span id="page_72">p.
72</span> <span id="v.XX-Page_72"></span> nowhere and never. Again,
since there is no good, nor anything at all without it; if this Being
itself exists nowhere or never, then nowhere or never is there any good,
and nowhere and never is there anything at all. But there is no need to
state that this is false. Hence, the former proposition is also false,
that that Being exists nowhere and never.

<span id="v.XX-p7"></span>It therefore exists finitely, at some time and
place, or everywhere and always. But, if it exists finitely, at some
place or time, there and then only, where and when it exists, can
anything exist. Where and when it does not exist, moreover, there is no
existence at all, because, without it, nothing exists. Whence it will
follow, that there is some place and time where and when nothing at all
exists. But seeing that this is false ‑‑ for place and time themselves
are existing things ‑‑ the supreme Nature cannot exist finitely, at some
place or time. But, if it is said that it of itself exists finitely, at
some place and time, but that, through its power, it is wherever and
whenever anything is, this is not true. For, since it is manifest that
its power is nothing else than itself, by no means does its power exist
without it.

<span id="v.XX-p8"></span>Since, then, it does not exist finitely, at
some place or time, it must exist everywhere and always, that is, in
every place and at every time.

<span id="v.XX-p9"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.](ans054.md)
