[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joh)  [Next](rom) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Acts

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> I composed the first discourse, O
Theophilus, concerning all things which Jesus began both to do and to
teach,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> until that day in which, having by the Holy
Spirit charged the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> to whom also he presented himself living,
after he had suffered, with many proofs; being seen by them during forty
days, and speaking of the things which concern the kingdom of God;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and, being assembled with \[them\],
commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to await the promise of
the Father, which \[said he\] ye have heard of me.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For John indeed baptised with water, but
\*ye\* shall be baptised with the Holy Spirit after now not many days.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> They therefore, being come together, asked
him saying, Lord, is it at this time that thou restorest the kingdom to
Israel?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he said to them, It is not yours to
know times or seasons, which the Father has placed in his own authority;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> but ye will receive power, the Holy Spirit
having come upon you, and ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judaea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And having said these things he was taken
up, they beholding \[him\], and a cloud received him out of their sight.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And as they were gazing into heaven, as
he was going, behold, also two men stood by them in white clothing,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> who also said, Men of Galilee, why do ye
stand looking into heaven? This Jesus who has been taken up from you
into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him
going into heaven.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then they returned to Jerusalem from the
mount called \[the mount\] of Olives, which is near Jerusalem, a
sabbath-day's journey off.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And when they were come into \[the
city\], they went up to the upper chamber, where were staying both
Peter, and John, and James, and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew
and Matthew, James \[son\] of Alphaeus, and Simon the zealot, and Jude
\[the brother\] of James.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> These gave themselves all with one accord
to continual prayer, with \[several\] women, and Mary the mother of
Jesus, and with his brethren.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in those days Peter, standing up in
the midst of the brethren, said, (the crowd of names \[who were\]
together \[was\] about a hundred and twenty,)

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Brethren, it was necessary that the
scripture should have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke
before, by the mouth of David, concerning Judas, who became guide to
those who took Jesus;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> for he was numbered amongst us, and had
received a part in this service.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (This \[man\] then indeed got a field
with \[the\] reward of iniquity, and, having fallen down headlong, burst
in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And it was known to all the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, so that that field was called in their own dialect
Aceldama; that is, field of blood.)

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For it is written in \[the\] book of
Psalms, Let his homestead become desolate, and let there be no dweller
in it; and, Let another take his overseership.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> It is necessary therefore, that of the
men who have assembled with us all \[the\] time in which the Lord Jesus
came in and went out among us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> beginning from the baptism of John until
the day in which he was taken up from us, one of these should be a
witness with us of his resurrection.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they appointed two, Joseph, who was
called Barsabas, who had been surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord,
knower of the hearts of all, shew which one of these two thou hast
chosen,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> to receive the lot of this service and
apostleship, from which Judas transgressing fell to go to his own place.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And they gave lots on them, and the lot
fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And when the day of Pentecost was now
accomplishing, they were all together in one place.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And there came suddenly a sound out of
heaven as of a violent impetuous blowing, and filled all the house where
they were sitting.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And there appeared to them parted tongues,
as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And they were all filled with \[the\] Holy
Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave to them
to speak forth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews,
pious men, from every nation of those under heaven.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But the rumour of this having spread, the
multitude came together and were confounded, because each one heard them
speaking in his own dialect.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And all were amazed and wondered, saying,
Behold, are not all these who are speaking Galilaeans?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and how do \*we\* hear \[them\] each in our
own dialect in which we have been born,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and
those who inhabit Mesopotamia, and Judaea, and Cappadocia, Pontus and
Asia,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> both Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt, and
the parts of Libya which adjoin Cyrene, and the Romans sojourning
\[here\], both Jews and proselytes,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Cretans and Arabians, we hear them
speaking in our own tongues the great things of God?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they were all amazed and in
perplexity, saying one to another, What would this mean?

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But others mocking said, They are full of
new wine.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But Peter, standing up with the eleven,
lifted up his voice and spoke forth to them, Men of Judaea, and all ye
inhabitants of Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give heed to my
words:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> for these are not full of wine, as \*ye\*
suppose, for it is the third hour of the day;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> but this is that which was spoken through
the prophet Joel,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And it shall be in the last days, saith
God, \[that\] I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons
and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions,
and your elders shall dream with dreams;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> yea, even upon my bondmen and upon my
bondwomen in those days will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall
prophesy.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will give wonders in the heaven
above and signs on the earth below, blood, and fire, and vapour of
smoke:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> the sun shall be changed to darkness and
the moon to blood, before the great and gloriously appearing day of
\[the\] Lord come.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall be that whosoever shall call
upon the name of \[the\] Lord shall be saved.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus
the Nazaraean, a man borne witness to by God to you by works of power
and wonders and signs, which God wrought by him in your midst, as
yourselves know

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> -- him, given up by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye, by \[the\] hand of lawless
\[men\], have crucified and slain.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Whom God has raised up, having loosed the
pains of death, inasmuch as it was not possible that he should be held
by its power;

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> for David says as to him, I foresaw the
Lord continually before me, because he is at my right hand that I may
not be moved.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Therefore has my heart rejoiced and my
tongue exulted; yea more, my flesh also shall dwell in hope,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> for thou wilt not leave my soul in hades,
nor wilt thou give thy gracious one to see corruption.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou hast made known to me \[the\] paths
of life, thou wilt fill me with joy with thy countenance.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Brethren, let it be allowed to speak with
freedom to you concerning the patriarch David, that he has both died and
been buried, and his monument is amongst us unto this day.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Being therefore a prophet, and knowing
that God had sworn to him with an oath, of the fruit of his loins to set
upon his throne;

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> he, seeing \[it\] before, spoke
concerning the resurrection of the Christ, that neither has he been left
in hades nor his flesh seen corruption.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This Jesus has God raised up, whereof all
\*we\* are witnesses.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Having therefore been exalted by the
right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the
Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which \*ye\* behold and hear.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> For David has not ascended into the
heavens, but he says himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit at my
right hand

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> until I have put thine enemies \[to be\]
the footstool of thy feet.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Let the whole house of Israel therefore
know assuredly that God has made him, this Jesus whom \*ye\* have
crucified, both Lord and Christ.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> And having heard \[it\] they were pricked
in heart, and said to Peter and the other apostles, What shall we do,
brethren?

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And Peter said to them, Repent, and be
baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of
sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> For to you is the promise and to your
children, and to all who \[are\] afar off, as many as \[the\] Lord our
God may call.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And with many other words he testified
and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from this perverse generation.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> Those then who had accepted his word were
baptised; and there were added in that day about three thousand souls.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And they persevered in the teaching and
fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And fear was upon every soul, and many
wonders and signs took place through the apostles' means.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And all that believed were together, and
had all things common,

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> and sold their possessions and substance,
and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And every day, being constantly in the
temple with one accord, and breaking bread in \[the\] house, they
received their food with gladness and simplicity of heart,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> praising God, and having favour with all
the people; and the Lord added \[to the assembly\] daily those that were
to be saved.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Peter and John went up together into
the temple at the hour of prayer, \[which is\] the ninth \[hour\];

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and a certain man who was lame from his
mother's womb was being carried, whom they placed every day at the gate
of the temple called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who were going into
the temple;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> who, seeing Peter and John about to enter
into the temple, asked to receive alms.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Peter, looking stedfastly upon him with
John, said, Look on us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he gave heed to them, expecting to
receive something from them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Peter said, Silver and gold I have not;
but what I have, this give I to thee: In the name of Jesus Christ the
Nazaraean rise up and walk.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And having taken hold of him \[by\] the
right hand he raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankle bones
were made strong.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And leaping up he stood and walked, and
entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising
God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And all the people saw him walking and
praising God;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and they recognised him, that it was
\*he\* who sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple; and they
were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And as he held Peter and John, all the
people ran together to them in the portico which is called Solomon's,
greatly wondering.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And Peter, seeing it, answered the
people, Men of Israel, why are ye astonished at this? or why do ye gaze
on us as if we had by our own power or piety made him to walk?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob,
the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, whom \*ye\*
delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when \*he\* had
judged that he should be let go.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But \*ye\* denied the holy and righteous
one, and asked that a man \[that was\] a murderer should be granted to
you;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> but the originator of life ye slew, whom
God raised from among \[the\] dead, whereof \*we\* are witnesses.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And, by faith in his name, his name has
made this \[man\] strong whom ye behold and know; and the faith which is
by him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And now, brethren, I know that ye did it
in ignorance, as also your rulers;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> but God has thus fulfilled what he had
announced beforehand by the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ
should suffer.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Repent therefore and be converted, for
the blotting out of your sins, so that times of refreshing may come from
\[the\] presence of the Lord,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and he may send Jesus Christ, who was
foreordained for you,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> whom heaven indeed must receive till
\[the\] times of \[the\] restoring of all things, of which God has
spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets since time began.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Moses indeed said, A prophet shall
\[the\] Lord your God raise up to you out of your brethren like me: him
shall ye hear in everything whatsoever he shall say to you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And it shall be that whatsoever soul
shall not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And indeed all the prophets from Samuel
and those in succession after \[him\], as many as have spoken, have
announced also these days.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> \*Ye\* are the sons of the prophets and
of the covenant which God appointed to our fathers, saying to Abraham,
And in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> To you first God, having raised up his
servant, has sent him, blessing you in turning each one \[of you\] from
your wickedness.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And as they were speaking to the people,
the priests and captain of the temple and the Sadducees came upon them,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> being distressed on account of their
teaching the people and preaching by Jesus the resurrection from among
\[the\] dead;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and they laid hands on them, and put them
in ward till the morrow; for it was already evening.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But many of those who had heard the word
believed; and the number of the men had become \[about\] five thousand.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And it came to pass on the morrow that
their rulers and elders and scribes were gathered together at Jerusalem,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas,
and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of \[the\] high priestly
family;

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> and having placed them in the midst they
inquired, In what power or in what name have \*ye\* done this?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then Peter, filled with \[the\] Holy
Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people and elders \[of Israel\],

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> if \*we\* this day are called upon to
answer as to the good deed \[done\] to the infirm man, how \*he\* has
been healed,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> be it known to you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean, whom
\*ye\* have crucified, whom God has raised from among \[the\] dead, by
\*him\* this \[man\] stands here before you sound \[in body\].

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> \*He\* is the stone which has been set at
nought by you the builders, which is become the corner stone.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And salvation is in none other, for
neither is there another name under heaven which is given among men by
which we must be saved.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But seeing the boldness of Peter and
John, and perceiving that they were unlettered and uninstructed men,
they wondered; and they recognised them that they were with Jesus.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And beholding the man who had been healed
standing with them, they had nothing to reply;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> but having commanded them to go out of
the council they conferred with one another,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> saying, What shall we do to these men?
for that indeed an evident sign has come to pass through their means is
manifest to all that inhabit Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But that it be not further spread among
the people, let us threaten them severely no longer to speak to any man
in this name.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And having called them, they charged
\[them\] not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But Peter and John answering said to
them, If it be righteous before God to listen to you rather than to God,
judge ye;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> for as for us \*we\* cannot refrain from
speaking of the things which we have seen and heard.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> But they, having further threatened them,
let them go, finding no way how they might punish them, on account of
the people, because all glorified God for what had taken place;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> for the man on whom this sign of healing
had taken place was above forty years old.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And having been let go, they came to
their own \[company\], and reported all that the chief priests and
elders had said to them.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And they, having heard \[it\], lifted up
\[their\] voice with one accord to God, and said, Lord, \*thou\* art the
God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all that is in
them;

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who hast said by the mouth of thy servant
David, Why have \[the\] nations raged haughtily and \[the\] peoples
meditated vain things?

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> The kings of the earth were there, and
the rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against his
Christ.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For in truth against thy holy servant
Jesus, whom thou hadst anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with
\[the\] nations, and peoples of Israel, have been gathered together in
this city

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> to do whatever thy hand and thy counsel
had determined before should come to pass.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And now, Lord, look upon their
threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy
word,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> in that thou stretchest out thy hand to
heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy
servant Jesus.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And when they had prayed, the place in
which they were assembled shook, and they were all filled with the Holy
Spirit, and spoke the word of God with boldness.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And the heart and soul of the multitude
of those that had believed were one, and not one said that anything of
what he possessed was his own, but all things were common to them;

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> and with great power did the apostles
give witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was
upon them all.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> For neither was there any one in want
among them; for as many as were owners of lands or houses, selling them,
brought the price of what was sold

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> and laid it at the feet of the apostles;
and distribution was made to each according as any one might have need.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And Joseph, who had been surnamed
Barnabas by the apostles (which is, being interpreted, Son of
consolation), a Levite, Cyprian by birth,

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> being possessed of land, having sold
\[it\], brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But a certain man, Ananias by name, with
Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and put aside for himself part of the
price, \[his\] wife also being privy to it; and having brought a certain
part, laid it at the feet of the apostles.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan
filled thy heart that thou shouldest lie to the Holy Spirit, and put
aside for thyself a part of the price of the estate?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> While it remained did it not remain to
\*thee\*? and sold, was \[it not\] in thine own power? Why is it that
thou hast purposed this thing in thine heart? Thou hast not lied to men,
but to God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Ananias, hearing these words, fell down
and expired. And great fear came upon all who heard \[it\].

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the young men, rising up, swathed him
up for burial, and having carried him out, buried him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it came to pass about three hours
afterwards, that his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Peter answered her, Tell me if ye gave
the estate for so much? And she said, Yes, for so much.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Peter said to her, Why \[is it\] that
ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of \[the\] Lord? Lo, the
feet of those that have buried thy husband \[are\] at the door, and they
shall carry thee out.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And she fell down immediately at his feet
and expired. And when the young men came in they found her dead; and,
having carried her out, they buried her by her husband.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And great fear came upon all the
assembly, and upon all who heard these things.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And by the hands of the apostles were
many signs and wonders done among the people; (and they were all with
one accord in Solomon's porch,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> but of the rest durst no man join them,
but the people magnified them;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and believers were more than ever added
to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women;)

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> so that they brought out the sick into
the streets and put \[them\] on beds and couches, that at least the
shadow of Peter, when he came, might overshadow some one of them.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And the multitude also of the cities
round about came together to Jerusalem, bringing sick persons and
persons beset by unclean spirits, who were all healed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the high priest rising up, and all
they that were with him, which is the sect of the Sadducees, were filled
with wrath,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and laid hands on the apostles and put
them in the public prison.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But an angel of \[the\] Lord during the
night opened the doors of the prison, and leading them out, said,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Go ye and stand and speak in the temple
to the people all the words of this life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And when they heard it, they entered very
early into the temple and taught. And when the high priest was come, and
they that were with him, they called together the council and all the
elderhood of the sons of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them
brought.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And when the officers were come, they did
not find them in the prison; and returned and reported

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> saying, We found the prison shut with all
security, and the keepers standing at the doors; but when we had opened
\[them\], within we found no one.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And when they heard these words, both the
priest and the captain of the temple and the chief priests were in
perplexity as to them, what this would come to.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And some one coming reported to them, Lo,
the men whom ye put in the prison are in the temple, standing and
teaching the people.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Then the captain, having gone with the
officers, brought them, not with violence, for they feared the people,
lest they should be stoned.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And they bring them and set them in the
council. And the high priest asked them,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> saying, We strictly enjoined you not to
teach in this name: and lo, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine,
and purpose to bring upon us the blood of this man.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> But Peter answering, and the apostles,
said, God must be obeyed rather than men.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> The God of our fathers has raised up
Jesus, whom \*ye\* have slain, having hanged on a cross.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Him has God exalted by his right hand as
leader and saviour, to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And \*we\* are \[his\] witnesses of these
things, and the Holy Spirit also, which God has given to those that obey
him.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But they, when they heard \[these
things\], were cut to the heart, and took counsel to kill them.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But a certain \[man\], a Pharisee, named
Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, held in honour of all the people, rose
up in the council, and commanded to put the men out for a short while,

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> and said to them, Men of Israel, take
heed to yourselves as regards these men what ye are going to do;

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> for before these days Theudas rose up,
alleging himself to be somebody, to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, were joined; who was slain, and all, as many as obeyed him,
were dispersed and came to nothing.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> After him rose Judas the Galilean in the
days of the census, and drew away \[a number of\] people after him; and
\*he\* perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And now I say to you, Withdraw from these
men and let them alone, for if this counsel or this work have its origin
from men, it will be destroyed;

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> but if it be from God, ye will not be
able to put them down, lest ye be found also fighters against God.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And they listened to his advice; and
having called the apostles, they beat them, and enjoined them not to
speak in the name of Jesus, and dismissed them.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> They therefore went their way from
\[the\] presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy
to be dishonoured for the name.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And every day, in the temple and in the
houses, they ceased not teaching and announcing the glad tidings that
Jesus \[was\] the Christ.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> But in those days, the disciples
multiplying in number, there arose a murmuring of the Hellenists against
the Hebrews because their widows were overlooked in the daily
ministration.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the twelve, having called the multitude
of the disciples to \[them\], said, It is not right that we, leaving the
word of God, should serve tables.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Look out therefore, brethren, from among
yourselves seven men, well reported of, full of \[the\] \[Holy\] Spirit
and wisdom, whom we will establish over this business:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> but \*we\* will give ourselves up to prayer
and the ministry of the word.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the saying pleased the whole multitude:
and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and \[the\] Holy Spirit, and
Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and
Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> whom they set before the apostles; and,
having prayed, they laid their hands on them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the word of God increased; and the
number of the disciples in Jerusalem was very greatly multiplied, and a
great crowd of the priests obeyed the faith.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And Stephen, full of grace and power,
wrought wonders and great signs among the people.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And there arose up certain of those of the
synagogue called of freedmen, and of Cyrenians, and of Alexandrians, and
of those of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with Stephen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they were not able to resist the
wisdom and the Spirit with which he spoke.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then they suborned men, saying, We have
heard him speaking blasphemous words against Moses and God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they roused the people, and the
elders, and the scribes. And coming upon \[him\] they seized him and
brought \[him\] to the council.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And they set false witnesses, saying,
This man does not cease speaking words against the holy place and the
law;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> for we have heard him saying, This Jesus
the Nazaraean shall destroy this place, and change the customs which
Moses taught us.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And all who sat in the council, looking
fixedly on him, saw his face as \[the\] face of an angel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the high priest said, Are these things
then so?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And he said, Brethren and fathers, hearken.
The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and said to him, Go out of thy land and out
of thy kindred, and come into the land which I will shew thee.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then going out of the land of the Chaldeans
he dwelt in Charran, and thence, after his father died, he removed him
into this land in which \*ye\* now dwell.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And he did not give him an inheritance in
it, not even what his foot could stand on; and promised to give it to
him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when he had no child.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And God spoke thus: His seed shall be a
sojourner in a strange land, and they shall enslave them and evil
entreat \[them\] four hundred years;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and the nation to which they shall be in
bondage will \*I\* judge, said God; and after these things they shall
come forth and serve me in this place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he gave to him \[the\] covenant of
circumcision; and thus he begat Isaac and circumcised him the eighth
day; and Isaac Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the patriarchs, envying Joseph, sold
him away into Egypt. And God was with him,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and delivered him out of all his
tribulations, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and he appointed him chief over Egypt and all his house.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But a famine came upon all the land of
Egypt and Canaan, and great distress, and our fathers found no food.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But Jacob, having heard of there being
corn in Egypt, sent out our fathers first;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and the second time Joseph was made known
to his brethren, and the family of Joseph became known to Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And Joseph sent and called down to him
his father Jacob and all \[his\] kindred, seventy-five souls.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And Jacob went down into Egypt and died,
he and our fathers,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and were carried over to Sychem and
placed in the sepulchre which Abraham bought for a sum of money of the
sons of Emmor the \[father\] of Sychem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But as the time of promise drew near
which God had promised to Abraham, the people increased and multiplied
in Egypt,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> until another king over Egypt arose who
did not know Joseph.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> \*He\* dealt subtilly with our race, and
evil entreated the fathers, casting out their infants that they might
not live.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> In which time Moses was born, and was
exceedingly lovely, who was nourished three months in the house of his
father.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And when he was cast out, the daughter of
Pharaoh took him up, and brought him up for herself \[to be\] for a son.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Moses was instructed in all \[the\]
wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was mighty in his words and deeds.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And when a period of forty years was
fulfilled to him, it came into his heart to look upon his brethren, the
sons of Israel;

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> and seeing a certain one wronged, he
defended \[him\], and avenged him that was being oppressed, smiting the
Egyptian.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For he thought that his brethren would
understand that God by his hand was giving them deliverance. But they
understood not.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And on the morrow he shewed himself to
them as they were contending, and compelled them to peace, saying,
\*Ye\* are brethren, why do ye wrong one another?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But he that was wronging his neighbour
thrust him away, saying, Who established thee ruler and judge over us?

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Dost \*thou\* wish to kill me as thou
killedst the Egyptian yesterday?

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And Moses fled at this saying, and became
a sojourner in the land of Madiam, where he begat two sons.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And when forty years were fulfilled, an
angel appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sinai, in a flame of
fire of a bush.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And Moses seeing it wondered at the
vision; and as he went up to consider it, there was a voice of \[the\]
Lord,

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> \*I\* am the God of thy fathers, the God
of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob. And Moses trembled, and durst
not consider \[it\].

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the Lord said to him, Loose the
sandal of thy feet, for the place on which thou standest is holy ground.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> I have surely seen the ill treatment of
my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groan, and have come
down to take them out of it; and now, come, I will send thee to Egypt.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This Moses, whom they refused, saying,
Who made thee ruler and judge? him did God send \[to be\] a ruler and
deliverer with the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> \*He\* led them out, having wrought
wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the
wilderness forty years.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is the Moses who said to the sons of
Israel, A prophet shall God raise up to you out of your brethren like me
\[him shall ye hear\].

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> This is he who was in the assembly in the
wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him in the mount Sinai, and with
our fathers; who received living oracles to give to us;

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> to whom our fathers would not be subject,
but thrust \[him\] from them, and in their hearts turned back to Egypt,

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> saying to Aaron, Make us gods who shall
go before us; for this Moses, who brought us out of the land of Egypt,
we know not what has happened to him.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And they made a calf in those days, and
offered sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> But God turned and delivered them up to
serve the host of heaven; as it is written in \[the\] book of the
prophets, Have ye offered me victims and sacrifices forty years in the
wilderness, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> Yea, ye took up the tent of Moloch, and
the star of \[your\] god Remphan, the forms which ye made to do homage
to them; and I will transport you beyond Babylon.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Our fathers had the tent of the testimony
in the wilderness, as he that spoke to Moses commanded to make it
according to the model which he had seen;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> which also our fathers, receiving from
their predecessors, brought in with Joshua when they entered into
possession of \[the lands of\] the nations, whom God drove out from
\[the\] face of our fathers, until the days of David;

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> who found favour before God, and asked to
find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob;

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> but Solomon built him a house.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> But the Most High dwells not in
\[places\] made with hands; as says the prophet,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> The heaven \[is\] my throne and the earth
the footstool of my feet: what house will ye build me? saith \[the\]
Lord, or where \[is the\] place of my rest?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> has not my hand made all these things?

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> O stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart
and ears, \*ye\* do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers,
\*ye\* also.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> Which of the prophets have not your
fathers persecuted? and they have slain those who announced beforehand
concerning the coming of the Just One, of whom \*ye\* have now become
deliverers up and murderers!

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> who have received the law as ordained by
\[the\] ministry of angels, and have not kept \[it\].

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> And hearing these things they were cut to
the heart, and gnashed their teeth against him.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> But being full of \[the\] Holy Spirit,
having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw \[the\] glory of God, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God,

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> and said, Lo, I behold the heavens
opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> And they cried out with a loud voice, and
held their ears, and rushed upon him with one accord;

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> and having cast \[him\] out of the city,
they stoned \[him\]. And the witnesses laid aside their clothes at the
feet of a young man called Saul.

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> And they stoned Stephen, praying, and
saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> And kneeling down, he cried with a loud
voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And having said this, he
fell asleep.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Saul was consenting to his being
killed. And on that day there arose a great persecution against the
assembly which was in Jerusalem, and all were scattered into the
countries of Judaea and Samaria except the apostles.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And pious men buried Stephen and made great
lamentation over him.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering
into the houses one after another, and dragging off both men and women
delivered them up to prison.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Those then that had been scattered went
through \[the countries\] announcing the glad tidings of the word.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Philip, going down to a city of
Samaria, preached the Christ to them;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and the crowds with one accord gave heed to
the things spoken by Philip, when they heard \[him\] and saw the signs
which he wrought.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For from many who had unclean spirits they
went out, crying with a loud voice; and many that were paralysed and
lame were healed.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And there was great joy in that city.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But a certain man, by name Simon, had been
before in the city, using magic arts, and astonishing the nation of
Samaria, saying that himself was some great one.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> To whom they had all given heed, from
small to great, saying, This is the power of God which is called great.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they gave heed to him, because that
for a long time he had astonished them by his magic arts.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when they believed Philip announcing
the glad tidings concerning the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were baptised, both men and women.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Simon also himself believed; and,
having been baptised, continued constantly with Philip; and, beholding
the signs and great works of power which took place, was astonished.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And the apostles who were in Jerusalem,
having heard that Samaria had received the word of God, sent to them
Peter and John;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who, having come down, prayed for them
that they might receive \[the\] Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> for he was not yet fallen upon any of
them, only they were baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then they laid their hands upon them, and
they received \[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But Simon, having seen that by the laying
on of the hands of the apostles the \[Holy\] Spirit was given, offered
them money,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> saying, Give to me also this power, in
order that on whomsoever I may lay hands he may receive \[the\] Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Peter said to him, Thy money go with
thee to destruction, because thou hast thought that the gift of God can
be obtained by money.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Thou hast neither part nor lot in this
matter, for thy heart is not upright before God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Repent therefore of this thy wickedness,
and supplicate the Lord, if indeed the thought of thy heart may be
forgiven thee;

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> for I see thee to be in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of unrighteousness.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Simon answering said, Supplicate
\*ye\* for me to the Lord, so that nothing may come upon me of the
things of which ye have spoken.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They therefore, having testified and
spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and announced the
glad tidings to many villages of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But \[the\] angel of \[the\] Lord spoke
to Philip, saying, Rise up and go southward on the way which goes down
from Jerusalem to Gaza: the same is desert.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he rose up and went. And lo, an
Ethiopian, a eunuch, a man in power under Candace queen of the
Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to worship at
Jerusalem,

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> was returning and sitting in his chariot:
and he was reading the prophet Esaias.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And the Spirit said to Philip, Approach
and join this chariot.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Philip, running up, heard him reading
the prophet Esaias, and said, Dost thou then know what thou art reading
of?

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he said, How should I then be able
unless some one guide me? And he begged Philip to come up and sit with
him.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And the passage of the scripture which he
read was this: He was led as a sheep to slaughter, and as a lamb is dumb
in presence of him that shears him, thus he opens not his mouth.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> In his humiliation his judgment has been
taken away, and who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken
from the earth.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And the eunuch answering Philip said, I
pray thee, concerning whom does the prophet say this? of himself or of
some other?

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> And Philip, opening his mouth and
beginning from that scripture, announced the glad tidings of Jesus to
him.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And as they went along the way, they came
upon a certain water, and the eunuch says, Behold water; what hinders my
being baptised?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> 

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> And he commanded the chariot to stop. And
they went down both to the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he
baptised him.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> But when they came up out of the water
\[the\] Spirit of \[the\] Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw
him no longer, for he went on his way rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> And Philip was found at Azotus, and
passing through he announced the glad tidings to all the cities till he
came to Caesarea.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> But Saul, still breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, came to the high priest

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and asked of him letters to Damascus, to
the synagogues, so that if he found any who were of the way, both men
and women, he might bring \[them\] bound to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> But as he was journeying, it came to pass
that he drew near to Damascus; and suddenly there shone round about him
a light out of heaven,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> and falling on the earth he heard a voice
saying to him, Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And he
\[said\], \*I\* am Jesus, whom \*thou\* persecutest.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But rise up and enter into the city, and it
shall be told thee what thou must do.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> But the men who were travelling with him
stood speechless, hearing the voice but beholding no one.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Saul rose up from the earth, and his
eyes being opened he saw no one. But leading \[him\] by the hand they
brought him into Damascus.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And he was three days without seeing, and
neither ate nor drank.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And there was a certain disciple in
Damascus by name Ananias. And the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias.
And he said, Behold, \[here am\] I, Lord.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Lord \[said\] to him, Rise up and
go into the street which is called Straight, and seek in the house of
Judas one by name Saul, \[he is\] of Tarsus: for, behold, he is praying,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> and has seen \[in a vision\] a man by
name Ananias coming in and putting his hand on him, so that he should
see.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard
from many concerning this man how much evil he has done to thy saints at
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and here he has authority from the chief
priests to bind all who call upon thy name.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the Lord said to him, Go, for this
\[man\] is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name before both nations
and kings and \[the\] sons of Israel:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> for \*I\* will shew to him how much he
must suffer for my name.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And Ananias went and entered into the
house; and laying his hands upon him he said, Saul, brother, the Lord
has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee in the way in which thou
camest, that thou mightest see, and be filled with \[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And straightway there fell from his eyes
as it were scales, and he saw, and rising up was baptised;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and, having received food, got strength.
And he was with the disciples who \[were\] in Damascus certain days.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And straightway in the synagogues he
preached Jesus that \*he\* is the Son of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And all who heard were astonished and
said, Is not this \*he\* who destroyed in Jerusalem those who called on
this name, and here was come for this purpose, that he might bring them
bound to the chief priests?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Saul increased the more in power, and
confounded the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, proving that this is the
Christ.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Now when many days were fulfilled, the
Jews consulted together to kill him.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But their plot became known to Saul. And
they watched also the gates both day and night, that they might kill
him;

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> but the disciples took him by night and
let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And having arrived at Jerusalem he
essayed to join himself to the disciples, and all were afraid of him,
not believing that he was a disciple.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Barnabas took him and brought him to
the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way,
and that he had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly
in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he was with them coming in and going
out at Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> and speaking boldly in the name of the
Lord. And he spoke and discussed with the Hellenists; but they sought to
kill him.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And the brethren knowing it, brought him
down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> The assemblies then throughout the whole
of Judaea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified and walking
in the fear of the Lord, and were increased through the comfort of the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Now it came to pass that Peter, passing
through all \[quarters\], descended also to the saints who inhabited
Lydda.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he found there a certain man, Aeneas
by name, who had been lying for eight years upon a couch, who was
paralysed.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus, the
Christ, heals thee: rise up, and make thy couch for thyself. And
straightway he rose up.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And all who inhabited Lydda and the Saron
saw him, who turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And in Joppa there was a certain female
disciple, by name Tabitha, which being interpreted means Dorcas. She was
full of good works and alms-deeds which she did.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it came to pass in those days that
she grew sick and died; and, having washed her, they put her in \[the\]
upper room.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> But Lydda being near to Joppa, the
disciples having heard that Peter was there, sent two men to him,
beseeching him, Thou must not delay coming to us.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Peter rising up went with them, whom,
when arrived, they brought up into the upper chamber; and all the widows
stood by him weeping and shewing him the body-coats and garments which
Dorcas had made while she was with them.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> But Peter, putting them all out, and
kneeling down, prayed. And, turning to the body, he said, Tabitha,
arise. And she opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And having given her \[his\] hand, he
raised her up, and having called the saints and the widows, presented
her living.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And it became known throughout the whole
of Joppa, and many believed on the Lord.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And it came to pass that he remained many
days in Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> But a certain man in Caesarea, -- by name
Cornelius, a centurion of the band called Italic,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> pious, and fearing God with all his
house, \[both\] giving much alms to the people, and supplicating God
continually,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> -- saw plainly in a vision, about the
ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming unto him, and saying to
him, Cornelius.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> But he, having fixed his eyes upon him,
and become full of fear, said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy
prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And now send men to Joppa and fetch
Simon, who is surnamed Peter.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> He lodges with a certain Simon, a tanner,
whose house is by the sea.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when the angel who was speaking to
him had departed, having called two of his household and a pious soldier
of those who were constantly with him,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and related all things to them, he sent
them to Joppa.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And on the morrow, as these were
journeying and drawing near to the city, Peter went up on the house to
pray, about the sixth hour.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he became hungry and desired to
eat. But as they were making ready an ecstasy came upon him:

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> and he beholds the heaven opened, and a
certain vessel descending, as a great sheet, \[bound\] by \[the\] four
corners \[and\] let down to the earth;

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> in which were all the quadrupeds and
creeping things of the earth, and the fowls of the heaven.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And there was a voice to him, Rise,
Peter, slay and eat.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And Peter said, In no wise, Lord; for I
have never eaten anything common or unclean.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And \[there was\] a voice again the
second time to him, What God has cleansed, do not \*thou\* make common.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And this took place thrice, and the
vessel was straightway taken up into heaven.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And as Peter doubted in himself what
the vision which he had seen might mean, behold also the men who were
sent by Cornelius, having sought out the house of Simon, stood at the
gate,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and having called \[some one\], they
inquired if Simon who was surnamed Peter was lodged there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But as Peter continued pondering over
the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold, three men seek thee;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> but rise up, go down, and go with them,
nothing doubting, because \*I\* have sent them.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Peter going down to the men said,
Behold, \*I\* am he whom ye seek: what is the cause for which ye come?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And they said, Cornelius, a centurion,
a righteous man, and fearing God, and borne witness to by the whole
nation of the Jews, has been divinely instructed by a holy angel to send
for thee to his house, and hear words from thee.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Having therefore invited them in, he
lodged them. And on the morrow, rising up he went away with them, and
certain of the brethren from Joppa went with him.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And on the morrow they came to
Caesarea. But Cornelius was looking for them, having called together his
kinsmen and \[his\] intimate friends.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And when Peter was now coming in,
Cornelius met him, and falling down did \[him\] homage.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But Peter made him rise, saying, Rise
up: \*I\* myself also am a man.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And he went in, talking with him, and
found many gathered together.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And he said to them, \*Ye\* know how it
is unlawful for a Jew to be joined or come to one of a strange race, and
to \*me\* God has shewn to call no man common or unclean.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Wherefore also, having been sent for, I
came without saying anything against it. I inquire therefore for what
reason ye have sent for me.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Cornelius said, Four days ago I had
been \[fasting\] unto this hour, and the ninth \[I was\] praying in my
house, and lo, a man stood before me in bright clothing,

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> and said, Cornelius, thy prayer has
been heard, and thy alms have come in remembrance before God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Send therefore to Joppa and fetch
Simon, who is surnamed Peter; he lodges in the house of Simon, a tanner,
by the sea \[who when he is come will speak to thee\].

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Immediately therefore I sent to thee,
and \*thou\* hast well done in coming. Now therefore \*we\* are all
present before God to hear all things that are commanded thee of God.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And Peter opening his mouth said, Of a
truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons,

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> but in every nation he that fears him
and works righteousness is acceptable to him.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> The word which he sent to the sons of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, (\*he\* is Lord of all things,)

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> \*ye\* know; the testimony which has
spread through the whole of Judaea, beginning from Galilee after the
baptism which John preached --

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> Jesus who \[was\] of Nazareth: how God
anointed him with \[the\] Holy Spirit and with power; who went through
\[all quarters\] doing good, and healing all that were under the power
of the devil, because God was with him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> \*We\* also \[are\] witnesses of all
things which he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem;
whom they also slew, having hanged him on a cross.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> This \[man\] God raised up the third
day and gave him to be openly seen,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> not of all the people, but of witnesses
who were chosen before of God, \*us\* who have eaten and drunk with him
after he arose from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And he commanded us to preach to the
people, and to testify that \*he\* it is who was determinately appointed
of God \[to be\] judge of living and dead.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> To him all the prophets bear witness
that every one that believes on him will receive through his name
remission of sins.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> While Peter was yet speaking these
words the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> And the faithful of the circumcision
were astonished, as many as came with Peter, that upon the nations also
the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out:

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> for they heard them speaking with
tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> Can any one forbid water that these
should not be baptised, who have received the Holy Spirit as we also
\[did\]?

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And he commanded them to be baptised in
the name of the Lord. Then they begged him to stay some days.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the apostles and the brethren who
were in Judaea heard that the nations also had received the word of God;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and when Peter went up to Jerusalem, they
of the circumcision contended with him,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> saying, Thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised and hast eaten with them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But Peter began and set forth \[the
matter\] to them in order, saying,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> I was in the city of Joppa praying, and
in an ecstasy I saw a vision, a certain vessel descending like a great
sheet, let down by four corners out of heaven, and it came even to me:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> on which having fixed mine eyes, I
considered, and saw the quadrupeds of the earth, and the wild beasts,
and the creeping things, and the fowls of the heaven.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And I heard also a voice saying to me,
Rise up, Peter, slay and eat.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And I said, In no wise, Lord, for common
or unclean has never entered into my mouth.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And a voice answered the second time out
of heaven, What God has cleansed, do not \*thou\* make common.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And this took place thrice, and again
all was drawn up into heaven;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> and lo, immediately three men were at
the house in which I was, sent to me from Caesarea.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the Spirit said to me to go with
them, nothing doubting. And there went with me these six brethren also,
and we entered into the house of the man,

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and he related to us how he had seen
the angel in his house, standing and saying \[to him\], Send \[men\] to
Joppa and fetch Simon, who is surnamed Peter,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> who shall speak words to thee whereby
\*thou\* shalt be saved, thou and all thy house.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And as I began to speak, the Holy
Spirit fell upon them even as upon us also at the beginning.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And I remembered the word of the Lord,
how he said, John baptised with water, but \*ye\* shall be baptised with
\[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> If then God has given them the same
gift as also to us when we had believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who
indeed was \*I\* to be able to forbid God?

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And when they heard these things they
held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then indeed God has to the
nations also granted repentance to life.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> They then who had been scattered abroad
through the tribulation that took place on the occasion of Stephen,
passed through \[the country\] to Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch,
speaking the word to no one but to Jews alone.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But there were certain of them,
Cyprians and Cyrenians, who entering into Antioch spoke to the Greeks
also, announcing the glad tidings of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And \[the\] Lord's hand was with them,
and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And the report concerning them reached
the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem, and they sent out
Barnabas to go through as far as Antioch:

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> who, having arrived and seeing the
grace of God, rejoiced, and exhorted all with purpose of heart to abide
with the Lord;

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> for he was a good man and full of
\[the\] Holy Spirit and of faith; and a large crowd \[of people\] were
added to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And he went away to Tarsus to seek out
Saul.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And having found \[him\], he brought
him to Antioch. And so it was with them that for a whole year they were
gathered together in the assembly and taught a large crowd: and the
disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Now in these days prophets went down
from Jerusalem to Antioch;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and one from among them, by name
Agabus, rose up and signified by the Spirit that there was going to be a
great famine over all the inhabited earth, which also came to pass under
Claudius.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And they determined, according as any
one of the disciples was well off, each of them to send to the brethren
who dwelt in Judaea, to minister \[to them\];

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> which also they did, sending it to the
elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> At that time Herod the king laid his
hands on some of those of the assembly to do them hurt,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> and slew James, the brother of John, with
the sword.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And seeing that it was pleasing to the
Jews, he went on to take Peter also: (and they were the days of
unleavened bread:)

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> whom having seized he put in prison,
having delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep, purposing
after the passover to bring him out to the people.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Peter therefore was kept in the prison;
but unceasing prayer was made by the assembly to God concerning him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And when Herod was going to bring him
forth, that night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with
two chains, and guards before the door kept the prison.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And lo, an angel of \[the\] Lord came
there, and a light shone in the prison: and having smitten the side of
Peter, he roused him up, saying, Rise up quickly. And his chains fell
off his hands.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the angel said to him, Gird thyself,
and bind on thy sandals. And he did so. And he says to him, Cast thine
upper garment about thee and follow me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And going forth he followed \[him\] and
did not know that what was happening by means of the angel was real, but
supposed he saw a vision.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And having passed through a first and
second guard, they came to the iron gate which leads into the city,
which opened to them of itself; and going forth they went down one
street, and immediately the angel left him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And Peter, being come to himself, said,
Now I know certainly that \[the\] Lord has sent forth his angel and has
taken me out of the hand of Herod and all the expectation of the people
of the Jews.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And having become clearly conscious
\[in himself\], he came to the house of Mary, the mother of John who was
surnamed Mark, where were many gathered together and praying.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And when he had knocked at the door of
the entry, a maid came to listen, by name Rhoda;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> and having recognised the voice of
Peter, through joy did not open the entry, but running in, reported that
Peter was standing before the entry.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they said to her, Thou art mad. But
she maintained that it was so. And they said, It is his angel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But Peter continued knocking: and
having opened, they saw him and were astonished.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And having made a sign to them with his
hand to be silent, he related \[to them\] how the Lord had brought him
out of prison; and he said, Report these things to James and to the
brethren. And he went out and went to another place.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And when it was day there was no small
disturbance among the soldiers, what then was become of Peter.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And Herod having sought him and not
found him, having examined the guards, commanded \[them\] to be
executed. And he went down from Judaea to Caesarea and stayed \[there\].

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And he was in bitter hostility with
\[the\] Tyrians and Sidonians; but they came to him with one accord,
and, having gained Blastus the king's chamberlain, sought peace, because
their country was nourished by the king's.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And on a set day, clothed in royal
apparel and sitting on the elevated seat \[of honour\], Herod made a
public oration to them.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the people cried out, A god's voice
and not a man's.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And immediately an angel of \[the\]
Lord smote him, because he did not give the glory to God, and he
expired, eaten of worms.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the word of God grew and spread
itself.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Barnabas and Saul returned from
Jerusalem, having fulfilled the service \[entrusted to them\], taking
also with them John, surnamed Mark.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now there were in Antioch, in the
assembly which was \[there\], prophets and teachers: Barnabas, and
Simeon who was called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen,
foster-brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And as they were ministering to the Lord
and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for
the work to which I have called them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Then, having fasted and prayed, and
having laid \[their\] hands on them, they let \[them\] go.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> They therefore, having been sent forth by
the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and thence sailed away to
Cyprus.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And being in Salamis, they announced the
word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they had John also as
\[their\] attendant.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And having passed through the whole
island as far as Paphos, they found a certain man a magician, a false
prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> who was with the proconsul Sergius
Paulus, an intelligent man. \*He\*, having called Barnabas and Saul to
\[him\], desired to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But Elymas the magician (for so his name
is by interpretation) opposed them, seeking to turn away the proconsul
from the faith.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But Saul, who also \[is\] Paul, filled
with \[the\] Holy Spirit, fixing his eyes upon him,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> said, O full of all deceit and all
craft: son of \[the\] devil, enemy of all righteousness; wilt thou not
cease perverting the right paths of \[the\] Lord?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And now behold, \[the\] Lord's hand
\[is\] upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a
season. And immediately there fell upon him a mist and darkness; and
going about he sought persons who should lead him by the hand.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then the proconsul, seeing what had
happened, believed, being amazed at the teaching of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And having sailed from Paphos, Paul and
his company came to Perga of Pamphylia; and John separated from them and
returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But they, passing through from Perga,
came to Antioch of Pisidia; and entering into the synagogue on the
sabbath day they sat down.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And after the reading of the law and
the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying,
Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation to the people, speak.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And Paul, rising up and making a sign
with the hand, said, Israelites, and ye that fear God, hearken.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The God of this people Israel chose our
fathers, and exalted the people in their sojourn in \[the\] land of
Egypt, and with a high arm brought them out of it,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and for a time of about forty years he
nursed them in the desert.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And having destroyed seven nations in
the land of Canaan, he gave them their land as an inheritance.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And after these things he gave \[them\]
judges till Samuel the prophet, \[to the end of\] about four hundred and
fifty years.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And then they asked for a king, and God
gave to them Saul, son of Kis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, during
forty years.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And having removed him he raised up to
them David for king, of whom also bearing witness he said, I have found
David, the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do all my will.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Of this man's seed according to promise
has God brought to Israel a Saviour, Jesus;

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> John having proclaimed before the face
of his entry \[among the people\] \[the\] baptism of repentance to all
the people of Israel.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And as John was fulfilling his course
he said, Whom do ye suppose that I am? \*I\* am not \[he\]. But behold,
there comes one after me, the sandal of whose feet I am not worthy to
loose.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Brethren, sons of Abraham's race, and
those who among you fear God, to you has the word of this salvation been
sent:

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> for those who dwell in Jerusalem, and
their rulers, not having known him, have fulfilled also the voices of
the prophets which are read on every sabbath, \[by\] judging \[him\].

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And having found no cause of death \[in
him\], they begged of Pilate that he might be slain.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And when they had fulfilled all things
written concerning him, they took him down from the cross and put him in
a sepulchre;

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> but God raised him from among \[the\]
dead,

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> who appeared for many days to those who
had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his
witnesses to the people.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And \*we\* declare unto you the glad
tidings of the promise made to the fathers,

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> that God has fulfilled this to us their
children, having raised up Jesus; as it is also written in the second
psalm, \*Thou\* art my Son: this day have \*I\* begotten thee.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> But that he raised him from among
\[the\] dead, no more to return to corruption, he spoke thus: I will
give to you the faithful mercies of David.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Wherefore also he says in another, Thou
wilt not suffer thy gracious one to see corruption.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> For David indeed, having in his own
generation ministered to the will of God, fell asleep, and was added to
his fathers and saw corruption.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But he whom God raised up did not see
corruption.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Be it known unto you, therefore,
brethren, that through this man remission of sins is preached to you,

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> and from all things from which ye could
not be justified in the law of Moses, in him every one that believes is
justified.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> See therefore that that which is spoken
in the prophets do not come upon \[you\],

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and
perish; for \*I\* work a work in your days, a work which ye will in no
wise believe if one declare it to you.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And as they went out they begged that
these words might be spoken to them the ensuing sabbath.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> And the congregation of the synagogue
having broken up, many of the Jews and of the worshipping proselytes
followed Paul and Barnabas, who speaking to them, persuaded them to
continue in the grace of God.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> And on the coming sabbath almost all
the city was gathered together to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> But the Jews, seeing the crowds, were
filled with envy, and contradicted the things said by Paul,
\[contradicting and\] speaking injuriously.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> And Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly and
said, It was necessary that the word of God should be first spoken to
you; but, since ye thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of
eternal life, lo, we turn to the nations;

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> for thus has the Lord enjoined us: I
have set thee for a light of the nations, that thou shouldest be for
salvation to the end of the earth.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> And \[those of\] the nations, hearing
it, rejoiced, and glorified the word of the Lord, and believed, as many
as were ordained to eternal life.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> And the word of the Lord was carried
through the whole country.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> But the Jews excited the women of the
upper classes who were worshippers, and the first people of the city,
and raised a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and cast them out of
their coasts.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> But they, having shaken off the dust of
their feet against them, came to Iconium.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And the disciples were filled with joy
and \[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And it came to pass in Iconium that they
entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake that a
great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But the Jews who did not believe stirred
up the minds of \[those of\] the nations and made \[them\] evil-affected
against the brethren.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> They stayed therefore a good while,
speaking boldly, \[confiding\] in the Lord, who gave witness to the word
of his grace, giving signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And the multitude of the city was
divided, and some were with the Jews and some with the apostles.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And when an assault was making, both of
\[those of\] the nations and \[the\] Jews with their rulers, to use
\[them\] ill and stone them,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> they, being aware of it, fled to the
cities of Lycaonia, Lystra and Derbe, and the surrounding country,

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> and there they were announcing the glad
tidings.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And a certain man in Lystra, impotent in
his feet, sat, \[being\] lame from his mother's womb, who had never
walked.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> This \[man\] heard Paul speaking, who,
fixing his eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be healed,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> said with a loud voice, Rise up
straight upon thy feet: and he sprang up and walked.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> But the crowds, who saw what Paul had
done, lifted up their voices in Lycaonian, saying, The gods, having made
themselves like men, are come down to us.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And they called Barnabas Jupiter, and
Paul Mercury, because he took the lead in speaking.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And the priest of Jupiter who was
before the city, having brought bulls and garlands to the gates, would
have done sacrifice along with the crowds.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> But the apostles Barnabas and Paul,
having heard \[it\], rent their garments, and rushed out to the crowd,
crying

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and saying, Men, why do ye these
things? \*We\* also are men of like passions with you, preaching to you
to turn from these vanities to the living God, who made the heaven, and
the earth, and the sea, and all things in them;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> who in the past generations suffered
all the nations to go in their own ways,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> though indeed he did not leave himself
without witness, doing good, and giving to you from heaven rain and
fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and gladness.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And saying these things, they with
difficulty kept the crowds from sacrificing to them.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But there came Jews from Antioch and
Iconium, and having persuaded the crowds and stoned Paul, drew him out
of the city, supposing him to have died.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But while the disciples encircled him,
he rose up and entered into the city. And on the morrow he went away
with Barnabas to Derbe.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And having announced the glad tidings
to that city, and having made many disciples, they returned to Lystra,
and Iconium, and Antioch,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> establishing the souls of the
disciples, exhorting them to abide in the faith, and that through many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And having chosen them elders in each
assembly, having prayed with fastings, they committed them to the Lord,
on whom they had believed.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And having passed through Pisidia they
came to Pamphylia,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> and having spoken the word in Perga,
they came down to Attalia;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and thence they sailed away to Antioch,
whence they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which
they had fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And having arrived, and having brought
together the assembly, they related to them all that God had done with
them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And they stayed no little time with the
disciples.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And certain persons, having come down
from Judaea, taught the brethren, If ye shall not have been circumcised
according to the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> A commotion therefore having taken place,
and no small discussion on the part of Paul and Barnabas against them,
they arranged that Paul and Barnabas, and certain others from amongst
them, should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this
question.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> They therefore, having been set on their
way by the assembly, passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, relating the
conversion of \[those of\] the nations. And they caused great joy to all
the brethren.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And being arrived at Jerusalem, they were
received by the assembly, and the apostles, and the elders, and related
all that God had wrought with them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And some of those who were of the sect of
the Pharisees, who believed, rose up from among \[them\], saying that
they ought to circumcise them and enjoin them to keep the law of Moses.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the apostles and the elders were
gathered together to see about this matter.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And much discussion having taken place,
Peter, standing up, said to them, Brethren, \*ye\* know that from the
earliest days God amongst you chose that the nations by my mouth should
hear the word of the glad tidings and believe.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the heart-knowing God bore them
witness, giving \[them\] the Holy Spirit as to us also,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and put no difference between us and
them, having purified their hearts by faith.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Now therefore why tempt ye God, by
putting a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers
nor we have been able to bear?

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But we believe that we shall be saved
by the grace of the Lord Jesus, in the same manner as they also.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And all the multitude kept silence and
listened to Barnabas and Paul relating all the signs and wonders which
God had wrought among the nations by them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And after they had held their peace,
James answered, saying, Brethren, listen to me:

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Simon has related how God first visited
to take out of \[the\] nations a people for his name.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And with this agree the words of the
prophets; as it is written:

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> After these things I will return, and
will rebuild the tabernacle of David which is fallen, and will rebuild
its ruins, and will set it up,

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> so that the residue of men may seek out
the Lord, and all the nations on whom my name is invoked, saith \[the\]
Lord, who does these things

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> known from eternity.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Wherefore \*I\* judge, not to trouble
those who from the nations turn to God;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> but to write to them to abstain from
pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from what is strangled,
and from blood.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For Moses, from generations of old, has
in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every
sabbath.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then it seemed good to the apostles and
to the elders, with the whole assembly, to send chosen men from among
them with Paul and Barnabas to Antioch, Judas called Barsabas and Silas,
leading men among the brethren,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> having by their hand written \[thus\]:
The apostles, and the elders, and the brethren, to the brethren who are
from among \[the\] nations at Antioch, and \[in\] Syria and Cilicia,
greeting:

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Inasmuch as we have heard that some who
went out from amongst us have troubled you by words, upsetting your
souls, \[saying that ye must be circumcised and keep the law\]; to whom
we gave no commandment;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> it seemed good to us, having arrived at
a common judgment, to send chosen men to you with our beloved Barnabas
and Paul,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> men who have given up their lives for
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> We have therefore sent Judas and Silas,
who themselves also will tell you by word \[of mouth\] the same things.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> For it has seemed good to the Holy
Spirit and to us to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things:

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> to abstain from things sacrificed to
idols, and from blood, and from what is strangled, and from fornication;
keeping yourselves from which ye will do well. Farewell.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> They therefore, being let go, came to
Antioch, and having gathered the multitude delivered to \[them\] the
epistle.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And having read it, they rejoiced at
the consolation.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Judas and Silas, being themselves
also prophets, exhorted the brethren with much discourse, and
strengthened them.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And having passed some time \[there\],
they were let go in peace from the brethren to those who sent them.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> 

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And Paul and Barnabas stayed in
Antioch, teaching and announcing the glad tidings, with many others
also, of the word of the Lord.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> But after certain days Paul said to
Barnabas, Let us return now and visit the brethren in every city where
we have announced the word of the Lord, \[and see\] how they are getting
on.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Barnabas proposed to take with
\[them\] John also, called Mark;

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> but Paul thought it not well to take
with them him who had abandoned them, \[going back\] from Pamphylia, and
had not gone with them to the work.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> There arose therefore very warm
feeling, so that they separated from one another; and Barnabas taking
Mark sailed away to Cyprus;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> but Paul having chosen Silas went
forth, committed by the brethren to the grace of God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And he passed through Syria and
Cilicia, confirming the assemblies.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And he came to Derbe and Lystra: and
behold, a certain disciple was there, by name Timotheus, son of a Jewish
believing woman, but \[the\] father a Greek,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> who had a \[good\] testimony of the
brethren in Lystra and Iconium.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Him would Paul have go forth with him,
and took \[him and\] circumcised him on account of the Jews who were in
those places, for they all knew his father that he was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as they passed through the cities
they instructed them to observe the decrees determined on by the
apostles and elders who were in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> The assemblies therefore were confirmed
in the faith, and increased in number every day.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And having passed through Phrygia and the
Galatian country, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the
word in Asia,

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> having come down to Mysia, they attempted
to go to Bithynia, and the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them;

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> and having passed by Mysia they descended
to Troas.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And a vision appeared to Paul in the
night: There was a certain Macedonian man, standing and beseeching him,
and saying, Pass over into Macedonia and help us.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And when he had seen the vision,
immediately we sought to go forth to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord
had called us to announce to them the glad tidings.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Having sailed therefore away from
Troas, we went in a straight course to Samothracia, and on the morrow to
Neapolis,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and thence to Philippi, which is
\[the\] first city of that part of Macedonia, a colony. And we were
staying in that city certain days.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And on the sabbath day we went outside
the gate by the river, where it was the custom for prayer to be, and we
sat down and spoke to the women who had assembled.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And a certain woman, by name Lydia, a
seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshipped God, heard;
whose heart the Lord opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when she had been baptised and her
house, she besought \[us\], saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful
to the Lord, come into my house and abide \[there\]. And she constrained
us.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And it came to pass as we were going to
prayer that a certain female slave, having a spirit of Python, met us,
who brought much profit to her masters by prophesying.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> She, having followed Paul and us, cried
saying, These men are bondmen of the Most High God, who announce to you
\[the\] way of salvation.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And this she did many days. And Paul,
being distressed, turned, and said to the spirit, I enjoin thee in the
name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And it came out the same hour.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And her masters, seeing that the hope
of their gains was gone, having seized Paul and Silas, dragged \[them\]
into the market before the magistrates;

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> and having brought them up to the
praetors, said, These men utterly trouble our city, being Jews,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> and announce customs which it is not
lawful for us to receive nor practise, being Romans.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And the crowd rose up too against them;
and the praetors, having torn off their clothes, commanded to scourge
\[them\].

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And having laid many stripes upon them
they cast \[them\] into prison, charging the jailor to keep them safely;

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> who, having received such a charge,
cast them into the inner prison, and secured their feet to the stocks.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And at midnight Paul and Silas, in
praying, were praising God with singing, and the prisoners listened to
them.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison shook, and all the
doors were immediately opened, and the bonds of all loosed.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the jailor being awakened out of
his sleep, and seeing the doors of the prison opened, having drawn a
sword was going to kill himself, thinking the prisoners had fled.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But Paul called out with a loud voice,
saying, Do thyself no harm, for we are all here.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And having asked for lights, he rushed
in, and, trembling, fell down before Paul and Silas.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And leading them out said, Sirs, what
must I do that I may be saved?

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And they said, Believe on the Lord
Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And they spoke to him the word of the
Lord, with all that were in his house.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And he took them the same hour of the
night and washed \[them\] from their stripes; and was baptised, he and
all his straightway.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And having brought them into his house
he laid the table \[for them\], and rejoiced with all his house, having
believed in God.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And when it was day, the praetors sent
the lictors, saying, Let those men go.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And the jailor reported these words to
Paul: The praetors have sent that ye may be let go. Now therefore go out
and depart in peace.

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> But Paul said to them, Having beaten us
publicly uncondemned, us who are Romans, they have cast us into prison,
and now they thrust us out secretly? no, indeed, but let them come
themselves and bring us out.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And the lictors reported these words to
the praetors. And they were afraid when they heard they were Romans.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> And they came and besought them, and
having brought them out, asked them to go out of the city.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And having gone out of the prison, they
came to Lydia; and having seen the brethren, they exhorted them and went
away.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And having journeyed through Amphipolis
and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was the synagogue of the
Jews.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And according to Paul's custom he went in
among them, and on three sabbaths reasoned with them from the
scriptures,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> opening and laying down that the Christ
must have suffered and risen up from among the dead, and that this is
the Christ, Jesus whom \*I\* announce to you.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And some of them believed, and joined
themselves to Paul and Silas, and of the Greeks who worshipped, a great
multitude, and of the chief women not a few.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> But the Jews having been stirred up to
jealousy, and taken to \[themselves\] certain wicked men of the lowest
rabble, and having got a crowd together, set the city in confusion; and
having beset the house of Jason sought to bring them out to the people;

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> and not having found them, dragged Jason
and certain brethren before the politarchs, crying out, These \[men\]
that have set the world in tumult, are come here also,

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> whom Jason has received; and these all do
contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying, that there is another king,
Jesus.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And they troubled the crowd and the
politarchs when they heard these things.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And having taken security of Jason and
the rest, they let them go.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> But the brethren immediately sent away,
in the night, Paul and Silas to Berea; who, being arrived, went away
into the synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And these were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, receiving the word with all readiness of mind, daily
searching the scriptures if these things were so.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Therefore many from among them
believed, and of Grecian women of the upper classes and men not a few.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But when the Jews from Thessalonica
knew that the word of God was announced in Berea also by Paul, they came
there also, stirring up the crowds.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And then immediately the brethren sent
away Paul to go as to the sea; but Silas and Timotheus abode there.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But they that conducted Paul brought
him as far as Athens; and, having received a commandment to Silas and
Timotheus, that they should come to him as quickly as possible, they
departed.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> But in Athens, while Paul was waiting
for them, his spirit was painfully excited in him seeing the city given
up to idolatry.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> He reasoned therefore in the synagogue
with the Jews, and those who worshipped, and in the market-place every
day with those he met with.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> But some also of the Epicurean and
Stoic philosophers attacked him. And some said, What would this
chatterer say? and some, He seems to be an announcer of foreign demons,
because he announced the glad tidings of Jesus and the resurrection \[to
them\].

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And having taken hold on him they
brought \[him\] to Areopagus, saying, Might we know what this new
doctrine which is spoken by thee \[is\]?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> For thou bringest certain strange
things to our ears. We wish therefore to know what these things may
mean.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Now all \[the\] Athenians and the
strangers sojourning there spent their time in nothing else than to tell
and to hear the news.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And Paul standing in the midst of
Areopagus said, Athenians, in every way I see you given up to demon
worship;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> for, passing through and beholding your
shrines, I found also an altar on which was inscribed, To the unknown
God. Whom therefore ye reverence, not knowing \[him\], him I announce to
you.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> The God who has made the world and all
things which are in it, \*he\*, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not
dwell in temples made with hands,

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> nor is served by men's hands as needing
something, himself giving to all life and breath and all things;

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> and has made of one blood every nation
of men to dwell upon the whole face of the earth, having determined
ordained times and the boundaries of their dwelling,

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> that they may seek God; if indeed they
might feel after him and find him, although he is not far from each one
of us:

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> for in him we live and move and exist;
as also some of the poets amongst you have said, For we are also his
offspring.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> Being therefore \[the\] offspring of
God, we ought not to think that which is divine to be like gold or
silver or stone, \[the\] graven form of man's art and imagination.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> God therefore, having overlooked the
times of ignorance, now enjoins men that they shall all everywhere
repent,

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> because he has set a day in which he is
going to judge the habitable earth in righteousness by \[the\] man whom
he has appointed, giving the proof \[of it\] to all \[in\] having raised
him from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> And when they heard \[of the\]
resurrection of the dead, some mocked, and some said, We will hear thee
again also concerning this.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Thus Paul went out of their midst.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> But some men joining themselves to him
believed; among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman by
name Damaris, and others with them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And after these things, having left
Athens, he came to Corinth;

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> and finding a certain Jew by name Aquila,
of Pontus by race, just come from Italy, and Priscilla his wife,
(because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome,) came to them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and because they were of the same trade
abode with them, and wrought. For they were tent-makers by trade.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And he reasoned in the synagogue every
sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And when both Silas and Timotheus came
down from Macedonia, Paul was pressed in respect of the word, testifying
to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But as they opposed and spoke
injuriously, he shook his clothes, and said to them, Your blood be upon
your own head: \*I\* \[am\] pure; from henceforth I will go to the
nations.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And departing thence he came to the house
of a certain \[man\], by name Justus, who worshipped God, whose house
adjoined the synagogue.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> But Crispus the ruler of the synagogue
believed in the Lord with all his house; and many of the Corinthians
hearing, believed, and were baptised.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the Lord said by vision in \[the\]
night to Paul, Fear not, but speak and be not silent;

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> because \*I\* am with thee, and no one
shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this
city.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And he remained \[there\] a year and
six months, teaching among them the word of God.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But when Gallio was proconsul of
Achaia, the Jews with one consent rose against Paul and led him to the
judgment-seat,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> saying, This \[man\] persuades men to
worship God contrary to the law.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> But as Paul was going to open his
mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, If indeed it was some wrong or wicked
criminality, O Jews, of reason I should have borne with you;

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> but if it be questions about words, and
names, and the law that ye have, see to it yourselves; \[for\] \*I\* do
not intend to be judge of these things.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And he drove them from the
judgment-seat.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And having all laid hold on Sosthenes
the ruler of the synagogue, they beat him before the judgment-seat. And
Gallio troubled himself about none of these things.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And Paul, having yet stayed \[there\]
many days, took leave of the brethren and sailed thence to Syria, and
with him Priscilla and Aquila, having shorn his head in Cenchrea, for he
had a vow;

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> and he arrived at Ephesus, and left
them there. But entering himself into the synagogue he reasoned with the
Jews.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And when they asked him that he would
remain for a longer time \[with them\] he did not accede,

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> but bade them farewell, saying, \[I
must by all means keep the coming feast at Jerusalem\]; I will return to
you again, if God will: and he sailed away from Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And landing at Caesarea, and having
gone up and saluted the assembly, he went down to Antioch.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And having stayed \[there\] some time,
he went forth, passing in order through the country of Galatia and
Phrygia, establishing all the disciples.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> But a certain Jew, Apollos by name, an
Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, who was mighty in the scriptures,
arrived at Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> He was instructed in the way of the
Lord, and being fervent in his spirit, he spoke and taught exactly the
things concerning Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And \*he\* began to speak boldly in the
synagogue. And Aquila and Priscilla, having heard him, took him to
\[them\] and unfolded to him the way of God more exactly.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And when he purposed to go into Achaia,
the brethren wrote to the disciples engaging them to receive him, who,
being come, contributed much to those who believed through grace.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> For he with great force convinced the
Jews publicly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came to pass, while Apollos was at
Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper districts, came to
Ephesus, and finding certain disciples,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> he said to them, Did ye receive \[the\]
Holy Spirit when ye had believed? And they \[said\] to him, We did not
even hear if \[the\] Holy Spirit was \[come\].

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he said, To what then were ye
baptised? And they said, To the baptism of John.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Paul said, John indeed baptised
\[with\] the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they
should believe on him that was coming after him, that is, on Jesus.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And when they heard that, they were
baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Paul having laid \[his\] hands on
them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with tongues and
prophesied.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And all the men were about twelve.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And entering into the synagogue, he spoke
boldly during three months, reasoning and persuading \[the things\]
concerning the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But when some were hardened and
disbelieved, speaking evil of the way before the multitude, he left them
and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And this took place for two years, so
that all that inhabited Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and
Greeks.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And God wrought no ordinary miracles by
the hands of Paul,

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> so that even napkins or aprons were
brought from his body \[and put\] upon the sick, and the diseases left
them, and the wicked spirits went out.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And certain of the Jewish exorcists
also, who went about, took in hand to call upon those who had wicked
spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I adjure you by Jesus, whom
Paul preaches.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And there were certain \[men\], seven
sons of Sceva, Jewish high priest, who were doing this.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> But the wicked spirit answering said to
them, Jesus I know, and Paul I am acquainted with; but \*ye\*, who are
ye?

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the man in whom the wicked spirit
was leaped upon them, and having mastered both, prevailed against them,
so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And this became known to all, both Jews
and Greeks, who inhabited Ephesus, and fear fell upon all of them, and
the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And many of those that believed came
confessing and declaring their deeds.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And many of those that practised
curious arts brought their books \[of charms\] and burnt them before
all. And they reckoned up the prices of them, and found it fifty
thousand pieces of silver.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Thus with might the word of the Lord
increased and prevailed.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And when these things were fulfilled,
Paul purposed in his spirit to go to Jerusalem, passing through
Macedonia and Achaia, saying, After I have been there I must see Rome
also.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And having sent into Macedonia two of
those ministering to him, Timotheus and Erastus, he remained himself
awhile in Asia.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And there took place at that time no
small disturbance about the way.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> For a certain \[man\] by name
Demetrius, a silver-beater, making silver temples of Artemis, brought no
small gain to the artisans;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> whom having brought together, and those
who wrought in such things, he said, Men, ye know that our well-living
arises from this work,

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> and ye see and hear that this Paul has
persuaded and turned away a great crowd, not only of Ephesus, but almost
of all Asia, saying that they are no gods which are made with hands.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Now not only there is danger for us
that our business come into discredit, but also that the temple of the
great goddess Artemis be counted for nothing, and that her greatness
should be destroyed whom the whole of Asia and the world reveres.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And having heard \[this\], and being
filled with rage, they cried out, saying, Great \[is\] Artemis of the
Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the \[whole\] city was filled with
confusion, and they rushed with one accord to the theatre, having seized
and carried off with \[them\] Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians,
fellow-travellers of Paul.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> But Paul intending to go in to the
people, the disciples suffered him not;

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> and some of the Asiarchs also, who were
his friends, sent to him and urged him not to throw himself into the
theatre.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Different persons therefore cried out
some different thing; for the assembly was tumultuous, and the most did
not know for what cause they had come together.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> But from among the crowd they put
forward Alexander, the Jews pushing him forward. And Alexander,
beckoning with his hand, would have made a defence to the people.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But, recognising that he was a Jew,
there was one cry from all, shouting for about two hours, Great \[is\]
Artemis of the Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And the townclerk, having quieted the
crowd, said, Ephesians, what man is there then who does not know that
the city of the Ephesians is temple-keeper of Artemis the great, and of
the \[image\] which fell down from heaven?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> These things therefore being
undeniable, it is necessary that ye should be calm and do nothing
headlong.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> For ye have brought these men, \[who
are\] neither temple-plunderers, nor speak injuriously of your goddess.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> If therefore Demetrius and the artisans
who \[are\] with him have a matter against any one, the courts are being
held, and there are proconsuls: let them accuse one another.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> But if ye inquire anything concerning
other matters, it will be settled in the regular assembly.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For also we are in danger to be put in
accusation for sedition for this \[affair\] of to-day, no cause existing
in reference to which we shall be able to give a reason for this
concourse.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And having said these things, he
dismissed the assembly.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> But after the tumult had ceased, Paul
having called the disciples to \[him\] and embraced \[them\], went away
to go to Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And having passed through those parts,
and having exhorted them with much discourse, he came to Greece.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And having spent three months \[there\],
a treacherous plot against him having been set on foot by the Jews, as
he was going to sail to Syria, \[the\] resolution was adopted of
returning through Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And there accompanied him as far as Asia,
Sopater \[son\] of Pyrrhus, a Berean; and of Thessalonians, Aristarchus
and Secundus, and Gaius and Timotheus of Derbe, and of Asia, Tychicus
and Trophimus.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> These going before waited for us in
Troas;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> but we sailed away from Philippi after
the days of unleavened bread, and we came to them to Troas in five days,
where we spent seven days.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And the first day of the week, we being
assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed to them, about to depart on
the morrow. And he prolonged the discourse till midnight.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And there were many lights in the upper
room where we were assembled.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And a certain youth, by name Eutychus,
sitting at the window-opening, overpowered by deep sleep, while Paul
discoursed very much at length, having been overpowered by the sleep,
fell from the third story down to the bottom, and was taken up dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But Paul descending fell upon him, and
enfolding \[him\] \[in his arms\], said, Be not troubled, for his life
is in him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And having gone up, and having broken
the bread, and eaten, and having long spoken until daybreak, so he went
away.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And they brought \[away\] the boy
alive, and were no little comforted.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And we, having gone before on board
ship, sailed off to Assos, going to take in Paul there; for so he had
directed, he himself being about to go on foot.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And when he met with us at Assos,
having taken him on board, we came to Mitylene;

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> and having sailed thence, on the morrow
arrived opposite Chios, and the next day put in at Samos; and having
stayed at Trogyllium, the next day we came to Miletus:

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> for Paul thought it desirable to sail
by Ephesus, so that he might not be made to spend time in Asia; for he
hastened, if it was possible for him, to be the day of Pentecost at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> But from Miletus having sent to
Ephesus, he called over \[to him\] the elders of the assembly.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And when they were come to him, he said
to them, \*Ye\* know how I was with you all the time from the first day
that I arrived in Asia,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> serving the Lord with all lowliness,
and tears, and temptations, which happened to me through the plots of
the Jews;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> how I held back nothing of what is
profitable, so as not to announce \[it\] to you, and to teach you
publicly and in every house,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> testifying to both Jews and Greeks
repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And now, behold, bound in my spirit
\*I\* go to Jerusalem, not knowing what things shall happen to me in it;

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> only that the Holy Spirit testifies to
me in every city, saying that bonds and tribulations await me.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But I make no account of \[my\] life
\[as\] dear to myself, so that I finish my course, and the ministry
which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the glad tidings of
the grace of God.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And now, behold, I know that ye all,
among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom \[of God\], shall see
my face no more.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Wherefore I witness to you this day,
that I am clean from the blood of all,

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> for I have not shrunk from announcing
to you all the counsel of God.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Take heed therefore to yourselves, and
to all the flock, wherein the Holy Spirit has set you as overseers, to
shepherd the assembly of God, which he has purchased with the blood of
his own.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> \[For\] \*I\* know \[this,\] that there
will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing
the flock;

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> and from among your own selves shall
rise up men speaking perverted things to draw away the disciples after
them.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Wherefore watch, remembering that for
three years, night and day, I ceased not admonishing each one \[of you\]
with tears.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And now I commit you to God, and to the
word of his grace, which is able to build \[you\] up and give \[to you\]
an inheritance among all the sanctified.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> I have coveted \[the\] silver or gold
or clothing of no one.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Yourselves know that these hands have
ministered to my wants, and to those who were with me.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> I have shewed you all things, that thus
labouring \[we\] ought to come in aid of the weak, and to remember the
words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to
give than to receive.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And having said these things, he knelt
down and prayed with them all.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And they all wept sore; and falling
upon the neck of Paul they ardently kissed him,

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> specially pained by the word which he
had said, that they would no more see his face. And they went down with
him to the ship.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And when, having got away from them, we
at last sailed away, we came by a direct course to Cos, and on the
morrow to Rhodes, and thence to Patara.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And having found a ship passing over into
Phoenicia, we went on board and sailed;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and having sighted Cyprus, and left it on
the left hand, we sailed to Syria, and made the land at Tyre, for there
the ship was to discharge her cargo.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And having found out the disciples, we
remained there seven days; who said to Paul by the Spirit not to go up
to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> But when we had completed the days, we
set out and took our journey, all of them accompanying us, with wives
and children, till \[we were\] out of the city. And kneeling down upon
the shore we prayed.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And having embraced one another, we went
on board ship, and they returned home.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And we, having completed the voyage,
arrived from Tyre at Ptolemais, and having saluted the brethren, we
remained one day with them.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And leaving on the morrow, we came to
Caesarea; and entering into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was
of the seven, we abode with him.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Now this man had four virgin daughters
who prophesied.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And as we stayed there many days, a
certain man, by name Agabus, a prophet, came down from Judaea,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and coming to us and taking the girdle
of Paul, and having bound his own hands and feet, said, Thus saith the
Holy Spirit, The man whose this girdle is shall the Jews thus bind in
Jerusalem, and deliver him up into the hands of \[the\] Gentiles.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And when we heard these things, both we
and those of the place besought \[him\] not to go up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> But Paul answered, What do ye, weeping
and breaking my heart? for \*I\* am ready not only to be bound, but also
to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And when he would not be persuaded, we
were silent, saying, The will of the Lord be done.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And after these days, having got our
effects ready, we went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And \[some\] of the disciples from
Caesarea went with us, bringing \[with them\] a certain Mnason, a
Cyprian, an old disciple, with whom we were to lodge.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And when we arrived at Jerusalem the
brethren gladly received us.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And on the morrow Paul went in with us
to James, and all the elders came there.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And having saluted them, he related one
by one the things which God had wrought among the nations by his
ministry.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And they having heard \[it\] glorified
God, and said to him, Thou seest, brother, how many myriads there are of
the Jews who have believed, and all are zealous of the law.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And they have been informed concerning
thee, that thou teachest all the Jews among the nations apostasy from
Moses, saying that they should not circumcise their children, nor walk
in the customs.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> What is it then? a multitude must
necessarily come together, for they will hear that thou art come.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> This do therefore that we say to thee:
We have four men who have a vow on them;

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> take these and be purified with them,
and pay their expenses, that they may have their heads shaved; and all
will know that \[of those things\] of which they have been informed
about thee nothing is \[true\]; but that thou thyself also walkest
orderly, keeping the law.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But concerning \[those of\] the nations
who have believed, we have written, deciding that they should \[observe
no such thing, only to\] keep themselves both from things offered to
idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Then Paul, taking the men, on the next
day, having been purified, entered with them into the temple, signifying
the time the days of the purification would be fulfilled, until the
offering was offered for every one of them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And when the seven days were nearly
completed, the Jews from Asia, having seen him in the temple, set all
the crowd in a tumult, and laid hands upon him,

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> crying, Israelites, help! this is the
man who teaches all everywhere against the people, and the law, and this
place, and has brought Greeks too into the temple, and profaned this
holy place.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> For they had before seen Trophimus the
Ephesian with him in the city, whom they supposed that Paul had brought
into the temple.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And the whole city was moved, and there
was a concourse of the people; and having laid hold on Paul they drew
him out of the temple, and immediately the doors were shut.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And as they were seeking to kill him, a
representation came to the chiliarch of the band that the whole of
Jerusalem was in a tumult;

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> who, taking with him immediately
soldiers and centurions, ran down upon them. But they, seeing the
chiliarch and the soldiers, ceased beating Paul.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then the chiliarch came up and laid
hold upon him, and commanded \[him\] to be bound with two chains, and
inquired who he might be, and what he had done.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And different persons cried some
different thing in the crowd. But he, not being able to know the
certainty on account of the uproar, commanded him to be brought into the
fortress.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> But when he got upon the stairs it was
so that he was borne by the soldiers on account of the violence of the
crowd.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> For the multitude of the people
followed, crying, Away with him.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> But as he was about to be led into the
fortress, Paul says to the chiliarch, Is it allowed me to say something
to thee? And he said, Dost thou know Greek?

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> Thou art not then that Egyptian who
before these days raised a sedition and led out into the wilderness the
four thousand men of the assassins?

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> But Paul said, \*I\* am a Jew of
Tarsus, citizen of no insignificant city of Cilicia, and I beseech of
thee, allow me to speak to the people.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> And when he had allowed him, Paul,
standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people; and a
great silence having been made, he addressed them in the Hebrew tongue,
saying,

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Brethren and fathers, hear my defence
which I now make to you.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And hearing that he addressed them in the
Hebrew tongue, they kept the more quiet; and he says,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> \*I\* am a Jew, born in Tarsus of
Cilicia, but brought up in this city, at the feet of Gamaliel, educated
according to \[the\] exactness of the law of \[our\] fathers, being
zealous for God, as \*ye\* are all this day;

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> who have persecuted this way unto death,
binding and delivering up to prisons both men and women;

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> as also the high priest bears me witness,
and all the elderhood: from whom also, having received letters to the
brethren, I went to Damascus to bring those also who were there, bound,
to Jerusalem, to be punished.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And it came to pass, as I was journeying
and drawing near to Damascus, that, about mid-day, there suddenly shone
out of heaven a great light round about me.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And I fell to the ground, and heard a
voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And \*I\* answered, Who art thou, Lord?
And he said to me, \*I\* am Jesus the Nazaraean, whom \*thou\*
persecutest.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> But they that were with me beheld the
light, \[and were filled with fear\], but heard not the voice of him
that was speaking to me.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And
the Lord said to me, Rise up, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be
told thee of all things which it is appointed thee to do.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And as I could not see, through the
glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I
came to Damascus.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And a certain Ananias, a pious man
according to the law, borne witness to by all the Jews who dwelt
\[there\],

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> coming to me and standing by me, said
to me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And \*I\*, in the same hour,
received my sight and saw him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And he said, The God of our fathers has
chosen thee beforehand to know his will, and to see the just one, and to
hear a voice out of his mouth;

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> for thou shalt be a witness for him to
all men of what thou hast seen and heard.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And now why lingerest thou? Arise and
get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And it came to pass when I had returned
to Jerusalem, and as I was praying in the temple, that I became in
ecstasy,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> and saw him saying to me, Make haste
and go quickly out of Jerusalem, for they will not receive thy testimony
concerning me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And \*I\* said, Lord, they themselves
know that \*I\* was imprisoning and beating in every synagogue those
that believe on thee;

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> and when the blood of thy witness
Stephen was shed, I also myself was standing by and consenting, and kept
the clothes of them who killed him.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And he said to me, Go, for \*I\* will
send thee to the nations afar off.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And they heard him until this word, and
lifted up their voice, saying, Away with such a one as that from the
earth, for it was not fit he should live.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And as they were crying, and throwing
away their clothes, and casting dust into the air,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> the chiliarch commanded him to be
brought into the fortress, saying that he should be examined by
scourging, that he might ascertain for what cause they cried thus
against him.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But as they stretched him forward with
the thongs, Paul said to the centurion who stood \[by\], Is it lawful
for you to scourge a man \[who is\] a Roman and uncondemned?

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And the centurion, having heard it,
went and reported it to the chiliarch, saying, What art thou going to
do? for this man is a Roman.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And the chiliarch coming up said to
him, Tell me, Art \*thou\* a Roman? And he said, Yes.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And the chiliarch answered, \*I\*, for
a great sum, bought this citizenship. And Paul said, But \*I\* was also
\[free\] born.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Immediately therefore those who were
going to examine him left him, and the chiliarch also was afraid when he
ascertained that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And on the morrow, desirous to know the
certainty \[of the matter\] why he was accused of the Jews, he loosed
him, and commanded the chief priests and all the council to meet, and
having brought Paul down set him before them.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Paul, fixing his eyes on the council,
said, Brethren, I have walked in all good conscience with God unto this
day.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> But the high priest Ananias ordered those
standing by him to smite his mouth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then Paul said to him, God will smite
thee, whited wall. And \*thou\*, dost thou sit judging me according to
the law, and breaking the law commandest me to be smitten?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And those that stood by said, Dost thou
rail against the high priest of God?

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Paul said, I was not conscious,
brethren, that he was high priest; for it is written, Thou shalt not
speak evilly of the ruler of thy people.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But Paul, knowing that the one part \[of
them\] were of the Sadducees and the other of the Pharisees, cried out
in the council, Brethren, \*I\* am a Pharisee, son of Pharisees: \*I\*
am judged concerning the hope and resurrection of \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And when he had spoken this, there was a
tumult of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the multitude was
divided.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> For Sadducees say there is no
resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but Pharisees confess both of them.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And there was a great clamour, and the
scribes of the Pharisees' part rising up contended, saying, We find
nothing evil in this man; and if a spirit has spoken to him, or an angel
...

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And a great tumult having arisen, the
chiliarch, fearing lest Paul should have been torn in pieces by them,
commanded the troop to come down and take him by force from the midst of
them, and to bring \[him\] into the fortress.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But the following night the Lord stood
by him, and said, Be of good courage; for as thou hast testified the
things concerning me at Jerusalem, so thou must bear witness at Rome
also.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And when it was day, the Jews, having
banded together, put themselves under a curse, saying that they would
neither eat nor drink till they should kill Paul.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And they were more than forty who had
joined together in this oath;

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> and they went to the chief priests and
elders, and said, We have cursed ourselves with a curse to taste nothing
until we kill Paul.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Now therefore do ye with the council
make a representation to the chiliarch so that he may bring him down to
you, as about to determine more precisely what concerns him, and we,
before he draws near, are ready to kill him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> But Paul's sister's son, having heard
of the lying in wait, came and entered into the fortress and reported
\[it\] to Paul.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And Paul, having called one of the
centurions, said, Take this youth to the chiliarch, for he has something
to report to him.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> He therefore, having taken him with
\[him\], led him to the chiliarch, and says, The prisoner Paul called me
to \[him\] and asked me to lead this youth to thee, who has something to
say to thee.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And the chiliarch having taken him by
the hand, and having gone apart in private, inquired, What is it that
thou hast to report to me?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he said, The Jews have agreed
together to make a request to thee, that thou mayest bring Paul down
to-morrow into the council, as about to inquire something more precise
concerning him.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Do not thou then be persuaded by them,
for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, who have put
themselves under a curse neither to eat nor drink till they kill him;
and now they are ready waiting the promise from thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> The chiliarch then dismissed the youth,
commanding \[him\], Utter to no one that thou hast represented these
things to me.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And having called to \[him\] certain
two of the centurions, he said, Prepare two hundred soldiers that they
may go as far as Caesarea, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred
light-armed footmen, for the third hour of the night.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And \[he ordered them\] to provide
beasts, that they might set Paul on them and carry \[him\] safe through
to Felix the governor,

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> having written a letter, couched in
this form:

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Claudius Lysias to the most excellent
governor Felix, greeting.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> This man, having been taken by the
Jews, and being about to be killed by them, I came up with the military
and took out \[of their hands\], having learned that he was a Roman.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And desiring to know the charge on
which they accused him, I brought him down to their council;

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> whom I found to be accused of questions
of their law, but to have no charge laid against him \[making him\]
worthy of death or of bonds.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> But having received information of a
plot about to be put in execution against the man \[by the Jews\], I
have immediately sent him to thee, commanding also his accusers to say
before thee the things that are against him. \[Farewell.\]

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> The soldiers therefore, according to
what was ordered them, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris,

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> and on the morrow, having left the
horsemen to go with him, returned to the fortress.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And these, having entered into
Caesarea, and given up the letter to the governor, presented Paul also
to him.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And having read \[it\], and asked of
what eparchy he was, and learned that \[he was\] of Cilicia,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> he said, I will hear thee fully when
thine accusers also are arrived. And he commanded him to be kept in
Herod's praetorium.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And after five days came down the high
priest Ananias, with the elders, and a certain orator called Tertullus,
and laid their informations against Paul before the governor.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And he having been called, Tertullus
began to accuse, saying, Seeing we enjoy great peace through thee, and
that excellent measures are executed for this nation by thy forethought,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> we receive \[it\] always and everywhere,
most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But that I may not too much intrude on
thy time, I beseech thee to hear us briefly in thy kindness.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For finding this man a pest, and moving
sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a leader of the
sect of the Nazaraeans;

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> who also attempted to profane the temple;
whom we also had seized, \[and would have judged according to our law;

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> but Lysias, the chiliarch, coming up,
took \[him\] away with great force out of our hands,

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> having commanded his accusers to come to
thee;\] of whom thou canst thyself, in examining \[him\], know the
certainty of all these things of which we accuse him.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the Jews also joined in pressing the
matter against \[Paul\], saying that these things were so.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> But Paul, the governor having beckoned
to him to speak, answered, Knowing that for many years thou hast been
judge to this nation, I answer readily as to the things which concern
myself.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> As thou mayest know that there are not
more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem,

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> and neither in the temple did they find
me discoursing to any one, or making any tumultuous gathering together
of the crowd, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> neither can they make good the things
of which they now accuse me.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But this I avow to thee, that in the
way which they call sect, so I serve my fathers' God, believing all
things which are written throughout the law, and in the prophets;

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> having hope towards God, which they
themselves also receive, that there is to be a resurrection both of just
and unjust.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> For this cause I also exercise
\[myself\] to have in everything a conscience without offence towards
God and men.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And after a lapse of many years I
arrived, bringing alms to my nation, and offerings.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Whereupon they found me purified in the
temple, with neither crowd nor tumult. But it was certain Jews from
Asia,

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> who ought to appear before thee and
accuse, if they have anything against me;

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> or let these themselves say what wrong
they found in me when I stood before the council,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> \[other\] than concerning this one
voice which I cried standing amongst them: I am judged this day by you
touching \[the\] resurrection of \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And Felix, knowing accurately the
things concerning the way, adjourned them, saying, When Lysias the
chiliarch is come down I will determine your affair;

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> ordering the centurion to keep him, and
that he should have freedom, and to hinder none of his friends to
minister to him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And after certain days, Felix having
arrived with Drusilla his wife, who was a Jewess, he sent for Paul and
heard him concerning the faith in Christ.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And as he reasoned concerning
righteousness, and temperance, and the judgment about to come, Felix,
being filled with fear, answered, Go for the present, and when I get an
opportunity I will send for thee;

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> hoping at the same time that money
would be given him by Paul: wherefore also he sent for him the oftener
and communed with him.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> But when two years were completed,
Felix was relieved by Porcius Festus as his successor; and Felix,
desirous to oblige the Jews, to acquire their favour, left Paul bound.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Festus therefore, being come into the
eparchy, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And the chief priests and the chief of
the Jews laid informations before him against Paul, and besought him,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> asking as a grace against him that he
would send for him to Jerusalem, laying people in wait to kill him on
the way.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Festus therefore answered that Paul
should be kept at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to set out
shortly.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Let therefore the persons of authority
among you, says he, going down too, if there be anything in this man,
accuse him.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And having remained among them not more
than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea; and on the next day,
having sat down on the judgment-seat, commanded Paul to be brought.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And when he was come, the Jews who were
come down from Jerusalem stood round, bringing many and grievous charges
which they were not able to prove:

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Paul answering for himself, Neither
against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar,
have I offended \[in\] anything.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But Festus, desirous of obliging the
Jews, to acquire their favour, answering Paul, said, Art thou willing to
go up to Jerusalem, there to be judged before me concerning these
things?

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> But Paul said, I am standing before the
judgment-seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. To the Jews have I
done no wrong, as \*thou\* also very well knowest.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> If then I have done any wrong and
committed anything worthy of death, I do not deprecate dying; but if
there is nothing of those things of which they accuse me, no man can
give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then Festus, having conferred with the
council, answered, Thou hast appealed to Caesar. To Caesar shalt thou
go.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And when certain days had elapsed,
Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived at Caesarea to salute Festus.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And when they had spent many days
there, Festus laid before the king the matters relating to Paul, saying,
There is a certain man left prisoner by Felix,

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> concerning whom, when I was at
Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews laid
informations, requiring judgment against him:

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> to whom I answered, It is not \[the\]
custom of the Romans to give up any man before that the accused have the
accusers face to face, and he have got opportunity of defence touching
the charge.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> When therefore they had come together
here, without putting it off, I sat the next day on the judgment-seat
and commanded the man to be brought:

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> concerning whom the accusers, standing
up, brought no such accusation of guilt as \*I\* supposed;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> but had against him certain questions
of their own system of worship, and concerning a certain Jesus who is
dead, whom Paul affirmed to be living.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And as I myself was at a loss as to an
inquiry into these things, I said, Was he willing to go to Jerusalem and
there to be judged concerning these things?

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> But Paul having appealed to be kept for
the cognisance of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I shall send
him to Caesar.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And Agrippa \[said\] to Festus, I
myself also would desire to hear the man. To-morrow, said he, thou shalt
hear him.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> On the morrow therefore, Agrippa being
come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and having entered into the hall of
audience, with the chiliarchs and the men of distinction of the city,
and Festus having given command, Paul was brought.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all
men who are here present with us, ye see this person, concerning whom
all the multitude of the Jews applied to me both in Jerusalem and here,
crying out against \[him\] that he ought not to live any longer.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> But I, having found that he had done
nothing worthy of death, and this \[man\] himself having appealed to
Augustus, I have decided to send him;

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> concerning whom I have nothing certain
to write to my lord. Wherefore I have brought him before you, and
specially before thee, king Agrippa, so that an examination having been
gone into I may have something to write:

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> for it seems to me senseless, sending a
prisoner, not also to signify the charges against him.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And Agrippa said to Paul, It is permitted
thee to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretching out his hand answered in
his defence:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> I count myself happy, king Agrippa, in
having to answer to-day before thee concerning all of which I am accused
by the Jews,

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> especially because thou art acquainted
with all the customs and questions which are among the Jews; wherefore I
beseech thee to hear me patiently.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> My manner of life then from my youth,
which from its commencement was passed among my nation in Jerusalem,
know all the Jews,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> who knew me before from the outset \[of
my life\], if they would bear witness, that according to the strictest
sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And now I stand to be judged because of
the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> to which our whole twelve tribes serving
incessantly day and night hope to arrive; about which hope, O king, I am
accused of \[the\] Jews.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Why should it be judged a thing
incredible in your sight if God raises the dead?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> \*I\* indeed myself thought that I ought
to do much against the name of Jesus the Nazaraean.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Which also I did in Jerusalem, and
myself shut up in prisons many of the saints, having received the
authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death I gave
my vote.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And often punishing them in all the
synagogues, I compelled them to blaspheme. And, being exceedingly
furious against them, I persecuted them even to cities out \[of our own
land\].

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And when, \[engaged\] in this, I was
journeying to Damascus, with authority and power from the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> at mid-day, on the way, I saw, O king,
a light above the brightness of the sun, shining from heaven round about
me and those who were journeying with me.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And, when we were all fallen to the
ground, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? \[it is\] hard for thee to kick against goads.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And the
Lord said, \*I\* am Jesus whom \*thou\* persecutest:

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> but rise up and stand on thy feet; for,
for this purpose have I appeared to thee, to appoint thee to be a
servant and a witness both of what thou hast seen, and of what I shall
appear to thee in,

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> taking thee out from among the people,
and the nations, to whom \*I\* send thee,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> to open their eyes, that they may turn
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they
may receive remission of sins and inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in me.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Whereupon, king Agrippa, I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision;

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> but have, first to those both in
Damascus and Jerusalem, and to all the region of Judaea, and to the
nations, announced that they should repent and turn to God, doing works
worthy of repentance.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> On account of these things the Jews,
having seized me in the temple, attempted to lay hands on and destroy
me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Having therefore met with \[the\] help
which is from God, I have stood firm unto this day, witnessing both to
small and great, saying nothing else than those things which both the
prophets and Moses have said should happen,

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> \[namely,\] whether Christ should
suffer; whether he first, through resurrection of \[the\] dead, should
announce light both to the people and to the nations.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And as he answered for his defence with
these things, Festus says with a loud voice, Thou art mad, Paul; much
learning turns thee to madness.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> But Paul said, I am not mad, most
excellent Festus, but utter words of truth and soberness;

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> for the king is informed about these
things, to whom also I speak with all freedom. For I am persuaded that
of these things nothing is hidden from him; for this was not done in a
corner.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> King Agrippa, believest thou the
prophets? I know that thou believest.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And Agrippa \[said\] to Paul, In a
little thou persuadest me to become a Christian.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And Paul \[said\], I would to God, both
in little and in much, that not only thou, but all who have heard me
this day, should become such as \*I\* also am, except these bonds.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And the king stood up, and the governor
and Bernice, and those who sat with them,

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> and having gone apart, they spoke to
one another saying, This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And Agrippa said to Festus, This man
might have been let go if he had not appealed to Caesar.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> But when it had been determined that we
should sail to Italy, they delivered up Paul and certain other prisoners
to a centurion, by name Julius, of Augustus' company.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And going on board a ship of Adramyttium
about to navigate by the places along Asia, we set sail, Aristarchus, a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And the next day we arrived at Sidon. And
Julius treated Paul kindly and suffered him to go to his friends and
refresh himself.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And setting sail thence we sailed under
the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And having sailed over the waters of
Cilicia and Pamphylia we came to Myra in Lycia:

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> and there the centurion having found a
ship of Alexandria sailing to Italy, he made us go on board her.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And sailing slowly for many days, and
having with difficulty got abreast of Cnidus, the wind not suffering us,
we sailed under the lee of Crete abreast of Salmone;

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> and coasting it with difficulty we came
to a certain place called Fair Havens, near to which was \[the\] city of
Lasaea.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And much time having now been spent, and
navigation being already dangerous, because the fast also was already
past, Paul counselled them,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> saying, Men, I perceive that the
navigation will be with disaster and much loss, not only of the cargo
and the ship, but also of our lives.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the centurion believed rather the
helmsman and the shipowner than what was said by Paul.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And the harbour being ill adapted to
winter in, the most counselled to set sail thence, if perhaps they might
reach Phoenice to winter in, a port of Crete looking north-east and
south-east.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And \[the\] south wind blowing gently,
supposing that they had gained their object, having weighed anchor they
sailed close in shore along Crete.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But not long after there came down it a
hurricane called Euroclydon.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And the ship being caught and driven,
and not able to bring her head to the wind, letting her go we were
driven \[before it\].

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> But running under the lee of a certain
island called Clauda, we were with difficulty able to make ourselves
masters of the boat;

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> which having hoisted up, they used
helps, frapping the ship; and fearing lest they should run into Syrtis
and run aground, and having lowered the gear they were so driven.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> But the storm being extremely violent
on us, on the next day they threw cargo overboard,

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> and on the third day with their own
hands they cast away the ship furniture.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And neither sun nor stars appearing for
many days, and no small storm lying on us, in the end all hope of our
being saved was taken away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And when they had been a long while
without taking food, Paul then standing up in the midst of them said, Ye
ought, O men, to have hearkened to me, and not have made sail from Crete
and have gained this disaster and loss.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And now I exhort you to be of good
courage, for there shall be no loss at all of life of \[any\] of you,
only of the ship.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> For an angel of the God, whose I am and
whom I serve, stood by me this night,

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must stand
before Caesar; and behold, God has granted to thee all those that sail
with thee.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Wherefore be of good courage, men, for
I believe God that thus it shall be, as it has been said to me.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> But we must be cast ashore on a certain
island.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> And when the fourteenth night was come,
we being driven about in Adria, towards the middle of the night the
sailors supposed that some land neared them,

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> and having sounded found twenty
fathoms, and having gone a little farther and having again sounded they
found fifteen fathoms;

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> and fearing lest we should be cast on
rocky places, casting four anchors out of the stern, they wished that
day were come.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> But the sailors wishing to flee out of
the ship, and having let down the boat into the sea under pretext of
being about to carry out anchors from the prow,

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> Paul said to the centurion and the
soldiers, Unless these abide in the ship \*ye\* cannot be saved.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of
the boat and let her fall.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And while it was drawing on to
daylight, Paul exhorted them all to partake of food, saying, Ye have
passed the fourteenth day watching in expectation without taking food.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Wherefore I exhort you to partake of
food, for this has to do with your safety; for not a hair from the head
of any one of you shall perish.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And, having said these things and taken
a loaf, he gave thanks to God before all, and having broken it began to
eat.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> And all taking courage, themselves also
took food.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And we were in the ship, all the souls,
two hundred and seventy-six.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And having satisfied themselves with
food, they lightened the ship, casting out the wheat into the sea.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And when it was day they did not
recognise the land; but they perceived a certain bay having a strand, on
which they were minded, if they should be able, to run the ship ashore;

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> and, having cast off the anchors, they
left \[them\] in the sea, at the same time loosening the lashings of the
rudders, and hoisting the foresail to the wind, they made for the
strand.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> And falling into a place where two seas
met they ran the ship aground, and the prow having stuck itself fast
remained unmoved, but the stern was broken by the force of the waves.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> And \[the\] counsel of the soldiers was
that they should kill the prisoners, lest any one should swim off and
escape.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> But the centurion, desirous of saving
Paul, hindered them of their purpose, and commanded those who were able
to swim, casting themselves first \[into the sea\], to get out on land;

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> and the rest, some on boards, some on
some of the things \[that came\] from the ship; and thus it came to pass
that all got safe to land.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And when we got safe \[to land\] we then
knew that the island was called Melita.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> But the barbarians shewed us no common
kindness; for, having kindled a fire, they took us all in because of the
rain that was falling and because of the cold.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And Paul having gathered a \[certain\]
quantity of sticks together in a bundle and laid \[it\] on the fire, a
viper coming out from the heat seized his hand.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And when the barbarians saw the beast
hanging from his hand, they said to one another, This man is certainly a
murderer, whom, \[though\] saved out of the sea, Nemesis has not allowed
to live.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> \*He\* however, having shaken off the
beast into the fire, felt no harm.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> But \*they\* expected that he would have
swollen or fallen down suddenly dead. But when they had expected a long
time and saw nothing unusual happen to him, changing their opinion, they
said he was a god.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Now in the country surrounding that place
were the lands belonging to the chief man of the island, by name
Publius, who received us and gave \[us\] hospitality three days in a
very friendly way.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And it happened that the father of
Publius lay ill of fever and dysentery; to whom Paul entered in, and
having prayed and laid his hands on him cured him.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> But this having taken place, the rest
also who had sicknesses in the island came and were healed:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> who also honoured us with many honours,
and on our leaving they made presents to us of what should minister to
our wants.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And after three months we sailed in a
ship which had wintered in the island, an Alexandrian, with \[the\]
Dioscuri for its ensign.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And having come to Syracuse we remained
three days.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Whence, going in a circuitous course,
we arrived at Rhegium; and after one day, the wind having changed to
south, on the second day we came to Puteoli,

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> where, having found brethren, we were
begged to stay with them seven days. And thus we went to Rome.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And thence the brethren, having heard
about us, came to meet us as far as Appii Forum and Tres Tabernae, whom
when Paul saw, he thanked God and took courage.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And when we came to Rome, \[the
centurion delivered up the prisoners to the praetorian prefect, but\]
Paul was allowed to remain by himself with the soldier who kept him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And it came to pass after three days,
that he called together those who were the chief of the Jews; and when
they had come together he said to them, Brethren, \*I\* having done
nothing against the people or the customs of our forefathers, have been
delivered a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> who having examined me were minded to
let me go, because there was nothing worthy of death in me.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> But the Jews speaking against it, I was
compelled to appeal to Caesar, not as having anything to accuse my
nation of.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For this cause therefore I have called
you to \[me\] to see and to speak to you; for on account of the hope of
Israel I have this chain about me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And they said to him, For our part, we
have neither received letters from Judaea concerning thee, nor has any
one of the brethren who has arrived reported or said anything evil
concerning thee.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> But we beg to hear of thee what thou
thinkest, for as concerning this sect it is known to us that it is
everywhere spoken against.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And having appointed him a day many
came to him to the lodging, to whom he expounded, testifying of the
kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law
of Moses and the prophets, from early morning to evening.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And some were persuaded of the things
which were said, but some disbelieved.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And being disagreed among themselves
they left; Paul having spoken one word, Well spoke the Holy Spirit
through Esaias the prophet to our fathers,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> saying, Go to this people, and say,
Hearing ye shall hear and not understand, and seeing ye shall see and
not perceive.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the heart of this people has become
fat, and they hear heavily with their ears, and they have closed their
eyes; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal
them.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Be it known to you therefore, that this
salvation of God has been sent to the nations; \*they\* also will hear
\[it\].

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> \[And he having said this, the Jews
went away, having great reasoning among themselves.\]

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And he remained two whole years in his
own hired lodging, and received all who came to him,

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, with all freedom
unhinderedly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans](rom)
