[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](phi)  [Next](th1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Colossians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, apostle of Christ Jesus, by God's
will, and Timotheus the brother,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to the holy and faithful brethren in Christ
which \[are\] in Colosse. Grace to you and peace from God our Father
\[and Lord Jesus Christ\].

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We give thanks to the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ continually \[when\] praying for you,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus,
and the love which ye have towards all the saints,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> on account of the hope which \[is\] laid up
for you in the heavens; of which ye heard before in the word of the
truth of the glad tidings,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> which are come to you, as \[they are\] in
all the world, \[and\] are bearing fruit and growing, even as also among
you, from the day ye heard \[them\] and knew indeed the grace of God, in
truth:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> even as ye learned from Epaphras our
beloved fellow-bondman, who is a faithful minister of Christ for you,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> who has also manifested to us your love in
\[the\] Spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For this reason \*we\* also, from the day
we heard \[of your faith and love\], do not cease praying and asking for
you, to the end that ye may be filled with the full knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> \[so as\] to walk worthily of the Lord
unto all well-pleasing, bearing fruit in every good work, and growing by
the true knowledge of God;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> strengthened with all power according to
the might of his glory unto all endurance and longsuffering with joy;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> giving thanks to the Father, who has made
us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who has delivered us from the authority
of darkness, and translated \[us\] into the kingdom of the Son of his
love:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> in whom we have redemption, the
forgiveness of sins;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> who is image of the invisible God,
firstborn of all creation;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> because by him were created all things,
the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth, the visible and
the invisible, whether thrones, or lordships, or principalities, or
authorities: all things have been created by him and for him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And \*he\* is before all, and all things
subsist together by him.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And \*he\* is the head of the body, the
assembly; who is \[the\] beginning, firstborn from among the dead, that
\*he\* might have the first place in all things:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> for in him all the fulness \[of the
Godhead\] was pleased to dwell,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and by him to reconcile all things to
itself, having made peace by the blood of his cross -- by him, whether
the things on the earth or the things in the heavens.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And you, who once were alienated and
enemies in mind by wicked works, yet now has it reconciled

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> in the body of his flesh through death;
to present you holy and unblamable and irreproachable before it,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> if indeed ye abide in the faith founded
and firm, and not moved away from the hope of the glad tidings, which ye
have heard, which have been proclaimed in the whole creation which
\[is\] under heaven, of which \*I\* Paul became minister.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Now, I rejoice in sufferings for you, and
I fill up that which is behind of the tribulations of Christ in my
flesh, for his body, which is the assembly;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> of which \*I\* became minister, according
to the dispensation of God which \[is\] given me towards you to complete
the word of God,

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> the mystery which \[has been\] hidden
from ages and from generations, but has now been made manifest to his
saints;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> to whom God would make known what are the
riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations, which is Christ
in you the hope of glory:

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> whom \*we\* announce, admonishing every
man, and teaching every man, in all wisdom, to the end that we may
present every man perfect in Christ.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Whereunto also I toil, combating
according to his working, which works in me in power.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> For I would have you know what combat I
have for you, and those in Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my
face in flesh;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> to the end that their hearts may be
encouraged, being united together in love, and unto all riches of the
full assurance of understanding, to \[the\] full knowledge of the
mystery of God;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> in which are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and of knowledge.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And I say this to the end that no one may
delude you by persuasive speech.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For if indeed in the flesh I am absent, yet
I am with you in spirit, rejoicing and seeing your order, and the
firmness of your faith in Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> As therefore ye have received the Christ,
Jesus the Lord, walk in him,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> rooted and built up in him, and assured in
the faith, even as ye have been taught, abounding in it with
thanksgiving.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> See that there be no one who shall lead
\*you\* away as a prey through philosophy and vain deceit, according to
the teaching of men, according to the elements of the world, and not
according to Christ.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For in him dwells all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and ye are complete in him, who is the
head of all principality and authority,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> in whom also ye have been circumcised
with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of
the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> buried with him in baptism, in which ye
have been also raised with \[him\] through faith of the working of God
who raised him from among the dead.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And you, being dead in offences and in
the uncircumcision of your flesh, he has quickened together with him,
having forgiven us all the offences;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> having effaced the handwriting in
ordinances which \[stood out\] against us, which was contrary to us, he
has taken it also out of the way, having nailed it to the cross;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> having spoiled principalities and
authorities, he made a show of them publicly, leading them in triumph by
it.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Let none therefore judge you in meat or
in drink, or in matter of feast, or new moon, or sabbaths,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> which are a shadow of things to come; but
the body \[is\] of Christ.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Let no one fraudulently deprive you of
your prize, doing his own will in humility and worship of angels,
entering into things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by the mind
of his flesh,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and not holding fast the head, from whom
all the body, ministered to and united together by the joints and bands,
increases with the increase of God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> If ye have died with Christ from the
elements of the world, why as \[if\] alive in \[the\] world do ye
subject yourselves to ordinances?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Do not handle, do not taste, do not
touch,

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> (things which are all for destruction in
the using \[of them\]:) according to the injunctions and teachings of
men,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> (which have indeed an appearance of
wisdom in voluntary worship, and humility, and harsh treatment of the
body, not in a certain honour,) to \[the\] satisfaction of the flesh.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> If therefore ye have been raised with the
Christ, seek the things \[which are\] above, where the Christ is,
sitting at \[the\] right hand of God:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> have your mind on the things \[that are\]
above, not on the things \[that are\] on the earth;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> for ye have died, and your life is hid with
the Christ in God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> When the Christ is manifested who \[is\]
our life, then shall \*ye\* also be manifested with him in glory.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Put to death therefore your members which
\[are\] upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, vile passions, evil
lust, and unbridled desire, which is idolatry.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> On account of which things the wrath of God
comes upon the sons of disobedience.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In which \*ye\* also once walked when ye
lived in these things.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But now, put off, \*ye\* also, all
\[these\] things, wrath, anger, malice, blasphemy, vile language out of
your mouth.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Do not lie to one another, having put off
the old man with his deeds,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> and having put on the new, renewed into
full knowledge according to \[the\] image of him that has created him;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> wherein there is not Greek and Jew,
circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman;
but Christ \[is\] everything, and in all.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Put on therefore, as \[the\] elect of
God, holy and beloved, bowels of compassion, kindness, lowliness,
meekness, longsuffering;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, if any should have a complaint against any; even as the Christ
has forgiven you, so also \[do\] \*ye\*.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And to all these \[add\] love, which is
the bond of perfectness.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And let the peace of Christ preside in
your hearts, to which also ye have been called in one body, and be
thankful.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Let the word of the Christ dwell in you
richly, in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another, in psalms,
hymns, spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to God.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And everything, whatever ye may do in
word or in deed, \[do\] all things in \[the\] name of \[the\] Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Wives, be subject to \[your\] husbands,
as is fitting in \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Husbands, love your wives, and be not
bitter against them.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Children, obey your parents in all
things, for this is well-pleasing in \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Fathers, do not vex your children, to the
end that they be not disheartened.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Bondmen, obey in all things your masters
according to flesh; not with eye-services, as men-pleasers, but in
simplicity of heart, fearing the Lord.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Whatsoever ye do, labour at it heartily,
as \[doing it\] to the Lord, and not to men;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> knowing that of \[the\] Lord ye shall
receive the recompense of the inheritance; ye serve the Lord Christ.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For he that does a wrong shall receive
the wrong he has done, and there is no respect of persons.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Masters, give to bondmen what is just and
fair, knowing that \*ye\* also have a Master in \[the\] heavens.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Persevere in prayer, watching in it with
thanksgiving;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> praying at the same time for us also, that
God may open to us a door of the word to speak the mystery of Christ, on
account of which also I am bound,

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> to the end that I may make it manifest as I
ought to speak.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Walk in wisdom towards those without,
redeeming opportunities.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> \[Let\] your word \[be\] always with grace,
seasoned with salt, \[so as\] to know how ye ought to answer each one.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful
minister and fellow-bondman in \[the\] Lord, will make known to you all
that concerns me;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> whom I have sent to you for this very
purpose, that he might know your state, and that he might encourage your
hearts:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved
brother, who is \[one\] of you. They shall make known to you everything
here.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Aristarchus my fellow-captive salutes
you, and Mark, Barnabas's cousin, concerning whom ye have received
orders, (if he come to you, receive him,)

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> and Jesus called Justus, who are of the
circumcision. These \[are the\] only fellow-workers for the kingdom of
God who have been a consolation to me.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Epaphras, who is \[one\] of you, \[the\]
bondman of Christ Jesus, salutes you, always combating earnestly for you
in prayers, to the end that ye may stand perfect and complete in all
\[the\] will of God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For I bear him witness that he labours
much for you, and them in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Luke, the beloved physician, salutes you,
and Demas.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Salute the brethren in Laodicea, and
Nymphas, and the assembly which \[is\] in his house.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And when the letter has been read among
you, cause that it be read also in the assembly of Laodiceans, and that
\*ye\* also read that from Laodicea.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And say to Archippus, Take heed to the
ministry which thou hast received in \[the\] Lord, to the end that thou
fulfil it.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The salutation by the hand of me Paul.
Remember my bonds. Grace \[be\] with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians](th1)
