[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](num)  [Next](jos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Deuteronomy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the words which Moses spoke to
all Israel on this side the Jordan, in the wilderness, in the plain,
opposite to Suph, between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and
Dizahab.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> There are eleven days' journey from Horeb
by the way of mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And it came to pass in the fortieth year,
in the eleventh month, on the first of the month, that Moses spoke to
the children of Israel, according to all that Jehovah had given him in
command to them;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> after he had smitten Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt at
Ashtaroth \[and\] at Edrei.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> On this side the Jordan, in the land of
Moab, began Moses to unfold this law, saying,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Jehovah our God spoke unto us in Horeb,
saying, Ye have stayed long enough in this mountain.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Turn and take your journey, and go to the
hill-country of the Amorites, and unto all the neighbouring places in
the plain, in the mountain, and in the lowland, and in the south, and by
the seaside, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, unto the great
river, the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Behold, I have set the land before you: go
in and possess the land which Jehovah swore unto your fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed
after them.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And I spoke unto you at that time, saying,
I am not able to bear you myself alone.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Jehovah your God hath multiplied you, and
behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Jehovah, the God of your fathers, make
you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and bless you as he hath
said unto you!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> How can I myself alone sustain your wear,
and your burden, and your strife?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Provide you wise and understanding and
known men, according to your tribes, that I may make them your chiefs.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And ye answered me, and said, The thing
that thou hast spoken is good \[for us\] to do.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So I took the chiefs of your tribes, wise
men and known, and made them chiefs over you, captains of thousands, and
captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and captains of tens, and
officers for your tribes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I commanded your judges at that time,
saying, Hear \[the causes\] between your brethren, and judge righteously
between a man and his brother, and him also that sojourneth with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Ye shall not respect persons in judgment:
ye shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of
the face of man, for the judgment is God's; and the matter that is too
hard for you shall ye bring to me, that I may hear it.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And I commanded you at that time all the
things that ye should do.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And we departed from Horeb and went
through all that great and terrible wilderness, which ye saw, on the way
to the mountain of the Amorites, as Jehovah our God had commanded us;
and we came to Kadesh-barnea.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the
mountain of the Amorites, which Jehovah our God giveth us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Behold, Jehovah thy God hath set the land
before thee: go up, take possession, as Jehovah the God of thy fathers
hath said unto thee; fear not, neither be dismayed.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And ye came near to me all of you, and
said, We will send men before us, who shall examine the land for us, and
bring us word again of the way by which we must go up, and of the cities
to which we shall come.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And the matter was good in mine eyes; and
I took twelve men of you, one man for a tribe.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they turned and went up into the
mountain, and came to the valley of Eshcol, and searched it out.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And they took of the fruit of the land in
their hand, and brought it down unto us, and brought us answer, and
said, The land is good that Jehovah our God hath given us.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But ye would not go up, and rebelled
against the word of Jehovah your God;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> and ye murmured in your tents, and said,
Because Jehovah hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the land of
Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Whither shall we go up? Our brethren have
made our hearts melt, saying, \[They are\] a people greater and taller
than we; the cities are great and walled up to heaven; and moreover we
have seen the sons of the Anakim there.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And I said unto you, Be not afraid,
neither fear them;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Jehovah your God who goeth before you, he
will fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before
your eyes;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and in the wilderness where thou hast
seen that Jehovah thy God bore thee, as a man doth bear his son, in all
the way that ye went, until ye came to this place.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> But In this thing ye did not believe
Jehovah your God,

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> who went in the way before you, to search
you out a place for your encamping, in fire by night, to shew you by
what way ye should go, and in the cloud by day.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And Jehovah heard the voice of your
words, and was wroth, and swore, saying,

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> None among these men, this evil
generation, shall in any wise see that good land, which I swore to give
unto your fathers!

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Except Caleb the son of Jephunneh, he
shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath trodden upon,
and to his children, because he hath wholly followed Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Also Jehovah was angry with me on your
account, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Joshua the son of Nun, who standeth
before thee, he shall go in thither: strengthen him, for he shall cause
Israel to inherit it.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And your little ones, of whom ye said,
They shall be a prey, and your children, who this day know neither good
nor evil, they shall go in thither, and unto them will I give it, and
they shall possess it.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> But ye, turn, and take your journey into
the wilderness by the way of the Red sea.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> -- And ye answered and said unto me, We
have sinned against Jehovah, we will go up and fight, according to all
that Jehovah our God hath commanded us. And ye girded on every man his
weapons of war, and ye would go presumptuously up the hill.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And Jehovah said to me, Say unto them, Go
not up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smitten before
your enemies.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And I spoke unto you, but ye would not
hear, and ye rebelled against the word of Jehovah, and acted
presumptuously, and went up the hill.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And the Amorite that dwelt on that hill
came out against you, and chased you, like as bees do, and cut you in
pieces in Seir, as far as Hormah.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And ye returned and wept before Jehovah,
but Jehovah would not listen to your voice, nor give ear unto you.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And ye abode in Kadesh many days,
according unto the days that ye abode \[there\].

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And we turned, and took our journey into
the wilderness by the way of the Red sea, as Jehovah had said unto me;
and we went round mount Seir many days.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jehovah spoke to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Ye have gone round this mountain long
enough: turn you northward.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And command the people, saying, Ye are to
pass through the border of your brethren the children of Esau, who dwell
in Seir; and they will be afraid of you; and ye shall be very guarded:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> attack them not; for I will not give you of
their land, no, not so much as a foot-breadth; for I have given mount
Seir as a possession unto Esau.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Ye shall buy of them food for money, that
ye may eat; and water shall ye also buy of them for money, that ye may
drink;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> for Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee in
all the work of thy hand. He hath known thy walking through this great
wilderness: these forty years hath Jehovah thy God been with thee; thou
hast lacked nothing.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And we passed by from our brethren the
children of Esau, who dwelt in Seir, by the plain, by Elath, and by
Ezion-geber, and we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of
Moab.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And Jehovah said to me, Distress not the
Moabites, neither engage with them in battle; for I will not give thee
of their land a possession; for unto the children of Lot have I given Ar
as a possession.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> (The Emim dwelt therein in times past, a
people great, and many, and tall as the Anakim.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> They also are reckoned as giants like the
Anakim; but the Moabites call them Emim.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And in Seir dwelt the Horites in times
past; and the children of Esau dispossessed them, and destroyed them
from before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did to the land of
their possession, which Jehovah gave to them.)

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Now rise up, and pass over the torrent
Zered. And we passed over the torrent Zered.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Now the days in which we came from
Kadesh-barnea, until we had come over the torrent Zered, were
thirty-eight years; until the whole generation of the men of war was
consumed from the midst of the camp, as Jehovah had sworn unto them.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Moreover the hand of Jehovah was against
them to destroy them from the midst of the camp, until they were
consumed.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And it came to pass when all the men of
war were consumed, having died off from among the people,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> that Jehovah spoke to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Thou art to pass this day over the border
of Moab, \[which is\] Ar,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and come near over against the children
of Ammon; thou shalt not distress them nor attack them; for I will not
give thee of the land of the children of Ammon a possession; for unto
the children of Lot have I given it as a possession.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> (That also is reckoned a land of giants:
giants dwelt therein in time past, and the Ammonites call them
Zamzummim;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> a people great, and many, and tall as the
Anakim; and Jehovah destroyed them before them, and they dispossessed
them, and dwelt in their stead;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> as he did to the children of Esau, who
dwelt in Seir, from before whom he destroyed the Horites; and they
dispossessed them, and dwelt in their stead, even to this day.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And the Avvites who dwelt in the hamlets
as far as Gazah -- the Caphtorim, who came out of Caphtor, destroyed
them, and dwelt in their stead.)

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Rise up, take your journey, and pass over
the river Arnon. Behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon the king of
Heshbon, the Amorite, and his land: begin, take possession, and engage
with him in battle.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> This day will I begin to put the dread of
thee and the fear of thee upon the peoples under the whole heaven; who
will hear report of thee, and will tremble, and quake because of thee.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And I sent messengers out of the
wilderness of Kedemoth unto Sihon the king of Heshbon with words of
peace, saying,

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Let me pass through thy land: by the
highway alone will I go; I will neither turn to the right hand nor to
the left.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou shalt sell me food for money that I
may eat; and thou shalt give me water for money that I may drink; I will
only pass through on my feet,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> -- as the children of Esau who dwell in
Seir, and the Moabites who dwell in Ar, did to me, -- until I shall pass
over the Jordan into the land which Jehovah our God giveth us.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But Sihon the king of Heshbon would not
let us pass by him; for Jehovah thy God hardened his spirit, and made
his heart obdurate, that he might give him into thy hand, as it is this
day.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And Jehovah said to me, Behold, I begin
to give Sihon and his land before thee: begin, take possession, that
thou mayest possess his land.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And Sihon came out against us for battle,
he and all his people, to Jahaz.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> But Jehovah our God gave him up before
us; and we smote him, and his sons, and his whole people.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And we took all his cities at that time,
and utterly destroyed every city, men, and women, and little ones: we
let none escape.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Only the cattle we took as booty for
ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we took.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> From Aroer, which is on the bank of the
river Arnon, and the city that is in the ravine even to Gilead, there
was not one city too strong for us: Jehovah our God delivered all before
us.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Only thou didst not approach the land of
the children of Ammon, the whole border of the river Jabbok, nor the
cities of the mountain, nor to whatsoever Jehovah our God had forbidden
us.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And we turned, and went up the way to
Bashan; and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his
people, for battle at Edrei.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And Jehovah said to me, Fear him not; for
into thy hand have I given him, and all his people, and his land; and
thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Jehovah our God gave into our hand Og
the king of Bashan also, and all his people; and we smote him until none
was left to him remaining.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And we took all his cities at that time:
there was not a town which we took not from them, sixty cities, the
whole region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> All these cities were fortified with high
walls, gates, and bars; besides unwalled towns very many.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And we utterly destroyed them, as we had
done to Sihon the king of Heshbon, utterly destroying every city, men,
women and little ones.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But all the cattle and the spoil of the
cities we took as booty for ourselves.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And we took at that time the land out of
the hand of the two kings of the Amorites, that were on this side the
Jordan, from the river Arnon to mount Hermon

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> (the Sidonians call Hermon Sirion, and the
Amorites call it Senir):

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> all the cities of the plateau, and all
Gilead, and all Bashan, as far as Salchah and Edrei, the cities of the
kingdom of Og in Bashan.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For only Og the king of Bashan remained
of the residue of giants: behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron;
is it not in Rabbah of the children of Ammon? its length was nine
cubits, and its breadth four cubits, after the cubit of a man.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And this land we took in possession at
that time. From Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, and the half of
mount Gilead, and its cities, I gave to the Reubenites and to the
Gadites;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan,
the kingdom of Og, I gave to half the tribe of Manasseh. (The whole
region of Argob, even all Bashan, is called a land of giants.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Jair the son of Manasseh took the whole
region of Argob as far as the border of the Geshurites and Maachathites,
and called Bashan after his own name, Havoth-Jair, to this day.)

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And I gave Gilead to Machir.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And to the Reubenites and to the Gadites
I gave from Gilead even to the river Arnon, the middle of the ravine and
its border, as far as the river Jabbok, the border of the children of
Ammon;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> the plain also, and the Jordan, and
\[its\] border from Chinnereth as far as the sea of the plain, the salt
sea, under the slopes of Pisgah eastward.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And I commanded you at that time, saying,
Jehovah your God hath given you this land to take possession of it: ye
shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, all
\[who are\] combatants.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Only your wives, and your little ones,
and your cattle, -- I know that ye have much cattle, -- shall abide in
your cities which I have given you,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> until Jehovah give rest to your brethren,
as well as to you, and they also take possession of the land that
Jehovah your God giveth them beyond the Jordan; then shall ye return,
each man to his possession, which I have given you.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I commanded Joshua at that time,
saying, Thine eyes have seen all that Jehovah your God hath done to
these two kings: so will Jehovah do to all the kingdoms to which thou
shalt go.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Ye shall not fear them; for Jehovah your
God, he will fight for you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And I besought Jehovah at that time,
saying,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Lord Jehovah, thou hast begun to shew thy
servant thy greatness, and thy powerful hand; for what ùGod is in the
heavens or in the earth that can do like to thy works, and like to thy
might?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Let me go over, I pray thee, and see the
good land that is beyond the Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But Jehovah was wroth with me on your
account, and did not hear me; and Jehovah said to me, Let it suffice
thee; speak no more unto me of this matter!

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Go up to the top of Pisgah, and lift up
thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and
behold it with thine eyes; for thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> But charge Joshua, and encourage him and
strengthen him; for he shall go over before this people, and he shall
put them in possession of the land which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> And we abode in the valley opposite to
Beth-Peor.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And now, Israel, hearken to the statutes
and to the ordinances which I teach you, to do \[them\], that ye may
live, and go in and possess the land which Jehovah the God of your
fathers giveth you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Ye shall not add to the word which I
command you, neither shall ye take from it, that ye may keep the
commandments of Jehovah your God which I command you.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Your eyes have seen what Jehovah did
because of Baal-Peor; for all the men that followed Baal-Peor, Jehovah
thy God hath destroyed them from among you;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> but ye that did cleave to Jehovah your God
are alive every one of you this day.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> See, I have taught you statutes and
ordinances, even as Jehovah my God commanded me, that ye may do so in
the land into which ye enter to possess it.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And ye shall keep and do them; for that
will be your wisdom and your understanding before the eyes of the
peoples that shall hear all these statutes, and say, Verily this great
nation is a wise and understanding people.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For what great nation is there that hath
God near to them as Jehovah our God is in everything we call upon him
for?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And what great nation is there that hath
righteous statutes and ordinances, as all this law which I set before
you this day?

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy
soul diligently, lest thou forget the things that thine eyes have seen
(and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; but thou
shalt make them known to thy sons and to thy sons' sons),

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> the day that thou stoodest before Jehovah
thy God in Horeb, when Jehovah said to me, Gather me the people
together, that I may cause them to hear my words, that they may learn
them, and fear me all the days that they live upon the earth, and teach
them to their children.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And ye came near and stood under the
mountain; and the mountain burned with fire to the heart of heaven, with
darkness, clouds, and obscurity.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And Jehovah spoke to you from the midst
of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but ye saw no form; only
\[ye heard\] a voice.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he declared to you his covenant,
which he commanded you to do, the ten words; and he wrote them on two
tables of stone.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And Jehovah commanded me at that time to
teach you statutes and ordinances, that ye might do them in the land
whither ye are passing over to possess it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And take great heed to your souls (for ye
saw no form on the day that Jehovah spoke to you in Horeb from the midst
of the fire),

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you
a graven image, the form of any figure, the pattern of male or female,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> the pattern of any beast that is on the
earth, the pattern of any winged fowl that flieth in the heaven,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> the pattern of anything that creepeth on
the ground, the pattern of any fish that is in the waters under the
earth;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and lest thou lift up thine eyes to the
heavens, and see the sun, and the moon, and the stars, the whole host of
heaven, and be drawn away and bow down to them and serve them, which
Jehovah thy God hath assigned unto all peoples under the whole heaven.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But you hath Jehovah taken, and hath
brought you forth out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, that ye might
be to him a people of inheritance, as it is this day.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Jehovah was angry with me on your
account, and swore that I should not go over the Jordan, and that I
should not enter in to that good land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee
\[for\] an inheritance;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> for I shall die in this land, I shall not
go over the Jordan; but ye shall go over, and possess this good land.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Take heed to yourselves lest ye forget
the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he made with you, and make
yourselves a graven image, the form of anything which Jehovah thy God
hath forbidden thee.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For Jehovah thy God is a consuming fire,
a jealous ùGod.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> When thou begettest sons, and sons' sons,
and ye have remained long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and
make a graven image, the form of anything, and do evil in the sight of
Jehovah thy God, to provoke him to anger,

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I call heaven and earth to witness
against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the
land whereunto ye pass over the Jordan to possess it: ye shall not
prolong your days on it, but shall be utterly destroyed.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And Jehovah will scatter you among the
peoples, and ye shall be left a small company among the nations to which
Jehovah will lead you.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And ye shall there serve gods, the work
of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat,
nor smell.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And from thence ye shall seek Jehovah thy
God, and thou shalt find him, if thou shalt seek him with thy whole
heart and with thy whole soul.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> In thy tribulation, and when all these
things shall come upon thee, at the end of days, thou shalt return to
Jehovah thy God, and shalt hearken to his voice,

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> -- for Jehovah thy God is a merciful
ùGod, -- he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the
covenant of thy fathers which he swore unto them.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> For ask now of the days that are past,
which were before thee, since the day that God created man on the earth,
and from one end of the heavens to the other end of the heavens, whether
there hath been anything as this great thing is, or if anything hath
been heard like it?

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> Did \[ever\] people hear the voice of God
speaking from the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Or hath God essayed to come to take him a
nation from the midst of a nation, by trials, by signs, and by wonders,
and by war, and by a powerful hand, and by a stretched-out arm, and by
great terrors, according to all that Jehovah your God did for you in
Egypt before your eyes?

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Unto thee it was shewn, that thou
mightest know that Jehovah, he is God -- there is none other besides
him.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> From the heavens he made thee hear his
voice, that he might instruct thee; and on the earth he shewed thee his
great fire; and thou heardest his words from the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And because he loved thy fathers, and
chose their seed after them, he brought thee out with his countenance,
with his great power, out of Egypt,

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> to dispossess nations from before thee
greater and mightier than thou art, to bring thee in, to give thee their
land for an inheritance, as it is this day.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Thou shalt know therefore this day, and
consider it in thy heart, that Jehovah, he is God in the heavens above,
and on the earth beneath: \[there is\] none else.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And thou shalt keep his statutes, and his
commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may be well with
thee and with thy sons after thee, and that thou mayest prolong thy days
on the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, for ever.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Then Moses separated three cities on this
side the Jordan toward the sun-rising,

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> that the manslayer might flee thither,
who should kill his neighbour unawares, and hated him not previously,
that fleeing to one of these cities, he might live:

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> Bezer in the wilderness, in the plateau,
of the Reubenites, and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites, and Golan in
Bashan, of the Manassites.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And this is the law which Moses set
before the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> these are the testimonies, and the
statutes, and the ordinances that Moses declared to the children of
Israel, when they came out of Egypt,

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> on this side the Jordan, in the valley
opposite to Beth-Peor, in the land of Sihon the king of the Amorites,
who dwelt in Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote when
they came out of Egypt;

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> and they took possession of his land, and
the land of Og the king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, who were
on this side the Jordan, toward the sun-rising;

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> from Aroer, which is on the bank of the
river Arnon, as far as mount Sion, which is Hermon,

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> and all the plain on this side the
Jordan, eastward, and as far as the sea of the plain, under the slopes
of Pisgah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Moses called to all Israel, and said to
them, Hear, Israel, the statutes and the ordinances that I speak in your
ears this day, and learn them, and keep them to do them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in
Horeb.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Not with our fathers did Jehovah make this
covenant, but with us, \[even\] us, those \[who are\] here alive all of
us this day.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Face to face on the mountain from the midst
of the fire Jehovah spoke with you

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> (I stood between Jehovah and you at that
time, to declare to you the word of Jehovah; for ye were afraid by
reason of the fire, and went not up to the mountain), saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I am Jehovah thy God who have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Thou shalt not make thyself any graven
image, any form of what is in the heavens above, or what is in the earth
beneath, or what is in the waters under the earth:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,
nor serve them; for I, Jehovah thy God, am a jealous ùGod, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, and upon the third and upon the
fourth \[generation\] of them that hate me,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> and shewing mercy unto thousands of them
that love me and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Thou shalt not idly utter the name of
Jehovah thy God; for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that idly
uttereth his name.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Keep the sabbath day to hallow it, as
Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Six days shalt thou labour, and do all
thy work;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> but the seventh day is the sabbath of
Jehovah thy God: thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, nor thy bondman, nor thy handmaid, nor thine ox, nor thine
ass, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy sojourner that is within thy gates;
that thy bondman and thy handmaid may rest as well as thou.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast a
bondman in the land of Egypt, and that Jehovah thy God brought thee out
thence with a powerful hand and with a stretched-out arm; therefore
Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee to observe the sabbath day.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Honour thy father and thy mother, as
Jehovah thy God hath commanded thee; that thy days may be prolonged, and
that it may be well with thee in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth
thee.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Neither shalt thou commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Neither shalt thou steal.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Neither shalt thou bear false witness
against thy neighbour.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's
wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, nor his
bondman, nor his handmaid, his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy
neighbour's.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> These words Jehovah spoke to all your
congregation on the mountain from the midst of the fire, of the cloud,
and of the obscurity, with a great voice, and he added no more; and he
wrote them on two tables of stone, and gave them to me.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And it came to pass, when ye heard the
voice from the midst of the darkness, and the mountain burned with fire,
that ye came near to me, all the heads of your tribes, and your elders;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and ye said, Behold, Jehovah our God has
shewn us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice from
the midst of the fire: we have seen this day that God talks with man,
and he lives.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And now, why should we die? for this
great fire will consume us. If we hear the voice of Jehovah our God any
more, we shall die.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For who is there of all flesh, that has
heard the voice of the living God speaking from the midst of the fire,
as we, and has lived?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Come thou near, and hear all that Jehovah
our God will say; and speak thou to us all that Jehovah our God will
speak to thee; and we will hear it, and do it.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> And Jehovah heard the voice of your
words, when ye spoke to me; and Jehovah said unto me, I have heard the
voice of the words of this people that have spoken to thee: they have
well spoken all that they have spoken.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Oh that there were such a heart in them,
that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments continually, that
it might be well with them and with their sons for ever!

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Go, say unto them, Get you into your
tents again.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> But as for thee, stand thou here by me,
and I will speak unto thee all the commandments, and the statutes, and
the ordinances, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in
the land which I give them to possess it.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> Take heed then to do as Jehovah your God
hath commanded you: turn not aside to the right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> In all the way that Jehovah your God hath
commanded you shall ye walk, that ye may live, and that it may be well
with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall
possess.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And these are the commandments, the
statutes, and the ordinances, which Jehovah your God commanded to teach
you, that ye may do them in the land whereunto ye pass over to possess
it,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> that thou mayest fear Jehovah thy God, to
keep all his statutes and his commandments which I command thee, thou,
and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life; and that thy
days may be prolonged.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And thou shalt hear, Israel, and take heed
to do \[them\]; that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase
greatly, as Jehovah the God of thy fathers hath said unto thee, in a
land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Hear, Israel: Jehovah our God is one
Jehovah;

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and thou shalt love Jehovah thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And these words, which I command thee this
day, shall be in thy heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> and thou shalt impress them on thy sons,
and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou
goest on the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And thou shalt bind them for a sign on thy
hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And thou shalt write them upon the posts of
thy house, and upon thy gates.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And it shall be, when Jehovah thy God
bringeth thee into the land which he swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham,
to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee: great and good cities which thou
buildedst not,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and houses full of everything good which
thou filledst not, and wells digged which thou diggedst not, vineyards
and oliveyards which thou plantedst not, and thou shalt have eaten and
shalt be full;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> \[then\] beware lest thou forget Jehovah
who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God, and
serve him, and shalt swear by his name.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Ye shall not go after other gods, of the
gods of the peoples that are round about you;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> for Jehovah thy God is a jealous ùGod in
thy midst; lest the anger of Jehovah thy God be kindled against thee,
and he destroy thee from the face of the earth.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Ye shall not tempt Jehovah your God, as
ye tempted him in Massah.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Ye shall diligently keep the commandments
of Jehovah your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he
hath commanded thee.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And thou shalt do what is right and good
in the sight of Jehovah, that it may be well with thee, and that thou
mayest enter in and possess the good land which Jehovah swore unto thy
fathers,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> thrusting out all thine enemies from
before thee, as Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> When thy son shall ask thee in time to
come, saying, What are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the
ordinances, which Jehovah our God hath commanded you?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were
Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; and Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a
powerful hand;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and Jehovah shewed signs and wonders,
great and grievous, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his
household, before our eyes;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> and he brought us out thence, that he
might bring us in, to give us the land which he swore unto our fathers.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And Jehovah commanded us to do all these
statutes, to fear Jehovah our God, for our good continually, that he
might preserve us alive, as it is this day.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And it shall be our righteousness if we
take heed to do all these commandments before Jehovah our God, as he
hath commanded us.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into
the land whither thou goest to possess it, and shall cast out many
nations from before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the
Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and when Jehovah thy God shall give them up
before thee and thou shalt smite them, then shalt thou utterly destroy
them: thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And thou shalt make no marriages with them:
thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor take his daughter for
thy son;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> for he will turn away thy son from
following me, and they will serve other gods, and the anger of Jehovah
will be kindled against you, and he will destroy thee quickly.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> But thus shall ye deal with them: ye shall
break down their altars, and shatter their statues, and hew down their
Asherahs, and burn their graven images with fire.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For a holy people art thou unto Jehovah thy
God: Jehovah thy God hath chosen thee to be unto him a people for a
possession, above all the peoples that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Not because ye were more in number than all
the peoples, hath Jehovah been attached to you and chosen you, for ye
are the fewest of all the peoples;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> but because Jehovah loved you, and because
he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath
Jehovah brought you out with a powerful hand, and redeemed you out of
the house of bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And thou shalt know that Jehovah thy God,
he is God, the faithful ùGod, who keepeth covenant and mercy to a
thousand generations with them that love him and keep his commandments;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and repayeth them that hate him \[each\]
to his face, to cause them to perish: he delayeth not with him that
hateth him, he will repay him to his face.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And thou shalt keep the commandment, and
the statutes, and the ordinances, which I command thee this day, to do
them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye hearken
to these ordinances, and keep and do them, that Jehovah thy God will
keep with thee the covenant and the mercy which he swore unto thy
fathers;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and he will love thee, and bless thee,
and multiply thee, and will bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit
of thy ground, thy corn and thy new wine, and thine oil, the offspring
of thy kine, and the increase of thy sheep, in the land which he swore
unto thy fathers to give thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Thou shalt be blessed above all the
peoples; there shall not be male or female barren with thee, or with thy
cattle;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and Jehovah will take away from thee all
sickness, and none of the evil infirmities of Egypt, which thou knowest,
will he put upon thee; but he will lay them upon all them that hate
thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou shalt consume all the peoples
that Jehovah thy God will give up unto thee; thine eye shall not spare
them, and thou shalt not serve their gods; for that would be a snare
unto thee.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If thou shouldest say in thy heart, These
nations are greater than I; how can I dispossess them?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> fear them not; remember well what Jehovah
thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all the Egyptians;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> the great trials which thine eyes saw,
and the signs, and the wonders, and the powerful hand, and the
stretched-out arm, whereby Jehovah thy God brought thee out: so will
Jehovah thy God do unto all the peoples whom thou fearest.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Moreover, Jehovah thy God will send the
hornet among them, until they that are left, and they that hide
themselves from thee, are destroyed.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thou shalt not be afraid of them; for
Jehovah thy God is in thy midst, a ùGod great and terrible.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Jehovah thy God will cast out those
nations from before thee by little and little; thou shalt not be able to
make an end of them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon
thee.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But Jehovah thy God will give them up
before thee, and will confound them with great consternation, until they
are destroyed.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And he will give their kings into thy
hand, and thou shalt put out their name from under the heavens; no man
shall stand before thee, until thou hast destroyed them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The graven images of their gods shall ye
burn with fire; thou shalt not covet the silver and gold \[that is\] on
them and take it unto thee, lest thou be ensnared therein; for it is an
abomination to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And thou shalt not bring an abomination
into thy house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: thou shalt utterly
detest it, and thou shalt utterly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Every commandment which I command thee this
day shall ye take heed to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and enter
in and possess the land which Jehovah swore unto your fathers.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And thou shalt remember all the way which
Jehovah thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble
thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether thou
wouldest keep his commandments or not.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And he humbled thee, and suffered thee to
hunger, and fed thee with the manna, which thou hadst not known, and
which thy fathers knew not; that he might make thee know that man doth
not live by bread alone, but by everything that goeth out of the mouth
of Jehovah doth man live.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Thy clothing grew not old upon thee,
neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And know in thy heart that, as a man
chasteneth his son, so Jehovah thy God chasteneth thee;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and thou shalt keep the commandments of
Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For Jehovah thy God bringeth thee into a
good land, a land of water-brooks, of springs, and of deep waters, that
gush forth in the valleys and hills;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and
fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive-trees and honey;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without
scarceness, where thou shalt lack nothing; a land whose stones are iron,
and out of whose mountains thou wilt dig copper.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And thou shalt eat and be filled, and
shalt bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he hath given thee.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Beware that thou forget not Jehovah thy
God, in not keeping his commandments, and his ordinances, and his
statutes, which I command thee this day;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> lest when thou hast eaten and art full,
and hast built and inhabited fine houses,

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> and thy herds and thy flocks multiply,
and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou hast is
multiplied,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> then thy heart be lifted up, and thou
forget Jehovah thy God, who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who led thee through the great and
terrible wilderness, \[a wilderness of\] fiery serpents, and scorpions,
and drought, where there is no water; who brought thee forth water out
of the rock of flint;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> who fed thee in the wilderness with
manna, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that
he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> -- and thou say in thy heart, My power
and the might of my hand has procured me this wealth.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But thou shalt remember Jehovah thy God,
that it is he who giveth thee power to get wealth, that he may establish
his covenant which he swore unto thy fathers, as it is this day.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And it shall be, if thou do at all forget
Jehovah thy God, and go after other gods, and serve them, and bow down
to them, I testify against you this day that ye shall utterly perish.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> As the nations which Jehovah is causing
to perish before you, so shall ye perish; because ye would not hearken
unto the voice of Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Hear, Israel! Thou art to pass over the
Jordan this day, to enter in to possess nations greater and mightier
than thou, cities great and walled up to heaven,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> a people great and tall, the sons of the
Anakim, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard \[say\], Who can
stand before the sons of Anak!

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Know then this day, that Jehovah thy God is
he that goeth over before thee, a consuming fire; he will destroy them,
and he will cast them down before thee, and thou shalt dispossess them
and cause them to perish quickly, as Jehovah hath said unto thee.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Thou shalt not say in thy heart, when
Jehovah thy God thrusteth them out from before thee, saying, For my
righteousness Jehovah hath brought me in to possess this land; but for
the wickedness of these nations doth Jehovah dispossess them from before
thee.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Not for thy righteousness, or for the
uprightness of thy heart, dost thou enter in to possess their land, but
for the wickedness of these nations doth Jehovah thy God dispossess them
from before thee, and that he may perform the word which Jehovah swore
unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Know therefore that Jehovah thy God doth
not give thee this good land to possess it for thy righteousness; for
thou art a stiff-necked people.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Remember, forget not, how thou provokedst
Jehovah thy God to wrath in the wilderness. From the day that thou didst
depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came to this place, ye have
been rebellious against Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And at Horeb ye provoked Jehovah to wrath,
and Jehovah was angry with you, to destroy you,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> when I went up the mountain to receive the
tables of stone, the tables of the covenant which Jehovah made with you,
and I abode in the mountain forty days and forty nights, -- I ate no
bread and drank no water, --

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> -- and Jehovah delivered to me the two
tables of stone written with the finger of God; and on them \[was
written\] according to all the words which Jehovah spoke with you on the
mountain from the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And it came to pass at the end of forty
days and forty nights, that Jehovah gave me the two tables of stone, the
tables of the covenant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Arise, go down
quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of
Egypt have corrupted themselves; they have quickly turned aside from the
way which I commanded them: they have made for themselves a molten
image.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And Jehovah spoke unto me, saying, I have
seen this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked people.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Let me alone, that I may destroy them,
and blot out their name from under heaven; and I will make of thee a
nation mightier and greater than they.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And I turned and came down from the
mountain, and the mountain burned with fire; and the two tables of the
covenant were in my two hands.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I saw, and behold, ye had sinned
against Jehovah your God: ye had made for yourselves a molten calf; ye
had quickly turned aside from the way which Jehovah had commanded you.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And I seized the two tables, and cast
them out of my two hands, and broke them before your eyes.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And I fell down before Jehovah, as at the
first, forty days and forty nights, -- I ate no bread and drank no
water, -- because of all your sin which ye had sinned, in doing what is
evil in the eyes of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For I was afraid of the anger and fury
wherewith Jehovah was wroth against you to destroy you. And Jehovah
listened unto me also at that time.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And with Aaron Jehovah was very angry to
destroy him; and I prayed for Aaron also at the same time.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And I took your sin, the calf which ye
had made, and burned it with fire, and crushed it, and ground it very
small, until it became fine dust; and I cast the dust thereof into the
brook that flowed down from the mountain.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at
Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked Jehovah to wrath.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when Jehovah sent you from
Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and take possession of the land which I
have given you, ye rebelled against the word of Jehovah your God, and ye
believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Ye have been rebellious against Jehovah
from the day that I knew you.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> So I fell down before Jehovah the forty
days and forty nights, as I fell down; for Jehovah had said he would
destroy you.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I prayed therefore to Jehovah, and said,
Lord Jehovah, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou
hast redeemed through thy greatness, which thou hast brought forth out
of Egypt with a powerful hand.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Remember thy servants Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; look not at the stubbornness of this people, nor at their
wickedness, nor at their sin;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> lest the land whence thou broughtest us
out say, Because Jehovah was not able to bring them into the land which
he had promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them
out to kill them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> They are indeed thy people and thine
inheritance, which thou broughtest out with thy great power and with thy
stretched-out arm.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> At that time Jehovah said unto me, Hew
for thyself two tables of stone like the first, and come up unto me into
the mountain, and make thee an ark of wood;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> and I will write on the tables the words
that were on the first tables which thou didst break, and thou shalt lay
them in the ark.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And I made an ark of acacia-wood, and
hewed two tables of stone like the first, and went up the mountain with
the two tables in my hand.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he wrote on the tables, as the first
writing, the ten words which Jehovah spoke unto you on the mountain,
from the midst of the fire, on the day of the assembly, and Jehovah gave
them unto me.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And I turned and came down from the
mountain, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; -- and they
are there, as Jehovah commanded me.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> (And the children of Israel took their
journey from Beeroth-Bene-Jaakan to Moserah: there Aaron died, and there
he was buried; and Eleazar his son exercised the priesthood in his
stead.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah;
and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of water-brooks.)

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> At that time Jehovah separated the tribe
of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, to stand before
Jehovah to do service unto him, and to bless in his name, unto this day.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Therefore Levi has no portion nor
inheritance with his brethren; Jehovah is his inheritance, according as
Jehovah thy God told him.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> But I stood upon the mountain according
to the former days, forty days and forty nights; and Jehovah listened
unto me also at that time: Jehovah would not destroy thee.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Rise up, take
thy journey before the people, that they may enter in and possess the
land, which I swore unto their fathers to give unto them.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And now, Israel, what doth Jehovah thy
God require of thee, but to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve Jehovah thy God with all thy heart
and with all thy soul,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> to keep the commandments of Jehovah,
and his statutes, which I command thee this day, for thy good?

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Behold, the heaven and the heaven of
heavens belong to Jehovah thy God; the earth and all that is therein.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Only, Jehovah took pleasure in thy
fathers, to love them, and he chose their seed after them, \[even\] you,
out of all the peoples, as it is this day.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Circumcise then the foreskin of your
heart, and stiffen your neck no more.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For Jehovah your God is the God of
gods, and the Lord of lords, the great ùGod, the mighty and the
terrible, who regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> who executeth the judgment of the
fatherless and the widow, and loveth the stranger, to give him food and
clothing.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And ye shall love the stranger; for ye
have been strangers in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God; him
thou shalt serve, and unto him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He is thy praise, and he is thy God,
who hath done for thee these great and terrible things, which thine eyes
have seen.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> With seventy souls thy fathers went
down into Egypt; and now Jehovah thy God hath made thee as the stars of
heaven for multitude.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Thou shalt love then Jehovah thy God, and
keep his charge, and his statutes, and his ordinances, and his
commandments continually.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And know ye this day ...; for \[I speak\]
not with your children who have not known, and who have not seen the
chastisement of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his powerful hand, and
his stretched-out arm,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and his signs and his acts which he did
in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto all his
land;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and what he did unto the army of Egypt,
unto their horses, and unto their chariots, over which he made the water
of the Red sea flow as they pursued after you, and Jehovah destroyed
them unto this day;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> -- and what he did unto you in the
wilderness, until ye came to this place;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and what he did unto Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben, -- how the earth opened its mouth,
and swallowed them up, with their households, and their tents, and all
the living substance that belonged to them, in the midst of all Israel.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For your eyes have seen all the great
work of Jehovah which he hath done.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Keep then all the commandment which I
command you this day, that ye may be strong, and enter in and possess
the land, whither ye pass over to possess it;

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and that ye may prolong your days in the
land which Jehovah swore unto your fathers to give unto them and unto
their seed, a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For the land, whither thou enterest in
to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out,
where thou sowedst thy seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden
of herbs;

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> but the land, whereunto ye are passing
over to possess it, is a land of mountains and valleys, which drinketh
water of the rain of heaven,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> a land which Jehovah thy God careth
for; the eyes of Jehovah thy God are constantly upon it, from the
beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And it shall come to pass, if ye
hearken diligently unto my commandments which I command you this day, to
love Jehovah your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> that I will give rain to your land in
its season, the early rain and the latter rain; and thou shalt gather in
thy corn, and thy new wine, and thine oil;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and I will give grass in thy field for
thy cattle; and thou shalt eat and be full.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Take heed to yourselves, that your
heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside and serve other gods, and bow
down to them,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and Jehovah's wrath kindle against you,
and he shut up the heavens, that there be no rain, and that the ground
yield not its produce, and ye perish quickly from off the good land
which Jehovah is giving you.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And ye shall lay up these my words in
your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand,
and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And ye shall teach them unto your
children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thy house, and when thou
goest on the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> and write them upon the posts of thy
house, and upon thy gates;

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> that your days may be multiplied, and
the days of your children, in the land which Jehovah swore unto your
fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens \[which are\] above the
earth.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> For if ye diligently keep all this
commandment which I command you \[this day\] to do it, to love Jehovah
your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cleave unto him,

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> then will Jehovah dispossess all these
nations from before you, and ye shall take possession of nations greater
and mightier than yourselves.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Every place whereon the sole of your
foot shall tread shall be yours; from the wilderness and Lebanon, from
the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the hinder sea shall your
border be.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> No man shall be able to stand before
you: the fear of you and the dread of you will Jehovah your God lay upon
all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he hath said unto you.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> See, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse:

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> a blessing, if ye obey the commandments
of Jehovah your God, which I command you this day;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and a curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of Jehovah your God, but turn aside out of the way which I
command you this day, to go after other gods which ye have not known.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah
thy God hath brought thee into the land whither thou enterest in to
possess it, that thou shalt put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the
curse upon mount Ebal.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Are they not on the other side of the
Jordan, beyond the way toward the going down of the sun, in the land of
the Canaanites that dwell on the plain opposite to Gilgal, beside the
oaks of Moreh?

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For ye pass over the Jordan to enter in
to possess the land which Jehovah your God giveth you, and ye shall take
possession of it, and dwell therein.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And ye shall take heed to do all the
statutes and ordinances which I set before you this day.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> These are the statutes and ordinances,
which ye shall take heed to do in the land, which Jehovah the God of thy
fathers is giving thee to possess it, all the days that ye live upon the
earth.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Ye shall utterly destroy all the places
wherein the nations which ye shall dispossess have served their gods,
upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and ye shall break down their altars, and
shatter their statues, and burn their Asherahs with fire; and ye shall
hew down the graven images of their gods, and ye shall destroy the names
of them out of that place.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Ye shall not do so unto Jehovah your God;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> but unto the place which Jehovah your God
will choose out of all your tribes to set his name there, his habitation
shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come;

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> and thither ye shall bring your
burnt-offerings and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the
heave-offering of your hand, and your vows, and your
voluntary-offerings, and the firstlings of your kine and of your sheep;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and ye shall eat there before Jehovah
your God, and ye shall rejoice, ye and your households, in all the
business of your hand, wherein Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Ye shall not do after all that we do here
this day, each one whatever is right in his own eyes.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> For ye are not as yet come to the rest
and to the inheritance which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But when ye have gone over the Jordan,
and dwell in the land which Jehovah your God causeth you to inherit, and
when he hath given you rest from all your enemies round about, and ye
dwell in safety,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> then there shall be a place which
Jehovah your God will choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither
shall ye bring all that I command you: your burnt-offerings, and your
sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave-offering of your hand, and all
your choice vows which ye shall vow to Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And ye shall rejoice before Jehovah
your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your bondmen, and
your handmaids, and the Levite that is within your gates; for he hath no
portion nor inheritance with you.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Take heed to thyself that thou offer
not thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou seest;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> but in the place which Jehovah will
choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt-offerings,
and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Nevertheless, according to all the
desire of thy soul thou mayest slay and eat flesh in all thy gates,
according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he hath given thee:
the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the gazelle, and the
hart.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Only, ye shall not eat the blood; ye
shall pour it upon the earth as water.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Thou mayest not eat within thy gates
the tithe of thy corn, or of thy new wine, or of thine oil, or the
firstlings of thy kine or of thy sheep, nor any of thy vows which thou
vowest, nor thy voluntary-offerings, nor the heave-offering of thy hand;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> but before Jehovah thy God shalt thou
eat them in the place which Jehovah thy God will choose, thou and thy
son, and thy daughter, and thy bondman, and thy handmaid, and the Levite
that is within thy gates; and thou shalt rejoice before Jehovah thy God
in all the business of thy hand.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Take heed to thyself that thou forsake
not the Levite all the days thou shalt be in thy land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> When Jehovah thy God shall enlarge thy
border, as he promised thee, and thou say, I will eat flesh, because thy
soul longeth to eat flesh, thou mayest eat flesh, according to all the
desire of thy soul.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> If the place which Jehovah thy God will
choose to set his name there be too far from thee, then thou shalt slay
of thy kine and of thy sheep which Jehovah hath given thee, as I have
commanded thee, and thou shalt eat in thy gates according to all the
desire of thy soul.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Even as the gazelle and the hart is
eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the clean alike may eat
of them.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Only, be sure that thou eat not the
blood; for the blood is the life, and thou mayest not eat the life with
the flesh;

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour
it upon the earth as water:

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> thou shalt not eat it; that it may go
well with thee, and with thy children after thee, when thou shalt do
what is right in the eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> But thy hallowed things which thou
hast, and what thou hast vowed, thou shalt take, and come to the place
which Jehovah will choose;

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> and thou shalt offer thy
burnt-offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of Jehovah thy
God; and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar
of Jehovah thy God, and the flesh shalt thou eat.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Take heed to hear all these words which
I command thee, that it may be well with thee, and with thy children
after thee for ever, when thou doest what is good and right in the eyes
of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> When Jehovah thy God cutteth off from
before thee the nations whither thou goest, to take possession of them,
and thou hast dispossessed them, and dwellest in their land,

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> take heed to thyself that thou be not
ensnared \[to follow\] after them, after that they are destroyed from
before thee; and that thou inquire not after their gods, saying, How did
these nations serve their gods? even so will I do likewise.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Thou shalt not do so to Jehovah thy
God; for every \[thing that is\] abomination to Jehovah, which he
hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their
daughters have they burned in the fire to their gods.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Everything that I command you, ye shall
take heed to do it; thou shalt not add thereto, nor take from it.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> If there arise among you a prophet, or
one that dreameth dreams, and he give thee a sign or a wonder,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> and the sign or the wonder come to pass
that he told unto thee, when he said, Let us go after other gods, whom
thou hast not known, and let us serve them,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> -- thou shalt not hearken unto the words
of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams; for Jehovah your God proveth
you, to know whether ye love Jehovah your God with all your heart and
with all your soul.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Ye shall walk after Jehovah your God, and
ye shall fear him, and his commandments shall ye keep, and his voice
shall ye hear; and ye shall serve him, and unto him shall ye cleave.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams, shall be put to death; for he hath spoken revolt against Jehovah
your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out
of the house of bondage, -- to draw thee out of the way that Jehovah thy
God commanded thee to walk in; and thou shalt put evil away from thy
midst.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or
thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, who
is to thee as thy soul, entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and
serve other gods (whom thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> of the gods of the peoples which are
round about you, near unto thee, or far from thee, from one end of the
earth even unto the other end of the earth),

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> thou shalt not consent unto him, nor
hearken unto him; neither shall thine eye spare him, neither shalt thou
pity him, neither shalt thou screen him,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> but thou shalt in any case kill him: thy
hand shall be the first against him to put him to death, and afterwards
the hands of all the people;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and thou shalt stone him with stones,
that he die; for he hath sought to draw thee away from Jehovah thy God
who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage;

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> and all Israel shall hear, and fear,
and shall do no more any such wicked thing as this in thy midst.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> If in one of thy cities, which Jehovah
thy God hath given thee to dwell there, thou hearest, saying,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> There are men, children of Belial, gone
out from among you, and they have drawn away the inhabitants of their
city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, whom ye have not known;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> then shalt thou inquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and if it be truth, \[and\] the thing be
certain, that this abomination hath happened in the midst of thee,

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants
of that city with the edge of the sword, devoting it to destruction, and
all that is therein, and the cattle thereof, with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And all the spoil of it shalt thou
gather into the midst of the open place thereof, and shalt burn the city
with fire, and all the spoil thereof, wholly to Jehovah thy God; and it
shall be a heap for ever; it shall not be built again.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And thou shalt not let anything cleave
to thy hand of the devoted thing; that Jehovah may turn from the
fierceness of his anger, and shew thee mercy, and have compassion upon
thee, and multiply thee, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> when thou hearkenest to the voice of
Jehovah thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this
day, that thou mayest do what is right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Ye are sons of Jehovah your God: ye shall
not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for a dead
person.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For thou art a holy people unto Jehovah
thy God, and thee hath Jehovah chosen for a people of possession unto
himself, out of all the peoples that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are the beasts which ye shall eat:
the ox, the sheep, and the goat;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> the hart, and the gazelle, and the stag,
and the wild goat, and the dishon and the oryx, and the wild sheep.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And every beast that hath cloven hoofs,
and the feet quite split open into double hoofs, \[and\] which cheweth
the cud, among the beasts, that ye shall eat.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Only these ye shall not eat of those that
chew the cud, or of those with hoofs cloven and split open: the camel,
and the hare, and the rock-badger; for they chew the cud, but have not
cloven hoofs -- they shall be unclean unto you;

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and the swine, for it hath cloven hoofs,
yet cheweth not the cud -- it shall be unclean unto you. Of their flesh
shall ye not eat, and their carcase shall ye not touch.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> These shall ye eat of all that are in the
waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales shall ye eat;

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> but whatsoever hath not fins and scales
ye shall not eat: it shall be unclean unto you.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> All clean birds shall ye eat.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> But these are they of which ye shall
not eat: the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the sea-eagle,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> and the falcon, and the kite, and the
black kite after its kind;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and every raven after its kind;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and the female ostrich, and the male
ostrich, and the sea-gull, and the hawk after its kind;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> the owl, and the ibis and the swan,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> and the pelican, and the carrion
vulture, and the gannet,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> and the stork, and the heron after its
kind, and the hoopoe, and the bat.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And every winged crawling thing shall
be unclean unto you; they shall not be eaten.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> All clean fowls shall ye eat.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Ye shall eat of no carcase; thou shalt
give it unto the stranger that is within thy gates, that he may eat it,
or sell it unto a foreigner; for thou art a holy people to Jehovah thy
God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Thou shalt truly tithe all the increase
of thy seed, the produce of the field, year by year.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And thou shalt eat before Jehovah thy
God, in the place which he will choose to cause his name to dwell there,
the tithe of thy corn, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the
firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to
fear Jehovah thy God continually.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And if the way be too long for thee, so
that thou art not able to carry it, because the place is too far from
thee, which Jehovah thy God will choose to set his name there, when
Jehovah thy God blesseth thee;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> then shalt thou give it for money, and
bind the money together in thy hand, and go to the place which Jehovah
thy God will choose,

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and thou shalt give the money for
whatever thy soul desireth, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for
strong drink, or for whatever thy soul asketh of thee; and thou shalt
eat there before Jehovah thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thy
house.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And thou shalt not forsake the Levite
that is within thy gates; for he hath no portion nor inheritance with
thee.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> At the end of three years thou shalt
bring forth all the tithe of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay
it up within thy gates;

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> and the Levite -- for he hath no
portion nor inheritance with thee -- and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates, shall come, and
shall eat and be satisfied; that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all
the work of thy hand which thou doest.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> At the end of seven years thou shalt make
a release,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> and this is the manner of the release:
Every creditor shall relax his hand from the loan which he hath lent
unto his neighbour; he shall not demand it of his neighbour, or of his
brother; for a release to Jehovah hath been proclaimed.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Of the foreigner thou mayest demand it;
but what is thine with thy brother thy hand shall release;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> save when there shall be no one in need
among you; for Jehovah will greatly bless thee in the land that Jehovah
thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it,

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> if thou only diligently hearken unto the
voice of Jehovah thy God, to take heed to do all this commandment which
I command thee this day.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For Jehovah thy God will bless thee, as
he promised thee; and thou shalt lend on pledge to many nations, but
thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt rule over many nations, but they
shall not rule over thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If there be amongst you a poor man, any
one of thy brethren in one of thy gates, in thy land which Jehovah thy
God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from
thy brother in need;

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> but thou shalt open thy hand bountifully
unto him, and shalt certainly lend him on pledge what is sufficient for
his need, \[in that\] which he lacketh.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Beware that there be not a wicked thought
in thy heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand;
and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou givest him
nought; and he cry against thee to Jehovah, and it be sin in thee.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thou shalt bountifully give unto him,
and thy heart shall not be evil-disposed when thou givest unto him;
because for this thing Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thy works,
and in all the business of thy hand.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> For the needy shall never cease from
within the land; therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open thy
hand bountifully unto thy brother, to thy poor and to thy needy, in thy
land.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> If thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a
Hebrew woman, have been sold unto thee, he shall serve thee six years,
and in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And when thou sendest him out free from
thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty;

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> thou shalt certainly furnish him from
thy sheep, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of what
Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee with shalt thou give unto him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in the land of Egypt, and that Jehovah thy God redeemed thee;
therefore I command thee this thing to-day.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And it shall be, if he say unto thee, I
will not go away from thee, -- because he loveth thee and thy house,
because he is well with thee, --

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> then thou shalt take an awl, and thrust
it through his ear and into the door; and he shall be thy bondman for
ever. And also unto thy handmaid thou shalt do likewise.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Let it not seem hard unto thee, when
thou sendest him away free from thee; for double the worth of a hired
servant hath he been to thee, \[in\] serving thee six years; and Jehovah
thy God will bless thee in all that thou doest.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Every firstling that is born among thy
kine and among thy sheep that is a male, thou shalt hallow to Jehovah
thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy kine, nor shear
the firstling of thy sheep.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Thou shalt eat it before Jehovah thy
God, year by year, in the place which Jehovah will choose, thou and thy
household.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But if there be a defect therein, \[if
it be\] lame, or blind, \[or have\] any evil defect, thou shalt not
sacrifice it to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> In thy gates shalt thou eat it; the
unclean and the clean \[shall eat it\] alike, as the gazelle and as the
hart.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Only thou shalt not eat the blood
thereof: thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Keep the month of Abib, and celebrate the
passover to Jehovah thy God; for in the month of Abib Jehovah thy God
brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And thou shalt sacrifice the passover to
Jehovah thy God, of the flock and of the herd, in the place which
Jehovah will choose to cause his name to dwell there.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Thou shalt eat no leavened bread along
with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread with it, bread of
affliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste, --
that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land
of Egypt, all the days of thy life.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And there shall be no leaven seen with
thee in all thy borders seven days; neither shall any of the flesh,
which thou sacrificedst at even on the first day, be left over night
until the morning. --

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover in
one of thy gates, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> but at the place that Jehovah thy God
will choose, to cause his name to dwell in, there thou shalt sacrifice
the passover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the time that
thou camest forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And thou shalt cook and eat it at the
place which Jehovah thy God will choose; and in the morning shalt thou
turn and go unto thy tents.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread,
and on the seventh day is a solemn assembly to Jehovah thy God; thou
shalt do no work.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Seven weeks shalt thou count: from the
beginning of putting the sickle into the corn shalt thou begin to count
seven weeks.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And thou shalt hold the feast of weeks
to Jehovah thy God with a tribute of a voluntary-offering of thy hand,
which thou shalt give, according as Jehovah thy God hath blessed thee;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> and thou shalt rejoice before Jehovah
thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy bondman, and thy
handmaid, and the Levite that is in thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow that are in thy midst in the place that
Jehovah thy God will choose to cause his name to dwell there.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in Egypt, and thou shalt keep and do these statutes.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> The feast of tabernacles shalt thou
hold seven days, when thou hast gathered in \[the produce\] of thy floor
and of thy winepress.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast,
thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy bondman, and thy handmaid,
and the Levite, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow,
that are in thy gates.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Seven days shalt thou hold a feast to
Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah will choose; for Jehovah thy
God will bless thee in all thy produce, and in all the work of thy
hands, and thou shalt be wholly joyful.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Three times in the year shall all thy
males appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he will choose,
at the feast of unleavened bread, and at the feast of weeks, and at the
feast of tabernacles; and they shall not appear before Jehovah empty:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> each \[shall give\] according to that
which is in his power to give, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy
God which he hath given thee.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Judges and officers shalt thou make
thee in all thy gates, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, throughout thy
tribes, that they may judge the people with just judgment.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou
shalt not respect persons, neither take a bribe; for the bribe blindeth
the eyes of the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Perfect justice shalt thou follow, that
thou mayest live, and possess the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Thou shalt not plant thyself an Asherah
of any wood near unto the altar of Jehovah thy God, which thou shalt
make thee.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Neither shalt thou set thee up a
statue, which Jehovah thy God hateth.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Thou shalt not sacrifice to Jehovah thy
God an ox or sheep wherein is a defect, or anything bad; for it is an
abomination to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> If there be found in thy midst in any of
thy gates which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, man or woman, that doeth
what is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, in transgressing his
covenant,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and goeth and serveth other gods, and
boweth down to them, either to the sun or to the moon, or to the whole
host of heaven, which I have not commanded;

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> and it be told thee, and thou hearest of
it; then thou shalt make thorough inquiry, and if it be truth \[and\]
the thing be certain, that this abomination hath been wrought in Israel,

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> thou shalt bring forth that man or that
woman, who committed that wicked thing, unto thy gates, the man or the
woman, and shalt stone them with stones, that they die.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> At the mouth of two witnesses, or three
witnesses, shall he that is to die be put to death: he shall not be put
to death at the mouth of one witness.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> The hands of the witnesses shall be first
upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hands of all the
people; and thou shalt put evil away from thy midst.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> If there arise a matter too hard for thee
in judgment, between blood and blood, between cause and cause, and
between stroke and stroke, matters of controversy within thy gates, then
shalt thou arise, and go up to the place which Jehovah thy God will
choose.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And thou shalt come unto the priests, the
Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and inquire;
and they shall declare unto thee the sentence of judgment;

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> and thou shalt do according to the
tenor of the word, which they of that place which Jehovah will choose
shall declare unto thee; and thou shalt take heed to do according to all
that they instruct thee:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> according to the sentence of the law
which they shall declare unto thee, and according to the judgment which
they shall tell thee, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the
word which they shall declare unto thee, to the right hand, or the left.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the man that shall act
presumptuously, and not hearken unto the priest that standeth to serve
there before Jehovah thy God, or unto the judge, that man shall die; and
thou shalt put away evil from Israel.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And all the people shall hear, and
fear, and no more act presumptuously.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When thou comest unto the land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and shalt possess it, and shalt dwell
therein, and shalt say, I will set a king over me, like all the nations
that are about me;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> thou shalt only set him king over thee
whom Jehovah thy God will choose: from among thy brethren shalt thou set
a king over thee; thou mayest not set a foreigner over thee, who is not
thy brother.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Only he shall not multiply horses to
himself, nor lead back the people to Egypt, to multiply horses; for
Jehovah hath said unto you, Ye shall not return again any more that way.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall he multiply wives to
himself, that his heart turn not away; neither shall he greatly multiply
to himself silver and gold.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And it shall be, when he sitteth upon
the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write for himself a copy of
this law in a book out of that which is before the priests, the Levites;

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear Jehovah
his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do
them;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the
right hand, or to the left; that he may prolong his days in his kingdom,
he, and his sons, in the midst of Israel.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The priests, the Levites, \[and\] the
whole tribe of Levi, shall have no portion nor inheritance with Israel:
Jehovah's offerings by fire, and his inheritance shall they eat,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> but they shall have no inheritance among
their brethren: Jehovah, he is their inheritance, as he hath said unto
them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And this shall be the priest's due from
the people, from them that sacrifice a sacrifice, whether ox, or sheep:
they shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the jawbones, and the
maw.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The firstfruits \[also\] of thy corn, of
thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the firstfruits of the shearing of
thy sheep, shalt thou give him;

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> for Jehovah thy God hath chosen him out
of all thy tribes, that he may stand to serve in the name of Jehovah, he
and his sons continually.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And if the Levite shall come from one of
thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourneth, and shall come
according to all the desire of his soul unto the place which Jehovah
will choose,

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> and shall serve in the name of Jehovah
his God, as all his brethren the Levites that stand there before
Jehovah,

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> -- they shall have like portions to eat,
besides that which he hath sold of his patrimony.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> When thou art come into the land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not learn to do according to the
abominations of those nations.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> There shall not be found among you he
that maketh his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, that useth
divination, that useth auguries, or an enchanter, or a sorcerer,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> or a charmer, or one that inquireth of
a spirit of Python, or a soothsayer, or one that consulteth the dead.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> For every one that doeth these things
is an abomination to Jehovah, and because of these abominations Jehovah
thy God doth dispossess them from before thee.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Thou shalt be perfect with Jehovah thy
God.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> For these nations, which thou shalt
dispossess, hearkened unto those that use auguries, and that use
divination; but as for thee, Jehovah thy God hath not suffered thee \[to
do\] so.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Jehovah thy God will raise up unto thee
a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto
him shall ye hearken;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> according to all that thou desiredst of
Jehovah thy God at Horeb on the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not
hear again the voice of Jehovah my God, neither let me see this great
fire any more, that I die not.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Jehovah said unto me, They have
well spoken that which they have spoken.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> A prophet will I raise up unto them
from among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And it shall come to pass that the man
who hearkeneth not unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> But the prophet who shall presume to
speak a word in my name that I have not commanded him to speak, or that
shall speak in the name of other gods, that prophet shall die.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And if thou say in thy heart, How shall
we know the word that Jehovah hath not spoken?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When a prophet speaketh in the name of
Jehovah, and the thing followeth not, nor cometh to pass, that is the
word which Jehovah hath not spoken; the prophet hath spoken it
presumptuously: be not afraid of him.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> When Jehovah thy God hath cut off the
nations whose land Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and thou hast
dispossessed them, and dwellest in their cities and in their houses,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> thou shalt separate three cities for
thyself in the midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee to
possess.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Thou shalt prepare thee the way, and
divide the territory of thy land, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee to
inherit, into three parts, so that every slayer may flee thither.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And this is the case of the slayer who
shall flee thither that he may live: he that smiteth his neighbour
unwittingly, whom he hated not previously;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> as when he goeth into the wood with his
neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to
cut down the tree, and the iron slippeth from the handle, and lighteth
upon his neighbour, that he die; such an one shall flee unto one of
these cities, and live;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> lest the avenger of blood pursue the
manslayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is
long, and smite him mortally; whereas he was not worthy of death, since
he hated him not previously.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou
shalt separate three cities for thyself.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And if Jehovah thy God enlarge thy
border, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thee all the land
which he promised to give unto thy fathers

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> (if thou keep all this commandment to do
it, which I command thee this day, to love Jehovah thy God, and to walk
in his ways continually), then shalt thou add three cities more for
thyself to these three,

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> that innocent blood be not shed in the
midst of thy land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance,
and blood come not upon thee.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But if a man hate his neighbour, and
lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortally
that he die, and he flee into one of these cities,

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> then the elders of his city shall send
and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of
blood, that he may die.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Thine eye shall not spare him; and thou
shalt put away innocent blood from Israel, that it may be well with
thee.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's
landmark, which they of old time have fixed in thine inheritance, which
thou shalt inherit in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee to
possess.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> One witness shall not rise up against a
man for any iniquity, and for any sin, in any sin that he sinneth: at
the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a
matter be established.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> If an unrighteous witness rise up
against any man to testify against him of an offence;

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> then both the men between whom the
controversy is shall stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the
judges that shall be in those days;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and the judges shall make thorough
inquiry; and if the witness be a false witness, and he have testified
falsely against his brother,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> then shall ye do unto him as he had
thought to have done unto his brother; and thou shalt put evil away from
thy midst.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And those that remain shall hear, and
fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil in thy midst.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And thine eye shall not spare: life for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> When thou goest out to war against thine
enemies, and seest horses, and chariots, \[and\] a people more numerous
than thou, thou shalt not fear them; for Jehovah thy God is with thee,
who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And it shall be, when ye approach unto
the battle, that the priest shall draw near and speak unto the people,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> and shall say unto them, Hear, Israel, ye
are approaching this day unto battle against your enemies: let not your
hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be afraid of them;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> for Jehovah your God is he that goeth
with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And the officers shall speak unto the
people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath
not dedicated it? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in
the battle, and another man dedicate it.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And what man is there that hath planted a
vineyard, and hath not eaten of it? let him go and return unto his
house, lest he die in the battle, and another man eat of it.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And what man is there that hath betrothed
a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house,
lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And the officers shall speak further unto
the people, and shall say, What man is there that is timid and
faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's
heart melt as well as his heart.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And it shall be, when the officers have
ended speaking unto the people, that they shall place captains of the
hosts at the head of the people.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> When thou approachest unto a city to
fight against it, thou shalt proclaim peace unto it.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And it shall be, if it make thee answer
of peace, and open unto thee, then all the people that are found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And if it will not make peace with
thee, but will make war with thee, then thou shalt besiege it;

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> and when Jehovah thy God delivereth it
into thy hand, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the
sword:

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> only the women, and the little ones,
and the cattle, and all that shall be in the city, all the spoil
thereof, shalt thou take as booty for thyself; and thou shalt eat the
spoil of thine enemies, which Jehovah thy God giveth thee

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thus shalt thou do unto all the cities
that are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these
nations.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> But of the cities of these peoples
which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, thou shalt save
alive nothing that breatheth,

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> but shalt utterly devote them to
destruction, the Hittites and the Amorites, the Canaanites and the
Perizzites, the Hivites and the Jebusites, as Jehovah thy God hath
commanded thee;

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> that they teach you not to do according
to all their abominations, which they have done unto their gods, so that
ye sin against Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When thou shalt besiege a city many
days, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the
trees thereof by lifting up an axe against them; for thou canst eat of
them; and thou shalt not cut them down, for is the tree of the field a
man that it should be besieged?

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Only the trees which thou knowest are
not trees for meat, thou mayest destroy and cut them down, and build
bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thee, until it fall.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> If one be found slain in the land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee to possess, lying in the field, \[and\] it
be not known who hath smitten him,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> then thine elders and thy judges shall go
forth, and they shall measure unto the cities which are round about him
that is slain;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and the city that is nearest unto him
that is slain, even the elders of that city shall take a heifer that
hath not been wrought with, that hath not drawn in the yoke;

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> and the elders of that city shall bring
down the heifer unto an ever-flowing watercourse, which is not tilled,
nor is it sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in the
watercourse;

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> and the priests the sons of Levi shall
come near; for them Jehovah thy God hath chosen to do service unto him,
and to bless in the name of Jehovah; and according to their word shall
be every controversy and every stroke.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And all the elders of that city, that are
nearest unto him that is slain, shall wash their hands over the heifer
whose neck is broken in the watercourse,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> and shall answer and say, Our hands have
not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Forgive thy people Israel, whom thou,
Jehovah, hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood to the charge of thy
people Israel; and the blood shall be expiated for them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So shalt thou put away innocent blood
from thy midst, when thou shalt do what is right in the eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When thou goest forth to war against
thine enemies, and Jehovah thy God delivereth them into thy hands, and
thou hast taken captives of them,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> and thou seest among the captives a
woman of beautiful form, and hast a desire unto her, and takest her as
thy wife;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> then thou shalt bring her home to thy
house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and she shall put the clothes of her
captivity from off her, and shall abide in thy house, and bewail her
father and mother a full month, and afterwards thou mayest go in unto
her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And it shall be, if thou have no
delight in her, then thou shalt let her go according to her desire; but
thou shalt in no wise sell her for money; thou shalt not treat her as a
slave, because thou hast humbled her.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> If a man have two wives, one beloved,
and one hated, and they have borne him children, both the beloved and
the hated, and the firstborn son be hers that was hated;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> then it shall be, in the day that he
maketh his sons to inherit what he hath, that he may not make the son of
the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, who is the firstborn;

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> but he shall acknowledge as firstborn
the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion of all that is
found with him; for he is the firstfruits of his vigour: the right of
the firstborn is his.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If a man have an unmanageable and
rebellious son, who hearkeneth not unto the voice of his father, nor
unto the voice of his mother, and they have chastened him, but he
hearkeneth not unto them;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> then shall his father and his mother
lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto
the gate of his place;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and they shall say unto the elders of
his city, This our son is unmanageable and rebellious, he hearkeneth not
unto our voice; he is a profligate and a drunkard.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And all the men of his city shall stone
him with stones, that he die. And thou shalt put evil away from thy
midst; and all Israel shall hear and fear.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And if a man have committed a sin
worthy of death, and he be put to death, and thou have hanged him on a
tree,

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> his body shall not remain all night
upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day (for he that
is hanged is a curse of God); and thou shalt not defile thy land, which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thou shalt not see thy brother's ox or
his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case
bring them back unto thy brother.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And if thy brother be not near unto thee,
and thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it unto thy house, and it
shall be with thee until thy brother seek after it, and thou shalt
restore it unto him.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And so shalt thou do with his ass; and so
shalt thou do with his clothing; and so shalt thou do with everything
that is lost of thy brother, which he loseth, and thou findest: thou
mayest not hide thyself.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Thou shalt not see thy brother's ass or
his ox fall by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any
case \[help\] him to lift them up.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> There shall not be a man's apparel on a
woman, neither shall a man put on a woman's clothing; for whoever doeth
so is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If a bird's nest chance to be before thee
in the way, in any tree, or upon the ground, with young or with eggs,
and the dam sitting upon the young or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take
the dam with the young:

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> thou shalt in any case let the dam go,
and thou mayest take the young to thee, that it may be well with thee,
and that thou mayest prolong thy days.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> When thou buildest a new house, thou
shalt make a parapet for thy roof, that thou bring not blood upon thy
house, if any one should in any wise fall from it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with
\[seed of\] two sorts, lest the whole of thy seed which thou hast sown,
and the produce of thy vineyard, be forfeited.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an
ass together.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Thou shalt not wear a garment of mixed
material, \[woven\] of wool and linen together.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Tassels shalt thou make thee on the
four corners of thy clothing, wherewith thou coverest thyself.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If a man take a wife, and go in unto
her and hate her,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> and charge her with things for
scandalous talk, and cause an evil name against her to be spread abroad,
and say, This woman have I taken, and I came in unto her, and I did not
find her a virgin;

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> then shall the father of the damsel,
and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's
virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate;

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> and the damsel's father shall say unto
the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man as wife, and he hates her;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> and behold, he charges her with things
for scandalous talk, saying, I found not thy daughter a virgin; and here
are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the
cloth before the elders of the city.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the elders of that city shall take
the man and chastise him;

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> and they shall fine him a hundred
shekels of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel, because
he hath caused an evil name to be spread abroad against a virgin in
Israel. And she shall remain his wife: he may not put her away all his
days.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> But if this thing is true, \[and\]
virginity hath not been found with the damsel;

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> then they shall bring out the damsel
unto the entrance of her father's house, and the men of her city shall
stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought infamy in
Israel, committing fornication in her father's house; and thou shalt put
evil away from thy midst.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> If a man be found lying with a man's
wife, they shall both of them die, the man that lay with the woman, and
the woman; and thou shalt put away evil from Israel.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If a damsel, a virgin, be betrothed to
some one, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> then ye shall bring them both out unto
the gate of that city, and stone them with stones that they die; the
damsel, because she cried not, \[being\] in the city, and the man,
because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife; and thou shalt put evil
away from thy midst.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> But if a man find a betrothed damsel in
the field, and the man force her, and lie with her, then the man only
that lay with her shall die;

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> and unto the damsel thou shalt do
nothing: there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death; for as when a
man riseth against his neighbour, and murdereth him, so is this matter;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> for he found her in the field, the
betrothed damsel cried, and there was no one to save her.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> If a man find a damsel, a virgin, who
is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be
found,

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> then the man that lay with her shall
give unto the damsel's father fifty \[shekels\] of silver, and she shall
be his wife, because he hath humbled her; he may not put her away all
his days.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> A man shall not take his father's wife,
nor uncover his father's skirt.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> He that is a eunuch, whether he have been
crushed or cut, shall not come into the congregation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> A bastard shall not come into the
congregation of Jehovah; even his tenth generation shall not come into
the congregation of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> An Ammonite or Moabite shall not come
into the congregation of Jehovah; even their tenth generation shall not
come into the congregation of Jehovah for ever;

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> because they met you not with bread and
with water on the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt, and because they
hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor, of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to
curse thee.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But Jehovah thy God would not listen to
Balaam; and Jehovah thy God turned the curse into blessing unto thee,
because Jehovah thy God loved thee.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their
prosperity all thy days for ever.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he
is thy brother. Thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a
sojourner in his land.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Children that are born to them shall come
into the congregation of Jehovah in the third generation.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> When thou goest forth into camp against
thine enemies, then keep thee from every evil thing.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> If there be with thee a man that is not
clean from what hath happened in the night, then shall he go outside the
camp; he shall not come inside the camp;

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> and it shall be, towards evening, he
shall bathe in water: and at the going down of the sun he may come
inside the camp.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Thou shalt have a place also outside
the camp, and shalt go forth thither.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And thou shalt have a shovel amongst
thy weapons, and it shall be, when thou sittest down abroad, thou shalt
dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which is come from
thee.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> For Jehovah thy God walketh in the
midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before
thee; and thy camp shall be holy, that he see nothing unseemly with
thee, and turn away from thee.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Thou shalt not hand over to his master
a bondman that hath escaped from his master unto thee:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> he shall dwell with thee, even in thy
midst, in the place that he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it
seemeth good to him; thou shalt not oppress him.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> There shall be no prostitute amongst
the daughters of Israel, nor any Sodomite amongst the sons of Israel.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Thou shalt not bring the hire of a
harlot, or the price of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God for any
vow; for even both these are an abomination to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Thou shalt take no interest of thy
brother, interest of money, interest of victuals, interest of anything
that can be lent upon interest:

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> of a foreigner thou mayest take
interest, but of thy brother thou shalt not take interest; that Jehovah
thy God may bless thee in all the business of thy hand in the land
whither thou goest to possess it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> When thou vowest a vow to Jehovah thy
God, thou shalt not delay to perform it; for Jehovah thy God will
certainly require it of thee, and it shall be sin in thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if thou forbear to vow, it shall be
no sin in thee.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> What is gone out of thy lips thou shalt
keep and do, as thou hast vowed to Jehovah thy God, the
voluntary-offering that thou hast promised with thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> When thou comest into thy neighbour's
vineyard, thou mayest eat grapes thy fill, according to thy desire, but
thou shalt not put any in thy vessel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> When thou comest into the standing corn
of thy neighbour, thou mayest pluck ears with thy hand; but thou shalt
not wave the sickle against thy neighbour's standing corn.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> When a man taketh a wife, and marrieth
her, it shall be if she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath
found some unseemly thing in her, that he shall write her a letter of
divorce, and give it into her hand, and send her out of his house.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And she shall depart out of his house,
and go away, and may become another man's wife.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And if the latter husband hate her, and
write her a letter of divorce, and give it into her hand, and send her
out of his house; or if the latter husband die who took her as his wife;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> her first husband, who sent her away, may
not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for it is
an abomination before Jehovah; and thou shalt not cause the land to sin,
which Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> When a man hath newly taken a wife, he
shall not go out with the army, neither shall any kind of business be
imposed upon him; he shall be free for his house one year, and shall
gladden his wife whom he hath taken.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> No man shall take the hand-mill or the
upper millstone in pledge; for it would be taking life in pledge.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> If a man be found who hath stolen one of
his brethren of the children of Israel, and who hath treated him as a
slave and sold him, that thief shall die; and thou shalt put evil away
from thy midst.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Take heed in the plague of leprosy, that
thou take great heed, and do according to all that the priests the
Levites shall teach you: as I commanded them shall ye take heed to do.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Remember what Jehovah thy God did unto
Miriam on the way, after that ye came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> When thou dost lend thy brother
anything, thou shalt not go into his house to secure his pledge.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Thou shalt stand outside, and the man
to whom thou hast made a loan shall bring out the pledge to thee
without.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And if the man be needy, thou shalt not
lie down with his pledge;

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> in any case thou shalt return him the
pledge at the going down of the sun, that he may sleep in his own upper
garment and bless thee; and it shall be righteousness unto thee before
Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Thou shalt not oppress a hired servant
\[who is\] poor and needy of thy brethren, or of thy sojourners who are
in thy land within thy gates:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> on his day thou shalt give him his
hire, neither shall the sun go down upon it; for he is poor, and his
soul yearneth after it; lest he cry against thee to Jehovah, and it be a
sin in thee.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> The fathers shall not be put to death
for the sons, neither shall the sons be put to death for the fathers:
every man shall be put to death for his own sin.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of
the stranger, \[or\] of the fatherless; and thou shalt not take in
pledge a widow's garment.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in Egypt, and that Jehovah thy God redeemed thee from thence;
therefore I command thee to do this thing.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> When thou reapest thy harvest in thy
field, and forgettest a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not return to
fetch it; it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the
widow; that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hands.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> When thou shakest thine olive-tree,
thou shalt not go over the boughs again; it shall be for the stranger,
for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> When thou gatherest the grapes of thy
vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterwards; it shall be for the
stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And thou shalt remember that thou wast
a bondman in the land of Egypt; therefore I command thee to do this
thing.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> If there be a controversy between men,
and they resort to judgment, and they judge \[their case\]; then they
shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And it shall be if the wicked man have
deserved to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and
be beaten before his face, according to the measure of his wickedness
with a certain number \[of stripes\].

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> With forty \[stripes\] shall they beat
him; they shall not exceed, lest, if they continue to beat him with many
stripes above these, thy brother become despicable in thine eyes.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he
treadeth out \[the corn\].

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> If brethren dwell together, and one of
them die, and have no son, the wife of the dead shall not marry a
stranger abroad: her husband's brother shall go in unto her, and take
her to him as wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother unto
her.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And it shall be, that the firstborn that
she beareth shall stand in the name of his brother who is dead, that his
name be not blotted out from Israel.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> But if the man like not to take his
brother's wife, his brother's wife shall go up to the gate unto the
elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his
brother a name in Israel: he will not perform for me the duty of a
husband's brother.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Then the elders of his city shall call
him and speak unto him; and if he stand to it and say, I like not to
take her;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> then shall his brother's wife come near
to him before the eyes of the elders, and draw his sandal from his foot,
and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto
the man that will not build up his brother's house.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And his name shall be called in Israel,
The house of him that hath his shoe drawn off.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> When men fight together one with
another, and the wife of the one come near to rescue her husband out of
the hand of him that smiteth him, and stretch out her hand, and seize
him by his secret parts,

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> thou shalt cut off her hand; thine eye
shall not spare.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers
weights, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Thou shalt not have in thy house divers
ephahs, a great and a small.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> A perfect and just weight shalt thou
have; a perfect and just ephah shalt thou have; that thy days may be
prolonged in the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> For every one that doeth such things,
every one that doeth unrighteousness, is an abomination to Jehovah thy
God.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Remember what Amalek did unto thee on
the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> how he met thee on the way, and smote
the hindmost of thee, all the feeble that lagged behind thee, when thou
wast faint and weary, and he feared not God.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And it shall be, when Jehovah thy God
shall have given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the
land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance to possess it,
that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under the
heavens; thou shalt not forget it.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it shall be when thou comest into the
land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee for an inheritance, and possessest
it, and dwellest therein,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> that thou shalt take of the first of all
the fruit of the ground, which thou shalt bring of thy land which
Jehovah thy God giveth thee, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go
unto the place that Jehovah thy God will choose to cause his name to
dwell there;

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> and thou shalt come unto the priest that
shall be in those days, and say unto him, I profess this day unto
Jehovah thy God, that I am come unto the land that Jehovah swore unto
our fathers to give us.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And the priest shall take the basket out
of thy hand, and set it down before the altar of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> And thou shalt speak and say before
Jehovah thy God, A perishing Aramean was my father, and he went down to
Egypt with a few, and sojourned there, and became there a nation, great,
mighty, and populous.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And the Egyptians evil-entreated us, and
afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage;

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> and we cried to Jehovah, the God of our
fathers, and Jehovah heard our voice, and looked on our affliction, and
our labour, and our oppression;

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> and Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt
with a powerful hand, and with a stretched-out arm, and with great
terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and he hath brought us into this place,
and hath given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey!

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And now, behold, I have brought the
first of the fruits of the land, which thou, Jehovah, hast given me. And
thou shalt set it down before Jehovah thy God, and worship before
Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And thou shalt rejoice in all the good
that Jehovah thy God hath given to thee, and to thy house, thou, and the
Levite, and the stranger that is in thy midst.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> When thou hast made an end of tithing
all the tithes of thy produce in the third year, the year of tithing,
thou shalt give it to the Levite, to the stranger, to the fatherless,
and to the widow, that they may eat in thy gates, and be filled;

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> and thou shalt say before Jehovah thy
God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of the house, and also
have given them to the Levite, and to the stranger, to the fatherless,
and to the widow, according to all thy commandment which thou hast
commanded me; I have not transgressed nor forgotten \[any\] of thy
commandments:

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I have not eaten thereof in my
mourning, neither have I brought away thereof in uncleanness, nor given
thereof for a dead person; I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah my
God; I have done according to all that thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Look down from thy holy habitation,
from the heavens, and bless thy people Israel, and the land that thou
hast given us as thou didst swear unto our fathers, a land flowing with
milk and honey!

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> This day Jehovah thy God hath commanded
thee to do these statutes and ordinances; and thou shalt keep and do
them with all thy heart and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Thou hast this day accepted Jehovah to
be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and keep his statutes, and his
commandments, and his ordinances, and to hearken unto his voice;

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and Jehovah hath accepted thee this day
to be a people of possession to him, as he hath told thee, and that thou
shouldest keep all his commandments,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> so that he should make thee high above
all the nations which he hath made, in praise and in name and in honour;
and that thou shouldest be a holy people to Jehovah thy God, as he hath
said.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And Moses and the elders of Israel
commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandment which I command
you this day.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And it shall be on the day when ye pass
over the Jordan unto the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, that
thou shalt set thee up great stones, and plaster them with plaster:

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and thou shalt write upon them all the
words of this law, when thou goest over that thou mayest enter into the
land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee, a land flowing with milk and
honey, as Jehovah the God of thy fathers hath promised thee.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And it shall be when ye go over the
Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, as I command you this day, on
mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaster them with plaster.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And there shalt thou build an altar to
Jehovah thy God, an altar of stones; thou shalt not lift up an iron
\[tool\] upon them;

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> of whole stones shalt thou build the
altar of Jehovah thy God; and thou shalt offer up burnt-offerings
thereon to Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And thou shalt sacrifice peace-offerings,
and shalt eat there, and rejoice before Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And thou shalt write upon the stones all
the words of this law very plainly.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And Moses and the priests, the Levites,
spoke to all Israel, saying, Be silent and hearken, Israel! this day
thou art become the people of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And thou shalt hearken unto the voice
of Jehovah thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I
command thee this day.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Moses gave commandment to the
people the same day, saying,

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> These shall stand to bless the people
upon mount Gerizim, when ye have gone over the Jordan: Simeon, and Levi,
and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And these shall stand upon mount Ebal
to curse: Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And the Levites shall declare and say
unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice:

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Cursed be the man that maketh a graven
or molten image, an abomination to Jehovah, a work of the craftsman's
hand, and putteth it up secretly! And all the people shall answer and
say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Cursed be he that slighteth his father
or his mother! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Cursed be he that removeth his
neighbour's landmark! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Cursed be he that maketh the blind to
wander out of the way! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Cursed be he that perverteth the
judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow! And all the people
shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
father's wife; for he uncovereth his father's skirt! And all the people
shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Cursed be he that lieth with any manner
of beast! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother! And
all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Cursed be he that lieth with his
mother-in-law! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour
secretly! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Cursed be he that taketh reward to
smite mortally \[shedding\] innocent blood! And all the people shall
say, Amen.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Cursed be he that confirmeth not the
words of this law to do them! And all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt
hearken diligently unto the voice of Jehovah thy God, to take heed to do
all his commandments which I command thee this day, that Jehovah thy God
will set thee supreme above all nations of the earth;

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> and all these blessings shall come on
thee and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of Jehovah
thy God.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and
blessed shalt thou be in the field.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> Blessed shall be the fruit of thy womb,
and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the offspring
of thy kine, and the increase of thy sheep.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Blessed shall be thy basket and thy
kneading-trough.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Blessed shalt thou be in thy coming in,
and blessed shalt thou be in thy going out.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Jehovah will give up, smitten before
thee, thine enemies that rise up against thee; they shall come out
against thee one way, and by seven ways shall they flee before thee.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Jehovah will command blessing on thee in
thy granaries, and in all the business of thy hand; and he will bless
thee in the land which Jehovah thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Jehovah will establish thee unto himself
a holy people as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou keep the commandments
of Jehovah thy God, and walk in his ways.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> And all peoples of the earth shall see
that thou art called by the name of Jehovah, and they shall be afraid of
thee.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And Jehovah will give thee abundance of
good, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in
the fruit of thy ground, in the land that Jehovah swore unto thy fathers
to give thee.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Jehovah will open to thee his good
treasure, the heavens, to give rain unto thy land in its season, and to
bless all the work of thy hand; and thou shalt lend unto many nations,
but thou shalt not borrow.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And Jehovah will make thee the head,
and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be
beneath; if thou hearken unto the commandments of Jehovah thy God, which
I command thee this day, to keep and to do them,

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> and if thou turn not aside from any of
the words that I command thee this day, to the right hand or to the
left, to go after other gods to serve them.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> But it shall come to pass if thou wilt
not hearken unto the voice of Jehovah thy God, to take heed to do all
his commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day, that
all these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and
cursed shalt thou be in the field.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Cursed shall be thy basket and thy
kneading-trough.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Cursed shall be the fruit of thy womb,
and the fruit of thy ground, the offspring of thy kine, and the increase
of thy sheep.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Cursed shalt thou be in thy coming in,
and cursed shalt thou be in thy going out.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Jehovah will send upon thee cursing,
confusion, and rebuke, in all the business of thy hand which thou doest,
until thou be destroyed and until thou perish quickly, because of the
wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Jehovah will make the pestilence cleave
unto thee, until he have consumed thee from off the land whither thou
goest to possess it.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Jehovah will smite thee with
consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and with burning
ague, and with drought, and with blight, and with mildew, and they shall
pursue thee until thou perish.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And thy heavens which are over thy head
shall be brass, and the earth which is under thee, iron.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Jehovah will give as the rain of thy
land powder and dust; from the heavens shall it come down upon thee
until thou be destroyed.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Jehovah will give thee up smitten
before thine enemies; thou shalt go out against them one way, and by
seven ways shalt thou flee before them; and thou shalt be driven hither
and thither into all the kingdoms of the earth.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And thy carcase shall be meat unto all
the fowl of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and there shall
be no man to scare them away.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Jehovah will smite thee with the ulcers
of Egypt, and with boils, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof
thou canst not be healed.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Jehovah will smite thee with madness,
and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart;

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> and thou shalt grope at noonday, as the
blind gropeth in darkness, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways; and
thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled continually, and there shall be
none to save.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another
man shall lie with her; thou shalt build a house, and thou shalt not
dwell therein; thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not eat of it.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Thine ox shall be slaughtered before
thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof; thine ass shall be snatched
away from before thy face, and shall not return to thee; thy sheep shall
be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to recover them.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> Thy sons and thy daughters shall be
given unto another people, and thine eyes shall look, and languish for
them all the day long; and there shall be no power in thy hand \[to help
it\].

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> The fruit of thy ground and all thy
labour, shall a people that thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be
only oppressed and crushed continually.

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> And thou shalt be mad through the sight
of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> Jehovah will smite thee in the knees
and in the legs with evil ulcers, whereof thou canst not be healed, from
the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> Jehovah will bring thee, and thy king
whom thou shalt set over thee, unto a nation that neither thou nor thy
fathers have known, and there shalt thou serve other gods, wood and
stone.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And thou shalt become an astonishment,
a proverb, and a byword, among all the peoples whither Jehovah shall
lead thee.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> Thou shalt carry much seed out into the
field, and shalt gather little in; for the locust shall devour it.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> Thou shalt plant and till vineyards,
but shalt drink no wine, nor gather \[the fruit\]; for the worms shall
eat it.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> Olive-trees shalt thou have throughout
all thy borders, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with oil; for thine
olive-tree shall cast its fruit.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> Sons and daughters shalt thou beget,
but thou shalt not have them \[to be with thee\]; for they shall go into
captivity.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> All thy trees and the fruit of thy
ground shall the locust possess.

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> The sojourner that is in thy midst
shall rise above thee higher and higher, and thou shalt sink down lower
and lower.

<span id="an_28:44">28:44</span> He shall lend to thee, but thou shalt
not lend to him: he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail.

<span id="an_28:45">28:45</span> And all these curses shall come upon
thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, until thou be destroyed;
because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep
his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee.

<span id="an_28:46">28:46</span> And they shall be upon thee for a sign
and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for ever.

<span id="an_28:47">28:47</span> Because thou servedst not Jehovah thy
God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of
everything,

<span id="an_28:48">28:48</span> thou shalt serve thine enemies whom
Jehovah will send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in want of everything; and he shall put a yoke of iron
upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:49">28:49</span> Jehovah will bring a nation against
thee from afar, from the end of the earth, like as the eagle flieth, a
nation whose tongue thou understandest not;

<span id="an_28:50">28:50</span> a nation of fierce countenance, which
regardeth not the person of the old, nor is kind to the young;

<span id="an_28:51">28:51</span> and he shall eat the fruit of thy
cattle, and the fruit of thy ground, until thou be destroyed; for he
shall not leave thee corn, new wine, or oil, offspring of thy kine, or
increase of thy sheep, until he have destroyed thee.

<span id="an_28:52">28:52</span> And he shall besiege thee in all thy
gates, until thy high and strong walls wherein thou trustedst come down,
throughout all thy land; and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates in
all thy land, which Jehovah thy God hath given thee.

<span id="an_28:53">28:53</span> And in the siege, and in the
straitness, wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee, thou shalt eat
the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters
whom Jehovah thy God hath given thee.

<span id="an_28:54">28:54</span> The eye of the man in thy midst that is
tender and very luxurious shall be evil towards his brother, and the
wife of his bosom, and the residue of his children which he hath left;

<span id="an_28:55">28:55</span> so that he will not give to any of them
of the flesh of his children that he eateth, because he hath nothing
left him in the siege and in the straitness wherewith thine enemies
shall distress thee in all thy gates.

<span id="an_28:56">28:56</span> The eye of the tender and luxurious
woman in thy midst who would not attempt to set the sole of her foot
upon the ground from luxuriousness and from tenderness, shall be evil
toward the husband of her bosom, and her son, and her daughter,

<span id="an_28:57">28:57</span> because of her afterbirth which hath
come out between her feet, and her children whom she shall bear; for she
shall secretly eat them for want of everything in the siege and in the
straitness wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.

<span id="an_28:58">28:58</span> If thou wilt not take heed to do all
the words of this law that are written in this book, to fear this
glorious and fearful name, JEHOVAH THY GOD;

<span id="an_28:59">28:59</span> then Jehovah will make thy plagues
wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, great and persistent plagues and
evil and persistent sicknesses;

<span id="an_28:60">28:60</span> and he will bring upon thee all the
diseases of Egypt which thou art afraid of, and they shall cleave unto
thee.

<span id="an_28:61">28:61</span> Also every sickness and every plague
which is not written in the book of this law, them will Jehovah bring
upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

<span id="an_28:62">28:62</span> And ye shall be left a small company,
whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou hast
not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah thy God.

<span id="an_28:63">28:63</span> And it shall come to pass, that as
Jehovah rejoiced over you to do you good and to multiply you, so Jehovah
will rejoice over you to cause you to perish, and to destroy you; and ye
shall be plucked from off the land whereunto thou goest to possess it.

<span id="an_28:64">28:64</span> And Jehovah will scatter thee among all
peoples, from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;
and thou shalt there serve other gods, whom thou hast not known, neither
thou nor thy fathers, wood and stone.

<span id="an_28:65">28:65</span> And among these nations shalt thou have
no rest, neither shall the sole of thy foot have a resting-place, and
Jehovah shall give thee there a trembling heart, languishing of the
eyes, and pining of the soul.

<span id="an_28:66">28:66</span> And thy life shall hang in suspense
before thee; and thou shalt be in terror day and night and shalt be
afraid of thy life.

<span id="an_28:67">28:67</span> In the morning thou shalt say, Would
that it were even! and in the evening thou shalt say, Would that it were
morning! through the fright of thy heart wherewith thou shalt be in
terror, and through the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt see.

<span id="an_28:68">28:68</span> And Jehovah will bring thee into Egypt
again with ships, by the way whereof I said unto thee, Thou shalt see it
again no more; and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen
and bondwomen, and there shall be no man to buy \[you\].

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> These are the words of the covenant that
Jehovah commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land
of Moab, besides the covenant that he made with them in Horeb.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And Moses called to all Israel, and said
unto them, Ye have seen all that Jehovah did before your eyes in the
land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his bondmen, and to all his land:

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> the great trials that thine eyes have
seen, those great signs and wonders.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> But Jehovah hath not given you a heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, to this day.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And I have led you forty years in the
wilderness; your clothes are not grown old upon you, and thy sandal is
not grown old upon thy foot;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye
drunk wine or strong drink, that ye might know that I am Jehovah your
God.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And ye came to this place; and Sihon the
king of Heshbon and Og the king of Bashan came out against us for
battle, and we smote them.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And we took their land, and gave it for
an inheritance to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half
tribe of the Manassites.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Ye shall keep then the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Ye stand this day all of you before
Jehovah your God: your chiefs \[of\] your tribes, your elders, and your
officers, all the men of Israel,

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> your little ones, your wives, and thy
stranger that is in thy camp, as well the hewer of thy wood as the
drawer of thy water;

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> that thou mayest enter into the
covenant of Jehovah thy God, and into his oath, which Jehovah thy God
maketh with thee this day;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> that he may establish thee this day for
a people unto himself, and \[that\] he may be to thee a God, as he hath
said unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Neither with you only do I make this
covenant and this oath,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> but with him that standeth here with us
this day before Jehovah our God, and with him that is not here with us
this day

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> (for ye know how we dwelt in the land
of Egypt, and how we came through the nations which ye passed;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> and ye have seen their abominations,
and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among
them);

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> lest there should be among you man, or
woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from
Jehovah our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there
should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood,

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> and it come to pass, when he heareth
the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, to
sweep away the drunken with the thirsty.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Jehovah will not pardon him, but the
anger of Jehovah and his jealousy will then smoke against that man, and
all the curse shall be upon him that is written in this book; and
Jehovah will blot out his name from under the heavens;

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> and Jehovah will separate him for
mischief out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of
the covenant that is written in this book of the law.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> And the generation to come, your
children who shall rise up after you, and the foreigner that shall come
from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, and
its sicknesses wherewith Jehovah hath visited it,

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> \[that\] the whole ground thereof is
brimstone and salt, \[and\] burning, that it is not sown, nor beareth,
and no grass groweth in it, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah,
Admah and Zeboim, which Jehovah overthrew in his anger and in his fury:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> even all nations shall say, Why has
Jehovah done thus to this land? whence the heat of this great anger?

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And men shall say, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of Jehovah the God of their fathers, which he had
made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> and they went and served other gods,
and bowed down to them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not
assigned to them.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And the anger of Jehovah was kindled
against this land, to bring upon it all the curse that is written in
this book;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and Jehovah rooted them out of their
land in anger, and in fury, and in great indignation, and cast them into
another land, as \[it appears\] this day.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> The hidden things belong to Jehovah our
God; but the revealed ones are ours and our children's for ever, to do
all the words of this law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And it shall come to pass, when all these
things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set
before thee, and thou shalt take them to heart among all the nations
whither Jehovah thy God hath driven thee,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> and shalt return to Jehovah thy God, and
shalt hearken to his voice according to all that I command thee this
day, thou and thy sons, with all thy heart and with all thy soul;

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> that then Jehovah thy God will turn thy
captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will gather thee again
from all the peoples whither Jehovah thy God hath scattered thee.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Though there were of you driven out unto
the end of the heavens, from thence will Jehovah thy God gather thee,
and from thence will he fetch thee;

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> and Jehovah thy God will bring thee into
the land that thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it; and he
will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And Jehovah thy God will circumcise thy
heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And Jehovah thy God will put all these
curses on thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, who have persecuted
thee.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> But thou shalt return and hearken to the
voice of Jehovah, and do all his commandments which I command thee this
day.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> And Jehovah thy God will make thee abound
in every work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of
thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, for good; for Jehovah will
again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers;

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of
Jehovah thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are
written in this book of the law; if thou turn to Jehovah thy God with
all thy heart and with all thy soul.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For this commandment which I command
thee this day is not too wonderful for thee, neither is it far off.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> It is not in the heavens, that thou
shouldest say, Who shall go up for us to the heavens, and bring it to
us, that we should hear it and do it?

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And it is not beyond the sea, that thou
shouldest say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it to us,
that we should hear it and do it?

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> For the word is very near to thee, in
thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> See, I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil,

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> in that I command thee this day to love
Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and
his statutes and his ordinances, that thou mayest live and multiply, and
that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> But if thy heart turn away, so that
thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and thou shalt bow down to
other gods and serve them;

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> I denounce unto you this day that ye
shall surely perish; ye shall not prolong your days upon the land
whereunto thou passest over the Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> I call heaven and earth to witness this
day against you: life and death have I set before you, blessing and
cursing: choose then life, that thou mayest live, thou and thy seed,

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> in loving Jehovah thy God, in
hearkening to his voice, and in cleaving to him -- for this is thy life
and the length of thy days -- that thou mayest dwell in the land which
Jehovah swore unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to
give them.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Moses went and spoke these words to
all Israel;

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> and he said unto them, I am a hundred and
twenty years old this day, I can no more go out and come in; and Jehovah
hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Jehovah thy God, he will go over before
thee, he will destroy these nations from before thee, that thou mayest
take possession of them: Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as
Jehovah hath said.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> And Jehovah will do to them as he did to
Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land; whom he
destroyed.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And when Jehovah giveth them up before
you, ye shall do to them according to all the commandment which I have
commanded you.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Be strong and courageous, fear them not,
neither be afraid of them; for Jehovah thy God, he it is that goeth with
thee; he will not leave thee, nor forsake thee.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And Moses called to Joshua, and said to
him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and courageous, for thou must
go with this people into the land which Jehovah hath sworn unto their
fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And Jehovah, he it is that goeth before
thee: he will be with thee; he will not leave thee, nor forsake thee;
fear not, neither be dismayed.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And Moses wrote this law, and delivered
it to the priests, the sons of Levi, who bore the ark of the covenant of
Jehovah, and to all the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And Moses commanded them, saying, At
the end of every seven years, at the set time of the year of release, at
the feast of tabernacles,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> when all Israel cometh to appear before
Jehovah thy God in the place which he will choose, thou shalt read this
law before all Israel in their ears.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Gather the people together, the men,
and the women, and the children, and thy stranger that is within thy
gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear Jehovah
your God, and take heed to do all the words of this law;

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> and that their children who do not know
it may hear it and learn, that they may fear Jehovah your God, as long
as ye live in the land, whereunto ye pass over the Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Lo, the days
are near for thee to die; call Joshua, and present yourselves at the
tent of meeting, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went
and presented themselves at the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And Jehovah appeared at the tent in the
pillar of cloud; and the pillar of cloud stood over the entrance to the
tent.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thou
shalt sleep with thy fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a
whoring after the strange gods of the land into which they enter, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And my anger shall be kindled against
them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from
them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall
befall them, and they will say in that day, Have not these evils
befallen me because my God is not in my midst?

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And I will entirely hide my face in
that day for all the evils that they have wrought, because they turned
unto other gods.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> And now, write ye this song, and teach
it to the children of Israel; put it in their mouths, that this song may
be a witness for me against the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> For I shall bring them into the land
which I swore unto their fathers, which floweth with milk and honey; and
they will eat and fill themselves, and wax fat, and will turn unto other
gods, and serve them, and despise me, and break my covenant.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> And it shall come to pass, when many
evils and troubles have befallen them, that this song shall testify
against them as a witness; for it shall not be forgotten out of the
mouths of their seed; for I know their imagination which they are
forming already this day, before I bring them into the land which I have
sworn \[unto them\].

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> And Moses wrote this song the same day,
and taught it to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> And \[Jehovah\] commanded Joshua the
son of Nun, and said, Be strong and courageous; for thou shalt bring the
children of Israel into the land which I have sworn unto them; and I
will be with thee.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And it came to pass, when Moses had
ended writing the words of this law in a book, until their conclusion,

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> that Moses commanded the Levites, who
bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Take this book of the law, and put it
at the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, that it may
be there for a witness against thee;

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> for I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff
neck. Lo, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been
rebellious against Jehovah; and how much more after my death!

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Gather to me all the elders of your
tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears,
and take heaven and earth to witness against them.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> For I know that after my death ye will
utterly corrupt yourselves, and will turn aside from the way which I
have commanded you; and mischief will befall you at the end of days;
because ye do evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger
through the work of your hands.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And Moses spoke in the ears of the
whole congregation of Israel the words of this song, until their
conclusion.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Give ear, ye heavens, and I will speak;
And hear, O earth, the words of my mouth!

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> My doctrine shall drop as rain, My speech
flow down as dew, As small rain upon the tender herb, And as showers on
the grass.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For the name of Jehovah will I proclaim:
Ascribe greatness unto our God!

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> \[He is\] the Rock, his work is perfect,
For all his ways are righteousness; A ùGod of faithfulness without
deceit, Just and right is he.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> They have dealt corruptly with him; Not
his children's is their spot: -- A crooked and perverted generation!

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Do ye thus requite Jehovah, Foolish and
unwise people? Is not he thy father that hath bought thee? Hath he not
made thee and established thee?

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Remember the days of old, Consider the
years of generation to generation; Ask thy father, and he will shew
thee; Thine elders, and they will tell thee.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> When the Most High assigned to the
nations their inheritance, When he separated the sons of Adam, He set
the bounds of the peoples According to the number of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For Jehovah's portion is his people;
Jacob the lot of his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> He found him in a desert land, And in
the waste, howling wilderness; He compassed him about, he watched over
him, He preserved him as the apple of his eye.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> As the eagle stirreth up its nest,
Hovereth over its young, Spreadeth out its wings, Taketh them, beareth
them on its feathers,

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> So Jehovah alone did lead him, And no
strange ùgod \[was\] with him.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> He made him ride on the high places of
the earth, And he ate the produce of the field; And he made him suck
honey out of the crag, And oil out of the flinty rock;

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Cream of kine, and milk of sheep, With
the fat of lambs, And rams of the breed of Bashan, and he-goats, With
the fat of kidneys of wheat; And thou didst drink pure wine, the blood
of the grape.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Then Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked --
Thou art waxen fat, Thou art grown thick, And thou art covered with
fatness; -- He gave up +God who made him, And lightly esteemed the Rock
of his salvation.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> They moved him to jealousy with strange
gods, With abominations did they provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> They sacrificed unto demons who are not
+God; To gods whom they knew not, To new ones, who came newly up, Whom
your fathers revered not.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Of the Rock that begot thee wast thou
unmindful, And thou hast forgotten ùGod who brought thee forth.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And Jehovah saw it, and despised them,
Because of the provoking of his sons and of his daughters.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he said, I will hide my face from
them, I will see what their end shall be; For they are a perverse
generation, Children in whom is no faithfulness.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> They have moved me to jealousy with
that which is no ùGod; They have exasperated me with their vanities; And
I will move them to jealousy with that which is not a people; With a
foolish nation will I provoke them to anger.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For a fire is kindled in mine anger,
And it shall burn into the lowest Sheol, And shall consume the earth and
its produce, And set fire to the foundations of the mountains.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> I will heap mischiefs upon them; Mine
arrows will I spend against them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> They shall be consumed with hunger, and
devoured with burning heat, And with poisonous pestilence; And the teeth
of beasts will I send against them, With the poison of what crawleth in
the dust.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> From without shall the sword bereave
them, and in the chambers, terror -- Both the young man and the virgin,
The suckling with the man of gray hairs.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> I would say, I will scatter, I will
make the remembrance of them to cease from among men,

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> If I did not fear provocation from the
enemy, Lest their adversaries should misunderstand it, Lest they should
say, Our hand is high, and Jehovah has not done all this.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> For they are a nation void of counsel,
And understanding is not in them.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Oh that they had been wise! they would
have understood this, They would have considered their latter end!

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> How could one chase a thousand, And two
put ten thousand to flight, Were it not that their Rock had sold them,
And Jehovah had delivered them up?

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For their rock is not as our Rock: Let
our enemies themselves be judges.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For their vine is of the vine of Sodom,
And of the fields of Gomorrah: Their grapes are grapes of poison, Bitter
are their clusters;

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Their wine is the poison of dragons,
And the cruel venom of vipers.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> Is not this hidden with me, Sealed up
among my treasures?

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> Vengeance is mine, and recompense, For
the time when their foot shall slip. For the day of their calamity is at
hand, And the things that shall come upon them make haste.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> For Jehovah will judge his people, And
shall repent in favour of his servants; When he seeth that power is
gone, And there is none shut up or left.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> And he shall say, Where are their gods,
Their rock in whom they trusted,

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> Who ate the fat of their sacrifices,
\[And\] drank the wine of their drink-offering? Let them rise up and
help you, That there may be a protection over you.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> See now that I, I am HE, And there is
no god with me; I kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal, And there
is none that delivereth out of my hand,

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> For I lift up my hand to the heavens,
and say, I live for ever!

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> If I have sharpened my gleaming sword,
And my hand take hold of judgment, I will render vengeance to mine
adversaries, And will recompense them that hate me.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> Mine arrows will I make drunk with
blood, And my sword shall devour flesh; \[I will make them drunk\] with
the blood of the slain and of the captives, With the head of the princes
of the enemy.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Shout for joy, ye nations, with his
people, For he avengeth the blood of his servants, And rendereth
vengeance to his enemies, And maketh atonement for his land, for his
people.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> And Moses came and spoke all the words
of this song in the ears of the people, he and Hoshea the son of Nun.

<span id="an_32:45">32:45</span> And when Moses had ended speaking all
these words to all Israel,

<span id="an_32:46">32:46</span> he said unto them, Set your hearts unto
all the words that I testify among you this day, which ye shall command
your children to take heed to do, all the words of this law.

<span id="an_32:47">32:47</span> For it is no vain word for you, but it
is your life, and through this word ye shall prolong your days on the
land whereunto ye pass over the Jordan to possess it.

<span id="an_32:48">32:48</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses that same
day, saying,

<span id="an_32:49">32:49</span> Go up into this mountain Abarim, mount
Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, which is opposite Jericho; and
behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for
a possession,

<span id="an_32:50">32:50</span> and die on the mountain whither thou
goest up, and be gathered unto thy peoples, as Aaron thy brother died on
mount Hor, and was gathered unto his peoples;

<span id="an_32:51">32:51</span> because ye trespassed against me among
the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah-Kadesh, in the
wilderness of Zin; because ye hallowed me not in the midst of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:52">32:52</span> For thou shalt see the land before
\[thee\]; but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses
the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And he said, Jehovah came from Sinai, And
rose up from Seir unto them; He shone forth from mount Paran, And he
came from the myriads of the sanctuary; From his right hand \[went
forth\] a law of fire for them.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Yea, he loveth the peoples, All his
saints are in thy hand, And they sit down at thy feet; Each receiveth of
thy words.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> Moses commanded us a law, The inheritance
of the congregation of Jacob.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And he was king in Jeshurun, When the
heads of the people And the tribes of Israel were gathered together.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Let Reuben live, and not die; And let his
men be few.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And this of Judah; and he said, Hear,
Jehovah, the voice of Judah, And bring him unto his people; May his
hands strive for them; And be thou a help to him against his oppressors.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And of Levi he said, Thy Thummim and thy
Urim are for thy godly one, Whom thou didst prove at Massah, With whom
thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah;

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Who said to his father and to his mother,
I see him not, And he acknowledged not his brethren, And knew not his
own children; For they have observed thy word, And kept thy covenant.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They shall teach Jacob thine
ordinances, And Israel thy law: They shall put incense before thy
nostrils, And whole burnt-offering upon thine altar.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Bless, Jehovah, his substance! And let
the work of his hands please thee; Crush the loins of his adversaries,
And of them that hate him, that they may never rise again!

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Of Benjamin he said, The beloved of
Jehovah, -- he shall dwell in safety by him; He will cover him all the
day long, And dwell between his shoulders.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And of Joseph he said, Blessed of
Jehovah be his land! By the precious things of the heavens, By the dew,
and by the deep that lieth beneath,

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And by the precious fruits of the sun,
And by the precious things put forth by the months,

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And by the best things of the ancient
mountains, And by the precious things of the everlasting hills,

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And by the precious things of the earth
and the fulness thereof. And let the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush Come upon the head of Joseph, Upon the top of the head of him that
was separated from his brethren.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> His majesty is as the firstling of his
ox; And his horns are as the horns of a buffalo. With them shall he push
the peoples Together to the ends of the earth. These are the myriads of
Ephraim, And these are the thousands of Manasseh.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice,
Zebulun, in thy going out; And thou, Issachar, in thy tents!

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> They shall invite \[the\] peoples to
the mountain; There they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness; For
they will suck the abundance of the seas, And the hidden treasures of
the sand.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that
enlargeth Gad! As a lion doth he dwell, and teareth the arm, even the
top of the head.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And he provided the first part for
himself, For there was reserved the portion of the lawgiver; And he came
with the heads of the people; The justice of Jehovah and his judgments
Hath he executed with Israel.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And of Dan he said, Dan is a young
lion; He shall spring forth from Bashan.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And of Naphtali he said, Naphtali,
satisfied with favour, And full of the blessing of Jehovah, Possess thou
the west and the south.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And of Asher he said, Asher shall be
blessed with sons; Let him be acceptable to his brethren, And let him
dip his foot in oil.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Iron and brass shall be thy bolts; And
thy rest as thy days.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> There is none like unto the ùGod of
Jeshurun, Who rideth upon the heavens to thy help, And in his majesty,
upon the clouds.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> \[Thy\] refuge is the God of old, And
underneath are the eternal arms; And he shall drive out the enemy from
before thee, And shall say, Destroy \[them\]!

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And Israel shall dwell in safety alone,
The fountain of Jacob, in a land of corn and new wine; Also his heavens
shall drop down dew.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Happy art thou, Israel! Who is like
unto thee, a people saved by Jehovah, The shield of thy help, And the
sword of thine excellency? And thine enemies shall come cringing to
thee; And thou shalt tread upon their high places.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Moses went up from the plains of Moab
to mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, which is opposite Jericho. And
Jehovah shewed him the whole land, Gilead to Dan,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> and all Naphtali, and the land of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto the hindmost sea,

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and the south, and the plain of the
valley of Jericho, the city of palm-trees, to Zoar.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And Jehovah said unto him, This is the
land that I swore unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, Unto
thy seed will I give it: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes,
but thou shalt not go over thither.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And Moses the servant of Jehovah died
there in the land of Moab, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And he buried him in the valley in the
land of Moab, opposite Beth-Peor; and no man knows his sepulchre to this
day.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And Moses was a hundred and twenty years
old when he died; his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And the children of Israel wept for Moses
in the plains of Moab thirty days; and the days of weeping and mourning
for Moses were ended.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And Joshua the son of Nun was filled with
the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him; and the
children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as Jehovah had commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And there arose no prophet since in
Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah had known face to face;

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> according to all the signs and wonders
that Jehovah had sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to
all his servants, and to all his land;

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> and according to all that mighty hand;
and according to all the great terribleness that Moses had wrought in
the sight of all Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua](jos)
