[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ch2)  [Next](neh) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Ezra

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And in the first year of Cyrus king of
Persia, that the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
accomplished, Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, and
he made a proclamation throughout his kingdom, and also in writing,
saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Thus says Cyrus king of Persia: All the
kingdoms of the earth has Jehovah the God of the heavens given to me,
and he has charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in
Judah.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Whosoever there is among you of all his
people, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in
Judah, and build the house of Jehovah the God of Israel -- he is God --
which is at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And whosoever remains in any place where he
sojourns, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold,
and with goods, and with beasts, besides the voluntary offering for the
house of God which is at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the chief fathers of Judah and Benjamin
rose up, and the priests, and the Levites, even all those whose spirit
God had stirred, to go up to build the house of Jehovah which is at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And all they that were about them
strengthened their hands with articles of silver, with gold, with goods,
and with beasts, and with precious things, besides all that was
willingly offered.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And king Cyrus brought forth the vessels of
the house of Jehovah, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of
Jerusalem and had put in the house of his god.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Cyrus king of Persia brought them forth
by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, who counted them out to
Sheshbazzar the prince of Judah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And this is the number of them: thirty
chargers of gold, a thousand chargers of silver, nine-and-twenty knives,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> thirty basons of gold, silver basons of a
second \[sort\] four hundred and ten, \[and\] other vessels a thousand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> All the vessels of gold and of silver
were five thousand four hundred. The whole did Sheshbazzar bring up,
when they of the captivity were brought up from Babylon to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And these are the children of the province,
that went up out of the captivity of those that had been carried away,
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away to Babylon, and
who came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one to his city,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah,
Saraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The
number of the men of the people of Israel:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The children of Parosh, two thousand one
hundred and seventy-two.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The children of Shephatiah, three hundred
and seventy-two.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The children of Arah, seven hundred and
seventy-five.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The children of Pahath-Moab, of the
children of Jeshua \[and\] Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The children of Elam, a thousand two
hundred and fifty-four.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The children of Zattu, nine hundred and
forty-five.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and
sixty.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The children of Bani, six hundred and
forty-two.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred and
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The children of Azgad, a thousand two
hundred and twenty-two.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The children of Adonikam, six hundred and
sixty-six.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The children of Bigvai, two thousand and
fifty-six.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The children of Adin, four hundred and
fifty-four.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> The children of Ater of \[the family of\]
Hezekiah, ninety-eight.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The children of Bezai, three hundred and
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The children of Jorah, a hundred and
twelve.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> The children of Hashum, two hundred and
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The children of Gibbar, ninety-five.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The children of Bethlehem, a hundred and
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> The men of Netophah, fifty-six.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> The men of Anathoth, a hundred and
twenty-eight.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> The children of Azmaveth, forty-two.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> The children of Kirjath-arim, Chephirah,
and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The children of Ramah and Geba, six
hundred and twenty-one.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> The men of Michmas, a hundred and
twenty-two.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> The men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred and
twenty-three.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> The children of Nebo, fifty-two.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> The children of Magbish, a hundred and
fifty-six.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The children of the other Elam, a
thousand two hundred and fifty-four.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> The children of Harim, three hundred and
twenty.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono,
seven hundred and twenty-five.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred
and forty-five.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> The children of Senaah, three thousand
six hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of
the house of Jeshua, nine hundred and seventy-three.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> The children of Immer, a thousand and
fifty-two.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> The children of Pashhur, a thousand two
hundred and forty-seven.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> The children of Harim, a thousand and
seventeen.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> The Levites: the children of Jeshua and
of Kadmiel, of the children of Hodaviah, seventy-four.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> The singers: the children of Asaph, a
hundred and twenty-eight.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> The children of the doorkeepers: the
children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the
children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, in
all a hundred and thirty-nine.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the
children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> the children of Keros, the children of
Siaha, the children of Padon,

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> the children of Lebanah, the children of
Hagabah, the children of Akkub,

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> the children of Hagab, the children of
Shamlai, the children of Hanan,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> the children of Giddel, the children of
Gahar, the children of Reaiah,

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> the children of Rezin, the children of
Nekoda, the children of Gazzam,

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> the children of Uzza, the children of
Phaseah, the children of Besai,

<span id="an_2:50">2:50</span> the children of Asnah, the children of
Meunim, the children of Nephusim,

<span id="an_2:51">2:51</span> the children of Bakbuk, the children of
Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

<span id="an_2:52">2:52</span> the children of Bazluth, the children of
Mehida, the children of Harsha,

<span id="an_2:53">2:53</span> the children of Barkos, the children of
Sisera, the children of Thamah,

<span id="an_2:54">2:54</span> the children of Neziah, the children of
Hatipha.

<span id="an_2:55">2:55</span> The children of Solomon's servants: the
children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda,

<span id="an_2:56">2:56</span> the children of Jaalah, the children of
Darkon, the children of Giddel,

<span id="an_2:57">2:57</span> the children of Shephatiah, the children
of Hattil, the children of Pochereth-Hazzebaim, the children of Ami.

<span id="an_2:58">2:58</span> All the Nethinim and the children of
Solomon's servants, three hundred and ninety-two.

<span id="an_2:59">2:59</span> And these are they that went up from
Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub-Addan, Immer; but they could not shew
their fathers' house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel.

<span id="an_2:60">2:60</span> The children of Delaiah, the children of
Tobijah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred and fifty-two.

<span id="an_2:61">2:61</span> And of the children of the priests: the
children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai; who
took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called
after their name.

<span id="an_2:62">2:62</span> These sought their genealogical register,
but they were not found; therefore were they, as polluted, removed from
the priesthood.

<span id="an_2:63">2:63</span> And the Tirshatha said to them that they
should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest
with Urim and with Thummim.

<span id="an_2:64">2:64</span> The whole congregation together was
forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,

<span id="an_2:65">2:65</span> besides their servants and their maids,
of whom there were seven thousand three hundred and thirty-seven; and
they had two hundred singing men and singing women.

<span id="an_2:66">2:66</span> Their horses were seven hundred and
thirty-six; their mules two hundred and forty-five;

<span id="an_2:67">2:67</span> their camels four hundred and
thirty-five; the asses six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

<span id="an_2:68">2:68</span> And some of the chief fathers, when they
came to the house of Jehovah which is at Jerusalem, offered freely for
the house of God to set it up in its place.

<span id="an_2:69">2:69</span> They gave after their ability to the
treasure of the work sixty-one thousand darics of gold, and five
thousand pounds of silver, and one hundred priests' coats.

<span id="an_2:70">2:70</span> And the priests, and the Levites, and
\[some\] of the people, and the singers, and the doorkeepers, and the
Nethinim dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And when the seventh month came, and the
children of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered together as
one man to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak,
and his brethren the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and
his brethren, and built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer up
burnt-offerings on it, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of
God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And they set the altar on its base; for
fear was upon them because of the people of the countries; and they
offered up burnt-offerings on it to Jehovah, the morning and evening
burnt-offerings.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And they held the feast of tabernacles as
it is written, and \[offered\] daily burnt-offerings by number,
according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and afterwards the continual
burnt-offering, and those of the new moons, and of all the set feasts of
Jehovah that were consecrated, and of every one that willingly offered a
voluntary offering to Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> From the first day of the seventh month
they began to offer up burnt-offerings to Jehovah. But the foundation of
the temple of Jehovah was not \[yet\] laid.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And they gave money to the masons and to
the carpenters; and meat and drink and oil to the Zidonians and to the
Tyrians, to bring cedar-trees from Lebanon to the sea at Joppa,
according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And in the second year of their coming to
the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the
son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of
their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all they that had come
out of the captivity to Jerusalem; and they appointed the Levites, from
twenty years old and upward, to superintend the work of the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And Jeshua stood up, his sons and his
brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, as one \[man\], to
superintend the workmen in the house of God; \[also\] the sons of
Henadad, their sons and their brethren, the Levites.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And when the builders laid the foundation
of the temple of Jehovah, they set the priests in their apparel, with
trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph, with cymbals, to praise
Jehovah according to the directions of David king of Israel.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And they sang alternately together in
praising and giving thanks to Jehovah: For he is good, for his
loving-kindness \[endureth\] for ever toward Israel. And all the people
shouted with a great shout to the praise of Jehovah, because the
foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But many of the priests and Levites and
chief fathers, the ancient men that had seen the first house, wept with
a loud voice, \[when\] the foundation of this house was laid in their
sight; and many shouted aloud for joy.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And the people could not discern the
noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people;
for the people shouted with a great shout, and the noise was heard afar
off.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin
heard that the children of the captivity were building the temple to
Jehovah the God of Israel;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and they came to Zerubbabel and to the
chief fathers, and said to them, We would build with you; for we seek
your God, as ye; and we have sacrificed to him since the days of
Esar-haddon king of Assyria, who brought us up hither.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But Zerubbabel and Jeshua and the rest of
the chief fathers of Israel said to them, Ye have nothing to do with us
to build a house to our God, but we alone will build to Jehovah the God
of Israel, as king Cyrus, the king of Persia, has commanded us.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And the people of the land weakened the
hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and they hired counsellors against them, to
frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even
until the reign of Darius king of Persia.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the
beginning of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants
of Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And in the days of Artaxerxes, Bishlam,
Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of his companions, wrote to Artaxerxes
king of Persia; and the writing of the letter was written in Aramaic,
and interpreted in Aramaic.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the
scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king after
this sort:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the
scribe, and the rest of their companions, the Dinaites, and the
Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the
Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the Dehaites, the Elamites,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> and the rest of the peoples whom the
great and noble Osnappar brought over and settled in the cities of
Samaria, and the rest \[of the country\] on this side the river, and so
forth.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> This is the copy of the letter that they
sent to him: To Artaxerxes the king: Thy servants the men on this side
the river, and so forth.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Be it known to the king that the Jews who
came up from thee unto us have come to Jerusalem; they are building the
rebellious and the bad city, and they complete the walls and join up the
foundations.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Be it known therefore unto the king,
that, if this city be built and the walls be completed, they will not
pay tribute, tax, and toll, and in the end it will bring damage to the
kings.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Now, since we eat the salt of the palace,
and it is not right for us to see the king's injury, therefore have we
sent and informed the king;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> that search may be made in the book of
the annals of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the annals
and know that this city is a rebellious city, which has done damage to
kings and provinces, and that they have raised sedition within the same
of old time, for which cause this city was destroyed.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> We inform the king that if this city be
built and its walls be completed, by this means thou shalt have no
portion on this side the river.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The king sent an answer to Rehum the
chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions
that dwell in Samaria, and the other places beyond the river: Peace, and
so forth.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The letter that ye sent to us has been
read before me distinctly.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And I gave orders, and search has been
made, and it has been found that this city of old time has made
insurrection against the kings, and that rebellion and sedition have
been raised therein.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And there have been mighty kings over
Jerusalem, who have ruled over all beyond the river; and tribute, tax,
and toll were paid to them.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Now give order to make these men to
cease, and that this city be not built, until the order shall be given
from me;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and take heed that ye fail not to do
this: why should harm grow to the damage of the kings?

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> As soon as the copy of king Artaxerxes'
letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their
companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem to the Jews, and made
them cease by force and power.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Then ceased the work of the house of God
which is at Jerusalem; and it ceased until the second year of the reign
of Darius king of Persia.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now the prophets, Haggai the prophet and
Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews that were in Judah and
Jerusalem; in the name of the God of Israel \[did they prophesy\] to
them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house
of God which is at Jerusalem; and with them were the prophets of God,
who helped them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> At that time came to them Tatnai, governor
on this side the river, and Shethar-boznai, and their companions, and
said thus to them: Who gave you orders to build this house and to
complete this wall?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And they said to them after this manner:
What are the names of the men that build this building?

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> But the eye of their God was upon the
elders of the Jews, and they did not make them cease till the matter
came to Darius; and then they returned answer by letter concerning it.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The copy of the letter that Tatnai,
governor on this side the river, and Shethar-boznai, and his companions
the Apharsachites, who were on this side the river, sent to Darius the
king.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They sent a report to him in which was
written thus: To Darius the king, all peace!

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be it known to the king that we went into
the province of Judah, to the house of the great God, which is being
built with great stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work
is being carried on with diligence, and prospers in their hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then asked we those elders: thus we said to
them, Who gave you orders to build this house and to complete this wall?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> We asked their names also, to inform
thee, that we might write the names of the men that were the chief of
them.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And thus they returned us answer, saying,
We are the servants of the God of the heavens and the earth, and build
the house that was built these many years ago; and a great king of
Israel built and completed it.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But after that our fathers had provoked
the God of the heavens to wrath, he gave them into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, and he destroyed this
house, and carried the people away unto Babylon.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But in the first year of Cyrus king of
Babylon, king Cyrus gave orders to build this house of God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the vessels also of gold and silver
of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that
was at Jerusalem and brought into the temple of Babylon, those did king
Cyrus take out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered to one
Sheshbazzar by name, whom he had appointed governor.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And he said to him, Take these vessels,
go, carry them into the temple that is at Jerusalem, and let the house
of God be built in its place.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Then came the same Sheshbazzar, \[and\]
laid the foundation of the house of God which is at Jerusalem; and since
that time even until now has it been in building, and it is not
completed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And now, if it seem good to the king, let
search be made in the king's treasure-house, which is there at Babylon,
whether it be so, that orders were given by king Cyrus to build this
house of God at Jerusalem; and let the king send his pleasure to us
concerning this matter.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Then king Darius gave orders, and search
was made in the house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in
Babylon.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And there was found at Achmetha in the
fortress that is in the province of Media a roll, and therein was a
record thus written:

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> In the first year of king Cyrus, king Cyrus
made a decree \[concerning\] the house of God at Jerusalem: Let the
house be built for a place where they offer sacrifices, and let its
foundations be solidly laid; its height sixty cubits, its breadth sixty
cubits,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> \[with\] three rows of great stones, and a
row of new timber; and let the expenses be given out of the king's
house:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> and also let the golden and silver vessels
of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that is
at Jerusalem and brought to Babylon, be restored and brought again to
the temple that is at Jerusalem, in their place; and thou shalt put
\[them\] in the house of God.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Therefore Tatnai, governor beyond the
river, Shethar-boznai, and your companions the Apharsachites, who are
beyond the river, be ye far from thence:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> let the work of this house of God alone;
let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house
of God in its place.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Moreover, I give orders what ye shall do to
these elders of the Jews, for the building of this house of God: that of
the king's goods, of the tribute beyond the river, expenses be
diligently given to these men, that they be not hindered.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And that which they have need of, both
young bullocks and rams and lambs, for the burnt-offerings to the God of
the heavens, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the appointment of
the priests that are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day
without fail;

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> that they may present sweet odours to the
God of the heavens, and pray for the life of the king and of his sons.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Also I have given order that whosoever
shall alter this rescript, let timber be pulled down from his house, and
being set up, let him be hanged thereon, and let his house be made a
dunghill for this.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the God that has caused his name to
dwell there overthrow every king and people that shall put forth their
hand to alter \[or\] to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem.
I Darius have given \[this\] order; let it be done diligently.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then Tatnai, governor on this side the
river, Shethar-boznai, and their companions, because of that which king
Darius had sent, did so diligently.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the elders of the Jews built; and
they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and
Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they built and completed \[it\] according
to the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the
commandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And this house was finished on the third
day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of king
Darius.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the children of Israel, the priests
and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the
dedication of this house of God with joy;

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and they presented at the dedication of
this house of God a hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred
lambs, and for a sin-offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, according
to the number of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And they set the priests in their
classes, and the Levites in their divisions, for the service of God,
which is at Jerusalem: as it is written in the book of Moses.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the children of the captivity held
the passover upon the fourteenth of the first month.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For the priests and the Levites had
purified themselves as one \[man\]: they were all pure; and they killed
the passover for all the children of the captivity, and for their
brethren the priests, and for themselves.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the children of Israel that were come
back out of captivity, and all such as had separated themselves to them
from the filthiness of the nations of the land, to seek Jehovah the God
of Israel, did eat;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and they kept the feast of unleavened
bread seven days with joy; for Jehovah had made them joyful, and turned
the heart of the king of Assyria to them, to strengthen their hands in
the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And after these things, in the reign of
Artaxerxes, king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah,
the son of Hilkijah,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the
son of Ahitub,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the
son of Meraioth,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the
son of Bukki,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas,
the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> -- this Ezra went up from Babylon; and he
was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which Jehovah the God of Israel
had given. And the king granted him all his request, according to the
hand of Jehovah his God upon him.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> (And there went up \[some\] of the children
of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the
doorkeepers, and the Nethinim, to Jerusalem, in the seventh year of
Artaxerxes the king.)

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth
month, which was in the seventh year of the king.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> For upon the first of the first month the
project of going up from Babylon was determined on, and on the first of
the fifth month he came to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his
God upon him.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Ezra had directed his heart to seek
the law of Jehovah and to do it, and to teach in Israel the statutes and
the ordinances.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And this is the copy of the letter that
king Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe, a scribe of the
words of the commandments of Jehovah, and of his statutes to Israel:

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the
priest, an accomplished scribe of the law of the God of the heavens, and
so forth.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> I have given orders that all they of the
people of Israel, and of their priests and the Levites, in my realm, who
are disposed to go to Jerusalem, go with thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Because thou art sent by the king, and by
his seven counsellors, to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem,
according to the law of thy God which is in thy hand;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> and to carry the silver and gold which
the king and his counsellors have freely offered to the God of Israel,
whose habitation is at Jerusalem,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and all the silver and gold that thou
canst find in all the province of Babylon, besides the voluntary
offering of the people, and of the priests, who offer willingly for the
house of their God which is at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Therefore thou shalt buy diligently with
this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their oblations and their
drink-offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God
which is at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And whatever shall seem good to thee and
to thy brethren to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do
according to the will of your God.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the vessels that have been given thee
for the service of the house of thy God, deliver before the God of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And whatever more shall be needful for
the house of thy God which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it
out of the king's treasure house.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I, I Artaxerxes the king, do give
orders to all the treasurers that are beyond the river, that whatever
Ezra the priest and scribe of the law of the God of the heavens shall
require of you, it be done diligently,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> unto a hundred talents of silver, and to
a hundred measures of wheat, and to a hundred baths of wine, and to a
hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing \[how much\].

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Whatever is commanded by the God of the
heavens, let it be carefully done for the house of the God of the
heavens; for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and
his sons?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Also we inform you, as regards all the
priests and Levites, singers, doorkeepers, Nethinim, and ministers of
this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose tribute, tax, and
toll upon them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy
God, which is in thy hand, set magistrates and judges who may judge all
the people that are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy
God; and teach ye him that knows \[them\] not.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And whosoever will not do the law of thy
God and the law of the king, let judgment be executed diligently upon
him, whether unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods,
or to imprisonment.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Blessed be Jehovah the God of our
fathers, who has put \[such a thing\] as this in the king's heart, to
beautify the house of Jehovah which is at Jerusalem;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> and has extended mercy to me before the
king and his counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes. And
I was strengthened, as the hand of Jehovah my God was upon me; and I
gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And these are the chief fathers, and their
genealogy, who went up with me from Babylon in the reign of Artaxerxes
the king.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Of the children of Phinehas, Gershom; of
the children of Ithamar, Daniel; of the children of David, Hattush;

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> of the children of Shecaniah, of the
children of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him were registered by genealogy
of the males a hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Of the children of Pahath-Moab, Elihoenai
the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Of the children of Shechaniah, the son of
Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And of the children of Adin, Ebed the son
of Jonathan, and with him fifty males.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And of the children of Elam, Isaiah the son
of Athaliah, and with him seventy males.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And of the children of Shephatiah, Zebadiah
the son of Michael, and with him eighty males.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Of the children of Joab, Obadiah the son of
Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And of the children of Shelomith, the son
of Josiphiah, and with him a hundred and sixty males.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And of the children of Bebai, Zechariah
the son of Bebai, and with him twenty-eight males.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And of the children of Azgad, Johanan the
son of Hakkatan, and with him a hundred and ten males.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And of the children of Adonikam, the last
ones, whose names are these: Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with
them sixty males.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And of the children of Bigvai, Uthai and
Zabbud, and with them seventy males.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And I gathered them together at the river
that runs to Ahava; and there we encamped three days; and I surveyed the
people and the priests, and found none of the sons of Levi there.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And I sent for Eliezer, for Ariel, for
Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for
Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men, and for Joiarib
and for Elnathan, men of understanding.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I gave them a commission to Iddo the
chief, at the place Casiphia, and I put words in their mouths to say to
Iddo \[and\] his brethren the Nethinim, at the place Casiphia, that they
should bring to us ministers for the house of our God.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And by the good hand of our God upon us,
they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of
Levi, the son of Israel, namely, Sherebiah, with his sons and his
brethren, eighteen;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> and Hashabiah, and with him Isaiah of the
sons of Merari, his brethren and their sons, twenty;

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> and of the Nethinim, whom David and the
princes had appointed for the service of the Levites, two hundred and
twenty Nethinim: all of them were expressed by name.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And I proclaimed a fast there, at the
river Ahava, that we might humble ourselves before our God, to seek of
him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our
substance.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For I was ashamed to require of the king
a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way;
for we had spoken to the king saying, The hand of our God is upon all
them for good that seek him; but his power and his anger is against all
them that forsake him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And we fasted, and besought our God for
this; and he was entreated of us.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And I separated twelve of the chiefs of
the priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them,

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> and I weighed to them the silver and the
gold and the vessels, the heave-offering for the house of our God, which
the king and his counsellors and his princes, and all Israel present,
had offered.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And I weighed into their hand six hundred
and fifty talents of silver; and silver vessels a hundred talents,
\[and\] of gold a hundred talents;

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> and twenty basons of gold, of a thousand
darics; and two vessels of shining copper, precious as gold.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And I said to them, Ye are holy unto
Jehovah; the vessels also are holy; and the silver and the gold is a
voluntary offering to Jehovah the God of your fathers.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Watch and keep \[them\] until ye weigh
them before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites, and the chiefs of
the fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And the priests and the Levites received
by weight the silver and the gold and the vessels, to bring them to
Jerusalem unto the house of our God.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And we departed from the river Ahava on
the twelfth of the first month, to go to Jerusalem; and the hand of our
God was upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of
such as lay in wait by the way.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there
three days.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And on the fourth day the silver and the
gold and the vessels were weighed in the house of our God into the hand
of Meremoth the son of Urijah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the
son of Phinehas; and with them were Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and
Noadiah the son of Binnui, Levites:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> the whole by number and by weight; and
all the weight was written down at that time.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> The children of those that had been
carried away, who had come out of the captivity, presented
burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel,
ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, twelve he-goats for a
sin-offering: all for a burnt-offering to Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And they delivered the king's edicts to
the king's satraps, and to the governors on this side the river. And
they furthered the people and the house of God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now when these things were completed, the
princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests and
the Levites, have not separated themselves from the peoples of the
lands, according to their abominations, \[even\] of the Canaanites, the
Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites,
the Egyptians, and the Amorites;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> for they have taken of their daughters for
themselves and for their sons, and have mingled the holy seed with the
peoples of the lands; and the hand of the princes and rulers has been
chief in this unfaithfulness.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And when I heard this thing, I rent my
mantle and my garment, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my
beard, and sat down overwhelmed.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Then were assembled to me every one that
trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the
unfaithfulness of those that had been carried away; and I sat
overwhelmed until the evening oblation.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And at the evening oblation I arose up from
my humiliation; and with my mantle and my garment rent, I fell on my
knees, and spread out my hands to Jehovah my God,

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> and said: O my God, I am ashamed and blush
to lift up my face to thee, my God; for our iniquities are increased
over \[our\] head, and our trespass is grown up to the heavens.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Since the days of our fathers, we have been
in great trespass to this day; and for our iniquities we, our kings, our
priests, have been given into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the
sword, and to captivity, and to spoil, and to confusion of face, as it
is this day.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And now for a little space there hath been
favour from Jehovah our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to
give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and
give us a little reviving in our bondage.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For we are bondmen; yet our God hath not
forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us before the
kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God
and to repair the ruins thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And now, what shall we say, our God,
after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> which thou hast commanded by thy servants
the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to possess \[it\], is
an unclean land through the filthiness of the peoples of the lands,
through their abominations with which they have filled it from one end
to another through their uncleanness.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Now therefore give not your daughters to
their sons, neither take their daughters to your sons, nor seek their
peace or their prosperity for ever; that ye may be strong, and eat the
good of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children for
ever.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And after all that is come upon us for
our evil deeds and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast
punished us less than our iniquities \[deserve\], and hast given us such
deliverance as this,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> should we again break thy commandments,
and join in affinity with the peoples of these abominations? wouldest
thou not be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant nor any to escape?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Jehovah, God of Israel, thou art
righteous; for we are a remnant that is escaped, as \[it is\] this day.
Behold, we are before thee in our trespasses; for there is no standing
before thee because of this.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And while Ezra prayed, and made
confession, weeping and falling down before the house of God, there were
gathered to him out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women
and children; for the people wept very much.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, of the
sons of Elam, answered and said to Ezra, We have acted unfaithfully
toward our God, and have taken foreign wives of the peoples of the land;
yet now there is hope for Israel concerning this thing.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And now let us make a covenant with our
God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according
to the counsel of \[my\] lord, and of those that tremble at the
commandments of our God; and let it be done according to the law.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Arise, for this matter is incumbent on
thee, and we will be with thee: be of good courage, and do \[it\].

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Then Ezra arose, and made the chiefs of
the priests, of the Levites, and of all Israel, to swear that they would
do according to this word. And they swore.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And Ezra arose from before the house of
God, and went into the chamber of Jehohanan the son of Eliashib; and
when he came thither, he ate no bread and drank no water; for he mourned
because of the unfaithfulness of them that had been carried away.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And they made proclamation in Judah and
Jerusalem to all the children of the captivity, that they should gather
themselves together unto Jerusalem;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and that whosoever would not come within
three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders, all
his substance should be confiscated, and himself separated from the
congregation of those that had been carried away.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Then were all the men of Judah and
Benjamin gathered together at Jerusalem within three days. It was the
ninth month, on the twentieth of the month; and all the people sat in
the open space of the house of God, trembling because of the matter, and
because of the pouring rain.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And Ezra the priest stood up and said
to them, Ye have acted unfaithfully, and have taken foreign wives, to
increase the trespass of Israel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And now make confession to Jehovah the
God of your fathers, and do his pleasure, and separate yourselves from
the peoples of the land, and from the foreign wives.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the whole congregation answered and
said with a loud voice, Yes, it is for us to do according to thy words.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But the people are many, and it is a
time of pouring rain, and it is not possible to stand without: neither
is this a work for one day or two; for we are many that have
transgressed in this thing.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Let now our princes, while this matter
is going on, stand for all the congregation, and let all those that have
taken foreign wives in our cities come at the appointed times, and with
them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until the fierce
anger of our God be turned from us.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and
Jahzeiah the son of Tikvah stood up against this; and Meshullam and
Shabbethai the Levite helped them.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And the children of the captivity did
so. And Ezra the priest \[and\] certain of the chief fathers were
separated according to their fathers' houses, and all of them
\[expressed\] by name; and they sat down on the first day of the tenth
month to examine the matter.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And they ended with all the men that
had taken foreign wives by the first day of the first month.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And among the sons of the priests there
were found that had taken foreign wives, of the sons of Jeshua the son
of Jozadak, and his brethren: Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and
Gedaliah.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And they gave their hand to send away
their wives; and they offered a ram of the flock, as trespass-offering
for their guilt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And of the children of Immer: Hanani,
and Zebadiah.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And of the children of Harim: Maaseiah,
and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And of the children of Pashhur:
Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And of the Levites: Jozabad, and
Shimei, and Kelaiah (that is, Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And of the singers: Eliashib. And of
the doorkeepers: Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And of Israel; of the children of
Parosh: Ramiah, and Jizzijah, and Malchijah, and Mijamin, and Eleazar,
and Malchijah, and Benaiah.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And of the children of Elam: Mattaniah,
Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Elijah.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And of the children of Zattu: Elioenai,
Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And of the children of Bebai:
Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And of the children of Bani: Meshullam,
Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And of the children of Pahath-Moab:
Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui,
and Manasseh.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And the children of Harim: Eliezer,
Jishijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Simeon,

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Of the children of Hashum: Mattenai,
Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Of the sons of Bani: Maadai, Amram, and
Uel,

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> Benaiah, Bediah, Cheluhu,

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasai,

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> and Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> and Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Machnadbai, Shashai, Sharai,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> Shallum, Amariah, Joseph.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> Of the children of Nebo: Jeiel,
Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jaddai, and Joel, Benaiah.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> All these had taken foreign wives; and
there were among them wives who had had children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah](neh)
