[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dan)  [Next](joe.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Hosea

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came unto Hosea,
the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings
of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The beginning of the word of Jehovah
through Hosea. And Jehovah said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of
whoredoms, and children of whoredoms; for the land is entirely given up
to whoredom, away from Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And he went and took Gomer the daughter of
Diblaim; and she conceived and bore him a son.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Call his name
Jizreel; for yet a little, and I will visit the blood of Jizreel upon
the house of Jehu, and will cause the kingdom of the house of Israel to
cease.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, that
I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jizreel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And she conceived again, and bore a
daughter. And he said unto him, Call her name Lo-ruhamah; for I will no
more have mercy upon the house of Israel, so that I should pardon them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But I will have mercy upon the house of
Judah, and will save them by Jehovah their God; and I will not save them
by bow, or by sword, or by battle, \[or\] by horses, or by horsemen.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And she weaned Lo-ruhamah; and she
conceived and bore a son;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and he said, Call his name Lo-ammi; for ye
are not my people, and I will not be for you.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yet the number of the children of Israel
shall be as the sand of the sea which cannot be measured or numbered;
and it shall come to pass, \[that\] in the place where it was said unto
them, Ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, Sons of the
living ùGod.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And the children of Judah and the
children of Israel shall be gathered together, and they shall appoint
themselves one head, and shall go up out of the land: for great is the
day of Jizreel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Say unto your brethren Ammi; and to your
sisters, Ruhamah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Plead with your mother, plead; for she is
not my wife, neither am I her husband: and let her put away her
whoredoms from her face, and her adulteries from between her breasts;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> lest I strip her naked, and set her as in
the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her as
a dry land, and slay her with thirst.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And I will not have mercy upon her
children; for they are the children of whoredoms.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For their mother hath played the harlot;
she that conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I will go
after my lovers, that give \[me\] my bread and my water, my wool and my
flax, mine oil and my drink.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way
with thorns; and I will fence \[her\] in with a wall, that she shall not
find her paths.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she shall pursue after her lovers, and
shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, and shall not find
them: and she shall say, I will go and return to my first husband, for
then was it better with me than now.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And she did not know that I had given her
the corn and the new wine and the oil, and had multiplied to her the
silver and gold, which they employed for Baal.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore will I return, and take away my
corn in the time thereof, and my new wine in its season, and will
withdraw my wool and my flax which should have covered her nakedness.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And now will I discover her impiety in
the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of my hand.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And I will cause all her mirth to cease:
her feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths! and all her solemnities.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I will make desolate her vine and her
fig-tree, whereof she hath said, These are my rewards which my lovers
have given me; and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the
field shall eat them.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I will visit upon her the days of the
Baals, wherein she burned incense to them, and decked herself with her
rings and jewels, and went after her lovers, and forgot me, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Therefore behold, I will allure her, and
bring her into the wilderness, and speak to her heart.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And I will give her her vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she shall sing
there, as in the days of her youth and as in the day when she came up
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah, \[that\] thou shalt call me, My husband, and shalt call me no
more, Baali;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> for I will take away the names of the
Baals out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their
name.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And I will make a covenant for them in
that day with the beasts of the field, and with the fowl of the heavens,
and the creeping things of the ground; and I will break bow and sword
and battle out of the land; and I will make them to lie down safely.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will betroth thee unto me for ever;
and I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in loving-kindness, and in mercies;

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> and I will betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness: and thou shalt know Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, I
will hear, saith Jehovah, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear
the earth;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and the earth shall hear the corn, and
the new wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jizreel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will sow her unto me in the land;
and I will have mercy upon Lo-ruhamah; and I will say to Lo-ammi, Thou
art my people; and they shall say, My God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Jehovah said unto me, Go again, love a
woman beloved of a friend, and an adulteress, according to the love of
Jehovah for the children of Israel, though they turn to other gods, and
love raisin-cakes.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I bought her to me for fifteen silver
\[pieces\], and for a homer of barley, and a half-homer of barley.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And I said unto her, Thou shalt abide for
me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be
\[another\] man's, and I will also be for thee.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For the children of Israel shall abide many
days without king, and without prince, and without sacrifice, and
without statue, and without ephod and teraphim.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Afterwards shall the children of Israel
return, and seek Jehovah their God, and David their king; and shall turn
with fear toward Jehovah and toward his goodness, at the end of the
days.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear the word of Jehovah, ye children of
Israel; for Jehovah hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land;
for there is no truth, nor goodness, nor knowledge of God in the land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, -- they break out; and blood toucheth
blood.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For this shall the land mourn, and every
one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field,
and with the fowl of the heavens, yea, the fishes of the sea also shall
be taken away.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Yet let no man strive, and let no man
reprove; for thy people are as they that strive with the priest.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And thou shalt stumble by day; and the
prophet also shall stumble with thee by night: and I will destroy thy
mother.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge; for thou hast rejected knowledge, and I will reject thee,
that thou shalt be no priest to me; seeing thou hast forgotten the law
of thy God, I also will forget thy children.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> As they were multiplied, so they sinned
against me: I will change their glory into shame.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> They eat the sin of my people, and their
soul longeth for their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it shall be as the people so the
priest; and I will visit their ways upon them, and recompense to them
their doings;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> and they shall eat, and not have enough;
they shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase: for they have left
off taking heed to Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Fornication, and wine, and new wine take
away the heart.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My people ask counsel of their stock, and
their staff declareth unto them; for the spirit of whoredoms causeth
\[them\] to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> they sacrifice upon the tops of the
mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oak and poplar and
terebinth, because the shade thereof is good; therefore your daughters
play the harlot and your daughters-in-law commit adultery.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I will not punish your daughters when
they play the harlot, nor your daughters-in-law for their committing
adultery; for they themselves go aside with harlots, and they sacrifice
with prostitutes: and the people that doth not understand shall come to
ruin.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, let
not Judah trespass; and come ye not unto Gilgal, neither go up to
Beth-aven, nor swear \[As\] Jehovah liveth!

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For Israel is refractory as an
untractable heifer; now will Jehovah feed them as a lamb in a wide
\[pasture\].

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> -- Ephraim is joined to idols: leave him
alone.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Their drink is sour; they give themselves
up to whoredom; her great men passionately love \[their\] shame.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The wind hath wrapped her up in its
wings, and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Hear this, ye priests; and hearken, ye
house of Israel; and give ear, O house of the king: for this judgment is
for you; for ye have been a snare at Mizpah, and a net spread upon
Tabor.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And they have plunged themselves in the
corruption of apostasy, but I will be a chastiser of them all.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from
me; for now, Ephraim, thou hast committed whoredom; Israel is defiled.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Their doings do not allow them to return
unto their God; for the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and
they know not Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Israel's pride doth testify to his
face; and Israel and Ephraim shall fall by their iniquity: Judah also
shall fall with them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They shall go with their flocks and with
their herds to seek Jehovah; but they shall not find \[him\]: he hath
withdrawn himself from them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They have dealt treacherously against
Jehovah; for they have begotten strange children: now shall the new moon
devour them, with their allotted possessions.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blow the horn in Gibeah, the trumpet in
Ramah; cry aloud \[at\] Beth-aven: behind thee, O Benjamin!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Ephraim shall be a desolation in the day of
rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which is sure.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The princes of Judah are become like them
that remove the landmark: I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Ephraim is oppressed, crushed in
judgment, because in selfwill he walked after the commandment \[of
man\].

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And I will be unto Ephraim as a moth, and
to the house of Judah as rottenness.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
his sore, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to king Jareb; but
he was unable to heal you, nor hath he removed your sore.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and
as a young lion to the house of Judah. I, I will tear and go away; I
will carry off, and there shall be none to deliver.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I will go away, I will return to my
place, till they acknowledge their trespass, and seek my face: in their
affliction they will seek me early.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Come and let us return unto Jehovah: for he
hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> After two days will he revive us; on the
third day he will raise us up, and we shall live before his face;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and we shall know, -- we shall follow on to
know Jehovah: his going forth is assured as the morning dawn; and he
will come unto us as the rain, as the latter rain which watereth the
earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> What shall I do unto thee, Ephraim? What
shall I do unto thee, Judah? For your goodness is as a morning cloud,
and as the dew that early passeth away.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Therefore have I hewed \[them\] by the
prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and my judgment
goeth forth as the light.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For I delight in loving-kindness, and not
sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But they like Adam have transgressed the
covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Gilead is a city of them that work
iniquity; it is tracked with blood.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And as troops of robbers lie in wait for a
man, so the company of priests murder in the way of Shechem; yea, they
commit lewdness.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> In the house of Israel have I seen a
horrible thing: the whoredom of Ephraim is there; Israel is defiled.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Also, for thee, Judah, is a harvest
appointed, when I shall turn again the captivity of my people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When I would heal Israel, then the iniquity
of Ephraim is discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they
practise falsehood; and the thief entereth in, \[and\] the troop of
robbers assaileth without.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And they say not in their hearts \[that\] I
remember all their wickedness: now do their own doings encompass them;
they are before my face.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> They make the king glad with their
wickedness, and the princes with their lies.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> They all practise adultery, as an oven
heated by the baker: he ceaseth from stirring \[the fire\] after he hath
kneaded the dough, until it be leavened.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> In the day of our king, the princes made
themselves sick with the heat of wine: he stretched out his hand to
scorners.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For they have applied their heart like an
oven to their lying in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in the
morning it burneth like a flaming fire.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> They are all hot as an oven, and devour
their judges; all their kings are fallen: there is none among them that
calleth unto me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ephraim, he mixeth himself with the
peoples; Ephraim is a cake not turned.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Strangers have devoured his strength, and
he knoweth \[it\] not; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and
he knoweth \[it\] not.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the pride of Israel testifieth to his
face; and they do not return to Jehovah their God, nor seek him for all
this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Ephraim is become like a silly dove
without understanding: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When they go, I will spread my net upon
them; I will bring them down as the fowl of the heavens; I will chastise
them, according as their assembly hath heard.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Woe unto them! for they have wandered
from me; destruction unto them! for they have transgressed against me.
And I would redeem them; but they speak lies against me.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And they cried not unto me in their
heart, when they howled upon their beds; they assemble themselves for
corn and new wine; they have turned aside from me.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> I have indeed trained, I have
strengthened their arms, but they imagine mischief against me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They return, \[but\] not to the \[Most\]
High: they are like a deceitful bow. Their princes shall fall by the
sword for the rage of their tongue: this shall be their derision in the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Set the trumpet to thy mouth. \[He cometh\]
as an eagle against the house of Jehovah, because they have transgressed
my covenant, and rebelled against my law.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> They shall cry unto me, My God, we know
thee; \[we\], Israel.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Israel hath cast off good: the enemy shall
pursue him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They have set up kings, but not by me; they
have made princes, and I knew it not; of their silver and their gold
have they made them idols, that they may be cut off.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast \[thee\]
off; mine anger is kindled against them: how long will they be incapable
of purity?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For from Israel is this also: -- a workman
made it, and it is no God: for the calf of Samaria shall be \[broken
in\] pieces.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For they have sown the wind, and they shall
reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk; should it sprout, it would yield
no meal; if so be it yield, strangers shall swallow it up.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Israel is swallowed up: now are they become
among the nations as a vessel wherein is no pleasure.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For they are gone up \[to\] Assyria \[as\]
a wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired lovers.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Although they hire among the nations, now
will I gather them, and they shall begin to be straitened under the
burden of the king of princes.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because Ephraim hath multiplied altars to
sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I have prescribed unto him the manifold
things of my law: they are counted \[as\] a strange thing.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> They sacrifice flesh \[for\] the
sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it; Jehovah hath no delight in
them. Now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they
shall return to Egypt.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and
buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will
send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Rejoice not, Israel, exultingly, as the
peoples; for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved
harlot's hire upon every corn-floor.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The floor and the winepress shall not feed
them, and the new wine shall fail her.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They shall not dwell in Jehovah's land; but
Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and in Assyria shall they eat that which
is unclean.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> They shall pour out no \[offerings of\]
wine to Jehovah, neither shall their sacrifices be pleasing unto him:
they shall be unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat thereof
shall be defiled: for their bread shall be for themselves; it shall not
come into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> What will ye do in the day of assembly, and
in the day of the feast of Jehovah?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For behold, they are gone away because of
destruction: Egypt shall gather them up, Moph shall bury them: their
pleasant things of silver, nettles shall possess them; thorns shall be
in their tents.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The days of visitation are come; the days
of recompence are come: Israel shall know \[it\]: the prophet is a fool,
the inspired man is mad, because of the greatness of thine iniquity, and
the great enmity.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Is Ephraim a watchman with my God? \[nay\]
the prophet is a fowler's snare on all his ways, enmity in the house of
his God.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They have deeply corrupted themselves as in
the days of Gibeah. He will remember their iniquity, he will visit their
sins.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> I found Israel as grapes in the
wilderness; as first-ripe fruit on the fig-tree, I saw your fathers at
the beginning: they went to Baal-Peor, and separated themselves unto
that shame, and became abominations like their lover.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly
away as a bird, -- no birth, no pregnancy, no conception!

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For even should they bring up their
children, yet will I bereave them, \[that\] not a man \[remain\]: for
woe also to them when I shall have departed from them!

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Ephraim, as I saw \[him\], was a Tyre
planted in a beautiful place; but Ephraim shall bring forth his children
to the slayer.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Give them, Jehovah -- what wilt thou
give? -- give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> All their wickedness is in Gilgal; for
there I hated them: because of the wickedness of their doings, I will
drive them out of my house, I will love them no more: all their princes
are rebellious.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Ephraim is smitten: their root is dried
up, they shall bear no fruit; yea, though they should bring forth, yet
will I slay the beloved \[fruit\] of their womb.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> My God hath rejected them, because they
hearkened not unto him; and they shall be wanderers among the nations.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Israel is an unpruned vine, he bringeth
forth fruit unto himself: according to the abundance of his fruit he
hath multiplied altars; according to the goodness of his land they have
made goodly statues.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Their heart is divided; now shall they be
found guilty: he will break down their altars, he will destroy their
statues.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For now they will say, We have no king,
for we feared not Jehovah; and a king, what can he do for us?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They speak \[mere\] words, swearing
falsely in making a covenant; therefore shall judgment spring up as
hemlock in the furrows of the fields.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear
because of the calf of Beth-aven; for the people thereof shall mourn
over it, and the idolatrous priests thereof shall tremble for it, for
its glory, because it is departed from it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Yea, it shall be carried unto Assyria
\[as\] a present for king Jareb: Ephraim shall be seized with shame, and
Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> As for Samaria her king is cut off as
chips upon the face of the waters.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the high places of Aven, the sin of
Israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up upon
their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us! and to the
hills, Fall on us!

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> From the days of Gibeah hast thou sinned,
O Israel: there they stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children of
iniquity did not overtake them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> At my pleasure will I chastise them;
and the peoples shall be assembled against them, when they are bound for
their two iniquities.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Ephraim is a trained heifer, that
loveth to tread out \[the corn\]; I have passed over upon her fair neck:
I will make Ephraim to draw; Judah shall plough, Jacob shall break his
clods.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Sow to yourselves in righteousness,
reap according to mercy; break up your fallow ground: for it is time to
seek Jehovah, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Ye have ploughed wickedness, reaped
iniquity, eaten the fruit of lies; for thou didst confide in thy way, in
the multitude of thy mighty men.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And a tumult shall arise among thy
peoples, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled
Beth-arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces with
the children.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So shall Bethel do unto you because of
the wickedness of your wickedness: at day-break shall the king of Israel
utterly be cut off.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> When Israel was a child, then I loved
him, and out of Egypt I called my son.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> As they called them, so they went from
them: they sacrificed unto the Baals, and burned incense to graven
images.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And I it was that taught Ephraim to walk,
-- He took them upon his arms, -- but they knew not that I healed them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> I drew them with bands of a man, with
cords of love; and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their
jaws, and I gently caused them to eat.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> He shall not return into the land of
Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his king; for they refused to return
\[to me\];

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and the sword shall turn about in his
cities, and shall consume his bars, and devour \[them\], because of
their own counsels.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Yea, my people are bent upon backsliding
from me: though they call them to the Most High, none at all exalteth
\[him\].

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> How shall I give thee over, Ephraim?
\[how\] shall I deliver thee up, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah?
\[how\] shall I set thee as Zeboim? My heart is turned within me, my
repentings are kindled together.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will not execute the fierceness of mine
anger, I will not again destroy Ephraim; for I am ùGod, and not man, --
the Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not come in anger.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They shall walk after Jehovah; he shall
roar like a lion; when he shall roar, then the children shall hasten
from the west:

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> they shall hasten as a bird out of
Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria; and I will cause them
to dwell in their houses, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Ephraim encompasseth me about with
lies, and the house of Israel with deceit; but Judah yet walketh with
ùGod, and with the holy things of truth.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Ephraim feedeth on wind, and pursueth
after the east wind: all day long he multiplieth lies and desolation;
and they make a covenant with Assyria, and oil is carried into Egypt.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Jehovah hath also a controversy with
Judah, and he will punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his
doings will he recompense him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> He took his brother by the heel in the
womb, and in his strength he wrestled with God.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Yea, he wrestled with the Angel, and
prevailed; he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him in
Bethel, and there he spoke with us,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> -- even Jehovah, the God of hosts, --
Jehovah is his memorial.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And thou, return unto thy God: keep
loving-kindness and judgment, and wait on thy God continually.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> \[He is\] a merchant, balances of deceit
are in his hand; he loveth to oppress.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And Ephraim saith, Nevertheless I am
become rich, I have found me out substance; in all my labours they shall
find none iniquity in me that were sin.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> But I \[that am\] Jehovah thy God from
the land of Egypt will again make thee to dwell in tents, as in the days
of the solemn feast.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And I have spoken to the prophets, and
I have multiplied visions, and by means of the prophets have I used
similitudes.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> If Gilead is iniquity, surely they are
but vanity: they sacrifice bullocks in Gilgal; yea, their altars are as
heaps in the furrows of the fields.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Jacob fled into the country of
Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept \[sheep\].

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel
out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Ephraim provoked \[him\] to anger most
bitterly; and his Lord shall leave his blood upon him, and recompense
unto him his reproach.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling;
he exalted himself in Israel: but he trespassed through Baal, and he
died.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And now they sin more and more, and have
made them molten images of their silver, idols according to their own
understanding, all of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them,
Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Therefore they shall be as the morning
cloud, and as the early dew that passeth away, as the chaff driven with
the whirlwind out of the threshing-floor, and as the smoke out of the
lattice.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Yet I \[am\] Jehovah thy God from the
land of Egypt, and thou hast known no God but me; and there is no
saviour besides me.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I knew thee in the wilderness, in the
land of drought.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> According to their pasture, they became
full; they became full, and their heart was exalted: therefore have they
forgotten me.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And I will be unto them as a lion; as a
leopard I will lurk for them by the way;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> I will meet them as a bear bereaved of
her \[whelps\], and will rend the covering of their heart, and there
will I devour them like a lioness: the beast of the field shall tear
them.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> It is thy destruction, O Israel, that
\[thou art\] against me, against thy help.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Where then is thy king, that he may
save thee in all thy cities? and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me
a king and princes? --

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> I gave thee a king in mine anger, and
took him away in my wrath.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up;
his sin is laid by in store.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The pangs of a woman in travail shall
come upon him: he is a son not wise; for at the time of the breaking
forth of children, he was not there.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will ransom them from the power of
Sheol. I will redeem them from death: where, O death, are thy plagues?
where, O Sheol, is thy destruction? Repentance shall be hid from mine
eyes.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he be fruitful among \[his\]
brethren, an east wind shall come, a wind of Jehovah \[that\] cometh up
from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain
shall be dried up: he shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Samaria shall bear her guilt; for she
hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword; their
infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be
ripped up.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> O Israel, return unto Jehovah thy God;
for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Take with you words, and turn to Jehovah;
say unto him, Forgive all iniquity, and receive \[us\] graciously; so
will we render the calves of our lips.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Assyria shall not save us; we will not
ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands,
\[Thou art\] our God; because in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> I will heal their backsliding, I will
love them freely; for mine anger is turned away from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I will be as the dew unto Israel: he
shall blossom as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> His shoots shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the olive-tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> They shall return and sit under his
shadow; they shall revive \[as\] corn, and blossom as the vine: the
renown thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Ephraim \[shall say\], What have I to do
any more with idols? (I answer \[him\], and I will observe him.) I am
like a green fir-tree. -- From me is thy fruit found.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Who is wise, and he shall understand
these things? intelligent, and he shall know them? For the ways of
Jehovah are right, and the just shall walk in them; but the
transgressors shall fall therein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel](joe.md)
