[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](heb)  [Next](pe1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: James

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> James, bondman of God and of \[the\] Lord
Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which \[are\] in the dispersion,
greeting.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Count it all joy, my brethren, when ye fall
into various temptations,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> knowing that the proving of your faith
works endurance.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> But let endurance have \[its\] perfect
work, that ye may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But if any one of you lack wisdom, let him
ask of God, who gives to all freely and reproaches not, and it shall be
given to him:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> but let him ask in faith, nothing doubting.
For he that doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by the wind and
tossed about;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> for let not that man think that he shall
receive anything from the Lord;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> \[he is\] a double-minded man, unstable in
all his ways.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But let the brother of low degree glory in
his elevation,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and the rich in his humiliation, because
as \[the\] grass's flower he will pass away.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For the sun has risen with its burning
heat, and has withered the grass, and its flower has fallen, and the
comeliness of its look has perished: thus the rich also shall wither in
his goings.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Blessed \[is the\] man who endures
temptation; for, having been proved, he shall receive the crown of life,
which He has promised to them that love him.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Let no man, being tempted, say, I am
tempted of God. For God cannot be tempted by evil things, and himself
tempts no one.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But every one is tempted, drawn away, and
enticed by his own lust;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> then lust, having conceived, gives birth
to sin; but sin fully completed brings forth death.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Do not err, my beloved brethren.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Every good gift and every perfect gift
comes down from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variation nor shadow of turning.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> According to his own will begat he us by
the word of truth, that we should be a certain first-fruits of \*his\*
creatures.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So that, my beloved brethren, let every
man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> for man's wrath does not work God's
righteousness.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Wherefore, laying aside all filthiness
and abounding of wickedness, accept with meekness the implanted word,
which is able to save your souls.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But be ye doers of \[the\] word and not
hearers only, beguiling yourselves.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> For if any man be a hearer of \[the\]
word and not a doer, \*he\* is like to a man considering his natural
face in a mirror:

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> for he has considered himself and is gone
away, and straightway he has forgotten what he was like.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But \*he\* that fixes his view on \[the\]
perfect law, that of liberty, and abides in \[it\], being not a
forgetful hearer but a doer of \[the\] work, \*he\* shall be blessed in
his doing.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> If any one think himself to be religious,
not bridling his tongue, but deceiving his heart, this man's religion is
vain.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Pure and undefiled religion before God
and the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction,
to keep oneself unspotted from the world.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My brethren, do not have the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, \[Lord\] of glory, with respect of persons:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for if there come unto your synagogue a man
with a gold ring in splendid apparel, and a poor man also come in in
vile apparel,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and ye look upon him who wears the splendid
apparel, and say, Do thou sit here well, and say to the poor, Do thou
stand there, or sit here under my footstool:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> have ye not made a difference among
yourselves, and become judges having evil thoughts?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Hear, my beloved brethren: Has not God
chosen the poor as to the world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But \*ye\* have despised the poor \[man\].
Do not the rich oppress you, and \[do not\] \*they\* drag you before
\[the\] tribunals?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And \[do not\] \*they\* blaspheme the
excellent name which has been called upon you?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> If indeed ye keep \[the\] royal law
according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye
do well.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But if ye have respect of persons, ye
commit sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For whoever shall keep the whole law and
shall offend in one \[point\], he has come under the guilt of
\[breaking\] all.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For he who said, Thou shalt not commit
adultery, said also, Thou shalt not kill. Now if thou dost not commit
adultery, but killest, thou art become transgressor of \[the\] law.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So speak ye, and so act, as those that
are to be judged by \[the\] law of liberty;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> for judgment \[will be\] without mercy to
him that has shewn no mercy. Mercy glories over judgment.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> What \[is\] the profit, my brethren, if
any one say he have faith, but have not works? can faith save him?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Now if a brother or a sister is naked and
destitute of daily food,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and one from amongst you say to them, Go
in peace, be warmed and filled; but give not to them the needful things
for the body, what \[is\] the profit?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So also faith, if it have not works, is
dead by itself.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> But some one will say, \*Thou\* hast
faith and \*I\* have works. Shew me thy faith without works, and \*I\*
from my works will shew thee my faith.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> \*Thou\* believest that God is one. Thou
doest well. The demons even believe, and tremble.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But wilt thou know, O vain man, that
faith without works is dead?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Was not Abraham our father justified by
works when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Thou seest that faith wrought with his
works, and that by works faith was perfected.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And the scripture was fulfilled which
says, Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness,
and he was called Friend of God.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Ye see that a man is justified on the
principle of works, and not on the principle of faith only.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> But was not in like manner also Rahab the
harlot justified on the principle of works, when she had received the
messengers and put \[them\] forth by another way?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For as the body without a spirit is dead,
so also faith without works is dead.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Be not many teachers, my brethren, knowing
that we shall receive greater judgment.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For we all often offend. If any one offend
not in word, \*he\* \[is\] a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body
too.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Behold, we put the bits in the mouths of
the horses, that they may obey us, and we turn round their whole bodies.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Behold also the ships, which are so great,
and driven by violent winds, are turned about by a very small rudder,
wherever the pleasure of the helmsman will.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Thus also the tongue is a little member,
and boasts great things. See how little a fire, how large a wood it
kindles!

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and the tongue \[is\] fire, the world of
unrighteousness; the tongue is set in our members, the defiler of the
whole body, and which sets fire to the course of nature, and is set on
fire of hell.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For every species both of beasts and of
birds, both of creeping things and of sea animals, is tamed and has been
tamed by the human species;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> but the tongue can no one among men tame;
\[it is\] an unsettled evil, full of death-bringing poison.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Therewith bless we the Lord and Father, and
therewith curse we men made after \[the\] likeness of God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Out of the same mouth goes forth blessing
and cursing. It is not right, my brethren, that these things should be
thus.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Does the fountain, out of the same
opening, pour forth sweet and bitter?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Can, my brethren, a fig produce olives,
or a vine figs? Neither \[can\] salt \[water\] make sweet water.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Who \[is\] wise and understanding among
you; let him shew out of a good conversation his works in meekness of
wisdom;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> but if ye have bitter emulation and
strife in your hearts, do not boast and lie against the truth.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> This is not the wisdom which comes down
from above, but earthly, natural, devilish.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For where emulation and strife \[are\],
there \[is\] disorder and every evil thing.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But the wisdom from above first is pure,
then peaceful, gentle, yielding, full of mercy and good fruits,
unquestioning, unfeigned.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But \[the\] fruit of righteousness in
peace is sown for them that make peace.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Whence \[come\] wars and whence fightings
among you? \[Is it\] not thence, -- from your pleasures, which war in
your members?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Ye lust and have not: ye kill and are full
of envy, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war; ye have not because ye ask
not.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask
evilly, that ye may consume \[it\] in your pleasures.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Adulteresses, know ye not that friendship
with the world is enmity with God? Whoever therefore is minded to be
\[the\] friend of the world is constituted enemy of God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Think ye that the scripture speaks in vain?
Does the Spirit which has taken his abode in us desire enviously?

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> But he gives more grace. Wherefore he says,
God sets himself against \[the\] proud, but gives grace to \[the\]
lowly.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Subject yourselves therefore to God. Resist
the devil, and he will flee from you.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Draw near to God, and he will draw near to
you. Cleanse \[your\] hands, sinners, and purify \[your\] hearts, ye
double-minded.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Be wretched, and mourn, and weep: let your
laughter be turned to mourning, and \[your\] joy to heaviness.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Humble yourselves before \[the\] Lord,
and he shall exalt you.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Speak not against one another, brethren.
He that speaks against \[his\] brother, or judges his brother, speaks
against \[the\] law and judges \[the\] law. But if thou judgest \[the\]
law, thou art not doer of \[the\] law, but judge.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> One is the lawgiver and judge, who is
able to save and to destroy: but who art \*thou\* who judgest thy
neighbour?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Go to now, ye who say, To-day or
to-morrow will we go into such a city and spend a year there, and
traffic and make gain,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> ye who do not know what will be on the
morrow, (\[for\] what \[is\] your life? It is even a vapour, appearing
for a little while, and then disappearing,)

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> instead of your saying, If the Lord
should \[so\] will and we should live, we will also do this or that.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> But now ye glory in your vauntings: all
such glorying is evil.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> To him therefore who knows how to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Go to now, ye rich, weep, howling over your
miseries that \[are\] coming upon \[you\].

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Your wealth is become rotten, and your
garments moth-eaten.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Your gold and silver is eaten away, and
their canker shall be for a witness against you, and shall eat your
flesh as fire. Ye have heaped up treasure in \[the\] last days.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Behold, the wages of your labourers, who
have harvested your fields, wrongfully kept back by you, cry, and the
cries of those that have reaped are entered into the ears of \[the\]
Lord of sabaoth.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Ye have lived luxuriously on the earth and
indulged yourselves; ye have nourished your hearts \[as\] in a day of
slaughter;

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> ye have condemned, ye have killed the just;
he does not resist you.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Have patience, therefore, brethren, till
the coming of the Lord. Behold, the labourer awaits the precious fruit
of the earth, having patience for it until it receive \[the\] early and
\[the\] latter rain.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> \*Ye\* also have patience: stablish your
hearts, for the coming of the Lord is drawn nigh.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Complain not one against another, brethren,
that ye be not judged. Behold, the judge stands before the door.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Take \[as\] an example, brethren, of
suffering and having patience, the prophets, who have spoken in the name
of \[the\] Lord.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Behold, we call them blessed who have
endured. Ye have heard of the endurance of Job, and seen the end of the
Lord; that the Lord is full of tender compassion and pitiful.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But before all things, my brethren, swear
not, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but let
your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, that ye do not fall under judgment.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Does any one among you suffer evil? let
him pray. Is any happy? let him sing psalms.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Is any sick among you? let him call to
\[him\] the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of \[the\] Lord;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and the prayer of faith shall heal the
sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he be one who has
committed sins, it shall be forgiven him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Confess therefore your offences to one
another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed. \[The\]
fervent supplication of the righteous \[man\] has much power.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Elias was a man of like passions to us,
and he prayed with prayer that it should not rain; and it did not rain
upon the earth three years and six months;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and again he prayed, and the heaven gave
rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> My brethren, if any one among you err
from the truth, and one bring him back,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> let him know that he that brings back a
sinner from \[the\] error of his way shall save a soul from death and
shall cover a multitude of sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter](pe1)
