[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jo3)  [Next](rev) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Jude

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Jude, bondman of Jesus Christ, and brother
of James, to the called ones beloved in God \[the\] Father and preserved
in Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Mercy to you, and peace, and love be
multiplied.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Beloved, using all diligence to write to
you of our common salvation, I have been obliged to write to you
exhorting \[you\] to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to
the saints.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> For certain men have got in unnoticed, they
who of old were marked out beforehand to this sentence, ungodly
\[persons\], turning the grace of our God into dissoluteness, and
denying our only Master and Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But I would put you in remembrance, you who
once knew all things, that the Lord, having saved a people out of
\[the\] land of Egypt, in the second place destroyed those who had not
believed.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And angels who had not kept their own
original state, but had abandoned their own dwelling, he keeps in
eternal chains under gloomy darkness, to \[the\] judgment of \[the\]
great day;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities
around them, committing greedily fornication, in like manner with them,
and going after other flesh, lie there as an example, undergoing the
judgment of eternal fire.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Yet in like manner these dreamers also
defile \[the\] flesh, and despise lordship, and speak railingly against
dignities.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But Michael the archangel, when disputing
with the devil he reasoned about the body of Moses, did not dare to
bring a railing judgment against \[him\], but said, \[The\] Lord rebuke
thee.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But these, whatever things they know not,
they speak railingly against; but what even, as the irrational animals,
they understand by mere nature, in these things they corrupt themselves.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Woe to them! because they have gone in
the way of Cain, and given themselves up to the error of Balaam for
reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> These are spots in your love-feasts,
feasting together \[with you\] without fear, pasturing themselves;
clouds without water, carried along by \[the\] winds; autumnal trees,
without fruit, twice dead, rooted up;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> raging waves of the sea, foaming out
their own shames; wandering stars, to whom has been reserved the gloom
of darkness for eternity.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Enoch, \[the\] seventh from Adam,
prophesied also as to these, saying, Behold, \[the\] Lord has come
amidst his holy myriads,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> to execute judgment against all; and to
convict all the ungodly of them of all their works of ungodliness, which
they have wrought ungodlily, and of all the hard \[things\] which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These are murmurers, complainers, walking
after their lusts; and their mouth speaks swelling words, admiring
persons for the sake of profit.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But \*ye\*, beloved, remember the words
spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> that they said to you, that at \[the\]
end of the time there should be mockers, walking after their own lusts
of ungodlinesses.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> These are they who set \[themselves\]
apart, natural \[men\], not having \[the\] Spirit.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But \*ye\*, beloved, building yourselves
up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> keep yourselves in the love of God,
awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And of some have compassion, making a
difference,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> but others save with fear, snatching
\[them\] out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the flesh.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> But to him that is able to keep you
without stumbling, and to set \[you\] with exultation blameless before
his glory,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> to the only God our Saviour, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, \[be\] glory, majesty, might, and authority, from
before the whole age, and now, and to all the ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation](rev)
