[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from \[the\] beginning, that
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we
contemplated, and our hands handled, concerning the word of life;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (and the life has been manifested, and we
have seen, and bear witness, and report to you the eternal life, which
was with the Father, and has been manifested to us:)

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> that which we have seen and heard we report
to you, that \*ye\* also may have fellowship with us; and our fellowship
\[is\] indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And these things write we to you that your
joy may be full.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And this is the message which we have heard
from him, and declare to you, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not practise the truth.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But if we walk in the light as \*he\* is in
the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
righteous to forgive us \[our\] sins, and cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> If we say that we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My children, these things I write to you in
order that ye may not sin; and if any one sin, we have a patron with the
Father, Jesus Christ \[the\] righteous;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and \*he\* is the propitiation for our
sins; but not for ours alone, but also for the whole world.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And hereby we know that we know him, if we
keep his commandments.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He that says, I know him, and does not keep
his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> but whoever keeps his word, in him verily
the love of God is perfected. Hereby we know that we are in him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He that says he abides in him ought, even
as \*he\* walked, himself also \[so\] to walk.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Beloved, I write no new commandment to you,
but an old commandment, which ye have had from the beginning. The old
commandment is the word which ye heard.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Again, I write a new commandment to you,
which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing
and the true light already shines.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> He who says he is in the light, and hates
his brother, is in the darkness until now.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He that loves his brother abides in
light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But he that hates his brother is in the
darkness, and walks in the darkness, and knows not where he goes,
because the darkness has blinded his eyes.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I write to you, children, because
\[your\] sins are forgiven you for his name's sake.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I write to you, fathers, because ye have
known him \[that is\] from the beginning. I write to you, young men,
because ye have overcome the wicked \[one\]. I write to you, little
children, because ye have known the Father.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I have written to you, fathers, because
ye have known him \[that is\] from the beginning. I have written to you,
young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and
ye have overcome the wicked \[one\].

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Love not the world, nor the things in the
world. If any one love the world, the love of the Father is not in him;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> because all that \[is\] in the world, the
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father, but is of the world.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the world is passing, and its lust,
but he that does the will of God abides for eternity.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Little children, it is \[the\] last hour,
and, according as ye have heard that antichrist comes, even now there
have come many antichrists, whence we know that it is \[the\] last hour.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They went out from among us, but they
were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have surely
remained with us, but that they might be made manifest that none are of
us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And \*ye\* have \[the\] unction from the
holy \[one\], and ye know all things.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have not written to you because ye do
not know the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the
truth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is the liar but he who denies that
Jesus is the Christ? \*He\* is the antichrist who denies the Father and
the Son.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Whoever denies the Son has not the Father
either; he who confesses the Son has the Father also.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> As for \*you\* let that which ye have
heard from the beginning abide in you: if what ye have heard from the
beginning abides in you, \*ye\* also shall abide in the Son and in the
Father.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And this is the promise which \*he\* has
promised us, life eternal.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> These things have I written to you
concerning those who lead you astray:

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> and \*yourselves\*, the unction which ye
have received from him abides in you, and ye have not need that any one
should teach you; but as the same unction teaches you as to all things,
and is true and is not a lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall
abide in him.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And now, children, abide in him, that if
he be manifested we may have boldness, and not be put to shame from
before him at his coming.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> If ye know that he is righteous, know
that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> See what love the Father has given to us,
that we should be called \[the\] children of God. For this reason the
world knows us not, because it knew him not.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beloved, now are we children of God, and
what we shall be has not yet been manifested; we know that if it is
manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And every one that has this hope in him
purifies himself, even as \*he\* is pure.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Every one that practises sin practises also
lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And ye know that \*he\* has been manifested
that he might take away our sins; and in him sin is not.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Whoever abides in him, does not sin:
whoever sins, has not seen him or known him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Children, let no man lead you astray; he
that practises righteousness is righteous, even as \*he\* is righteous.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He that practises sin is of the devil; for
from \[the\] beginning the devil sins. To this end the Son of God has
been manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Whoever has been begotten of God does not
practise sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because
he has been begotten of God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In this are manifest the children of God
and the children of the devil. Whoever does not practise righteousness
is not of God, and he who does not love his brother.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For this is the message which ye have
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> not as Cain was of the wicked one, and
slew his brother; and on account of what slew he him? because his works
were wicked, and those of his brother righteous.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Do not wonder, brethren, if the world
hate you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> \*We\* know that we have passed from
death to life, because we love the brethren. He who does not love
\[his\] brother abides in death.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Every one that hates his brother is a
murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Hereby we have known love, because \*he\*
has laid down his life for us; and \*we\* ought for the brethren to lay
down \[our\] lives.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But whoso may have the world's substance,
and see his brother having need, and shut up his bowels from him, how
abides the love of God in him?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Children, let us not love with word, nor
with tongue, but in deed and in truth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And hereby we shall know that we are of
the truth, and shall persuade our hearts before him --

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> that if our heart condemn us, God is
greater than our heart and knows all things.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we
have boldness towards God,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and whatsoever we ask we receive from
him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are
pleasing in his sight.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And this is his commandment, that we
believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one
another, even as he has given us commandment.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And he that keeps his commandments abides
in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abides in us, by the
Spirit which he has given to us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Beloved, believe not every spirit, but
prove the spirits, if they are of God; because many false prophets are
gone out into the world.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Hereby ye know the Spirit of God: every
spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and every spirit which does not confess
Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God: and this is that \[power\] of
the antichrist, \[of\] which ye have heard that it comes, and now it is
already in the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> \*Ye\* are of God, children, and have
overcome them, because greater is he that \[is\] in you than he that
\[is\] in the world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> \*They\* are of the world; for this reason
they speak \[as\] of the world, and the world hears them.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> \*We\* are of God; he that knows God hears
us; he who is not of God does not hear us. From this we know the spirit
of truth and the spirit of error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Beloved, let us love one another; because
love is of God, and every one that loves has been begotten of God, and
knows God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He that loves not has not known God; for
God is love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Herein as to us has been manifested the
love of God, that God has sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might live through him.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Herein is love, not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his Son a propitiation for our sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Beloved, if God has so loved us, we also
ought to love one another.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No one has seen God at any time: if we
love one another, God abides in us, and his love is perfected in us.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Hereby we know that we abide in him and
he in us, that he has given to us of his Spirit.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And \*we\* have seen, and testify, that
the Father has sent the Son \[as\] Saviour of the world.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the
Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And \*we\* have known and have believed
the love which God has to us. God is love, and he that abides in love
abides in God, and God in him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Herein has love been perfected with us
that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, that even as \*he\*
is, \*we\* also are in this world.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> There is no fear in love, but perfect
love casts out fear; for fear has torment, and he that fears has not
been made perfect in love.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> \*We\* love because \*he\* has first
loved us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> If any one say, I love God, and hate his
brother, he is a liar: for he that loves not his brother whom he has
seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And this commandment have we from him,
That he that loves God love also his brother.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Every one that believes that Jesus is the
Christ is begotten of God; and every one that loves him that has
begotten loves also him that is begotten of him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Hereby know we that we love the children of
God, when we love God and keep his commandments.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For this is the love of God, that we keep
his commandments; and his commandments are not grievous.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For all that has been begotten of God gets
the victory over the world; and this is the victory which has gotten the
victory over the world, our faith.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Who is he that gets the victory over the
world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This is he that came by water and blood,
Jesus \[the\] Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it
is the Spirit that bears witness, for the Spirit is the truth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For they that bear witness are three:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> the Spirit, and the water, and the blood;
and the three agree in one.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of God \[which\] he
has witnessed concerning his Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He that believes on the Son of God has
the witness in himself; he that does not believe God has made him a
liar, because he has not believed in the witness which God has witnessed
concerning his Son.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And this is the witness, that God has
given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He that has the Son has life: he that has
not the Son of God has not life.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> These things have I written to you that
ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son
of God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And this is the boldness which we have
towards him, that if we ask him anything according to his will he hears
us.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And if we know that he hears us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have
asked of him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any one see his brother sinning a sin
not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for those that
do not sin unto death. There is a sin to death: I do not say of that
that he should make a request.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Every unrighteousness is sin; and there
is a sin not to death.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We know that every one begotten of God
does not sin, but he that has been begotten of God keeps himself, and
the wicked \[one\] does not touch him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> We know that we are of God, and the whole
world lies in the wicked \[one\].

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And we know that the Son of God has come,
and has given us an understanding that we should know him that \[is\]
true; and we are in him that \[is\] true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is
the true God and eternal life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Children, keep yourselves from idols.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2)
