[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hos)  [Next](amo.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Joel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came to Joel the
son of Pethuel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye
inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or even in the
days of your fathers?

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Tell your children of it, and \[let\] your
children \[tell\] their children, and their children another generation:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> that which the palmer-worm hath left hath
the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the
cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath left hath the
caterpillar eaten.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl,
all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine: for it is cut off from
your mouth.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For a nation is come up upon my land,
strong and without number: his teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he
hath the cheek teeth of a lioness.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He hath made my vine a desolation, and
barked my fig-tree; he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away: its
branches are made white.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Wail like a virgin girded with sackcloth
for the husband of her youth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The oblation and the drink-offering are cut
off from the house of Jehovah; the priests, Jehovah's ministers, mourn.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The field is laid waste, the land
mourneth; for the corn is wasted, the new wine is dried up, the oil
languisheth.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Be ashamed, ye husbandmen; howl, ye
vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley: because the harvest of
the field hath perished.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> The vine is dried up, and the fig-tree
languisheth; the pomegranate-tree, the palm also and the apple-tree; all
the trees of the field are withered, yea, joy is withered away from the
children of men.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests;
howl, ministers of the altar; come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye
ministers of my God: for the oblation and the drink-offering are
withholden from the house of your God.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Hallow a fast, proclaim a solemn
assembly, gather the elders, \[and\] all the inhabitants of the land to
the house of Jehovah your God, and cry unto Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Alas for the day! for the day of Jehovah
is at hand, and as destruction from the Almighty shall it come.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Is not the food cut off before our eyes,
joy and gladness from the house of our God?

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The seeds are rotten under their clods,
the granaries are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn
is withered.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> How do the beasts groan! The herds of
cattle are bewildered, for they have no pasture; the flocks of sheep
also are in suffering.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> To thee, Jehovah, do I cry; for the fire
hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath burned
up all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> The beasts of the field also cry unto
thee; for the water-courses are dried, and the fire hath devoured the
pastures of the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Blow the trumpet in Zion, and sound an
alarm in my holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the land tremble:
for the day of Jehovah cometh, for it is at hand;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> a day of darkness and gloom, a day of
clouds and gross darkness, as the dawn spread upon the mountains; -- a
great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the like, neither
shall be any more after them, to the years of generations and
generations.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> A fire devoureth before them, and behind
them a flame burneth; the land is as a garden of Eden before them, and
behind them a desolate wilderness: yea, and nothing escapeth them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The appearance of them is as the appearance
of horses; and as horsemen, so they run.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Like the noise of chariots, on the tops of
the mountains, they leap; like the noise of a flame of fire that
devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Before them the peoples are in anguish: all
faces turn pale.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> They run like mighty men; they climb the
wall like men of war; and they march every one on his ways, and break
not their ranks.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Neither doth one press upon another; they
march every one in his path; and fall amid weapons, but are not wounded.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> They spread themselves over the city; they
run upon the wall; they climb up into the houses; they enter in by the
windows like a thief.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The earth quaketh before them; the
heavens tremble; the sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars
withdraw their shining.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And Jehovah uttereth his voice before his
army; for his camp is very great; for strong is he that executeth his
word: for the day of Jehovah is great and very terrible; and who can
bear it?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Yet even now, saith Jehovah, turn to me
with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and rend your heart, and not your
garments, and turn unto Jehovah your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great loving-kindness, and repenteth him
of the evil.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who knoweth? He might return and repent,
and leave a blessing behind him, an oblation and a drink-offering for
Jehovah your God?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Blow the trumpet in Zion, hallow a fast,
proclaim a solemn assembly;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> gather the people, hallow the
congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that
suck the breasts; let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the
bride from her closet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Let the priests, the ministers of
Jehovah, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare,
O Jehovah, thy people, and give not thine inheritance to reproach, that
they should be a byword of the nations. Wherefore should they say among
the peoples, Where is their God?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Then Jehovah will be jealous for his
land, and will have pity on his people.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jehovah will answer and say unto his
people, Behold, I send you corn, and new wine, and oil, and ye shall be
satisfied therewith; and I will no more make you a reproach among the
nations.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And I will remove far off from you him
\[that cometh\] from the north, and will drive him into a land barren
and desolate, his face toward the eastern sea, and his rear toward the
hinder sea; and his stench shall come up, and his ill odour shall come
up, for he hath exalted himself to do great things.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> -- Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice:
for Jehovah doeth great things.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field:
for the pastures of the wilderness do spring; for the tree beareth its
fruit; the fig-tree and the vine yield full increase.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And ye, children of Zion, be glad and
rejoice in Jehovah your God; for he giveth you the early rain in due
measure, and he causeth to come down for you the rain, the early rain,
and the latter rain at the beginning \[of the season\].

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the floors shall be full of corn, and
the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And I will restore to you the years that
the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpillar, and the
palmer-worm, my great army which I sent among you.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And ye shall eat in plenty, and be
satisfied, and praise the name of Jehovah your God, who hath dealt
wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And ye shall know that I am in the midst
of Israel, and that I, Jehovah, \[am\] your God, and there is none else:
and my people shall never be ashamed.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And it shall come to pass afterwards
\[that\] I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and
your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your
young men shall see visions.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Yea, even upon the bondmen and upon the
handmaids in those days will I pour out my Spirit.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And I will shew wonders in the heavens
and on the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The sun shall be changed to darkness, and
the moon to blood, before the great and terrible day of Jehovah come.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And it shall be that whosoever shall call
upon the name of Jehovah shall be saved: for in mount Zion and in
Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as Jehovah hath said, and for the
residue whom Jehovah shall call.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For behold, in those days, and in that
time, when I shall turn again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I will also gather all the nations, and
will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and I will enter
into judgment with them there on account of my people and mine
inheritance, Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations: and
they have parted my land;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and they have cast lots for my people, and
have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine, and have drunk
\[it\].

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Yea also, what have ye to do with me, O
Tyre and Zidon, and all the districts of Philistia? Will ye render me a
recompence? But if ye recompense me, swiftly \[and\] speedily will I
bring your recompence upon your own head;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> because ye have taken my silver and my
gold, and have carried into your temples my beautiful pleasant things,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> and the children of Judah and the children
of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the children of the Greeks, that ye might
remove them far from their border.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold, I will raise them up out of the
place whither ye have sold them, and will bring your recompence upon
your own head.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I will sell your sons and your
daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell
them to the Sabeans, to a nation far off: for Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Proclaim this among the nations: prepare
war, arouse the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near, let them
come up.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Beat your ploughshares into swords, and
your pruning-knives into spears; let the weak say, I am strong.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Haste ye and come, all ye nations round
about, and gather yourselves together. Thither cause thy mighty ones to
come down, O Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let the nations rouse themselves, and
come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to judge all
the nations round about.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Put in the sickle, for the harvest is
ripe: come, get you down, for the press is full, the vats overflow; for
their wickedness is great.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of
decision! For the day of Jehovah is at hand in the valley of decision.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The sun and the moon shall be darkened,
and the stars shall withdraw their shining.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Jehovah will roar from Zion, and
utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall
shake: and Jehovah will be a shelter for his people, and the refuge of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, \[am\]
your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain; and Jerusalem shall be
holy, and no strangers shall pass through her any more.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow
with milk, and all the water-courses of Judah shall flow with waters;
and a fountain shall come forth from the house of Jehovah, and shall
water the valley of Shittim.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom
shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of
Judah, in that they have shed innocent blood in their land.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> But Judah shall abide for ever, and
Jerusalem from generation to generation.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I will purge them from the blood from
which I had not purged them: for Jehovah dwelleth in Zion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos](amo.md)
