[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](luk)  [Next](act.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In \[the\] beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> \*He\* was in the beginning with God.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> All things received being through him, and
without him not one \[thing\] received being which has received being.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> In him was life, and the life was the light
of men.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the light appears in darkness, and the
darkness apprehended it not.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> There was a man sent from God, his name
John.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He came for witness, that he might witness
concerning the light, that all might believe through him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> \*He\* was not the light, but that he might
witness concerning the light.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The true light was that which, coming into
the world, lightens every man.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> He was in the world, and the world had
\[its\] being through him, and the world knew him not.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> He came to his own, and his own received
him not;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> but as many as received him, to them gave
he \[the\] right to be children of God, to those that believe on his
name;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who have been born, not of blood, nor of
flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the Word became flesh, and dwelt
among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an
only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> (John bears witness of him, and he has
cried, saying, This was he of whom I said, He that comes after me is
preferred before me, for he was before me;)

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> for of his fulness we all have received,
and grace upon grace.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For the law was given by Moses: grace and
truth subsists through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> No one has seen God at any time; the
only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, \*he\* hath
declared \[him\].

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And this is the witness of John, when the
Jews sent from Jerusalem priests and Levites that they might ask him,
Thou, who art thou?

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And he acknowledged and denied not, and
acknowledged, I am not the Christ.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias? And he says, I am not. Art thou the prophet? And he answered, No.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> They said therefore to him, Who art thou?
that we may give an answer to those who sent us. What sayest thou of
thyself?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> He said, I \[am\] \[the\] voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Make straight the path of \[the\] Lord, as
said Esaias the prophet.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they were sent from among the
Pharisees.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And they asked him and said to him, Why
baptisest thou then, if thou art not the Christ, nor Elias, nor the
prophet?

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> John answered them saying, I baptise with
water. In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know,

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> he who comes after me, the thong of whose
sandal I am not worthy to unloose.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> These things took place in Bethany,
across the Jordan, where John was baptising.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> On the morrow he sees Jesus coming to
him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the
world.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> He it is of whom I said, A man comes
after me who takes a place before me, because he \*was\* before me;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> and I knew him not; but that he might be
manifested to Israel, therefore have I come baptising with water.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And John bore witness, saying, I beheld
the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And I knew him not; but he who sent me to
baptise with water, \*he\* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the
Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with \[the\]
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And I have seen and borne witness that
this is the Son of God.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Again, on the morrow, there stood John
and two of his disciples.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And, looking at Jesus as he walked, he
says, Behold the Lamb of God.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> And the two disciples heard him speaking,
and followed Jesus.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> But Jesus having turned, and seeing them
following, says to them, What seek ye? And \*they\* said to him, Rabbi
(which, being interpreted, signifies Teacher), where abidest thou?

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> He says to them, Come and see. They went
therefore, and saw where he abode; and they abode with him that day. It
was about the tenth hour.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, was
one of the two who heard \[this\] from John and followed him.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> He first finds his own brother Simon, and
says to him, We have found the Messias (which being interpreted is
Christ).

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And he led him to Jesus. Jesus looking at
him said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called Cephas
(which interpreted is stone).

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> On the morrow he would go forth into
Galilee, and Jesus finds Philip, and says to him, Follow me.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And Philip was from Bethsaida, of the
city of Andrew and Peter.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Philip finds Nathanael, and says to him,
We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets,
Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And Nathanael said to him, Can anything
good come out of Nazareth? Philip says to him, Come and see.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and
says of him, Behold \[one\] truly an Israelite, in whom there is no
guile.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Nathanael says to him, Whence knowest
thou me? Jesus answered and said to him, Before that Philip called thee,
when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Nathanael answered and said to him,
Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> Jesus answered and said to him, Because I
said to thee, I saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? Thou shalt
see greater things than these.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And he says to him, Verily, verily, I say
to you, Henceforth ye shall see the heaven opened, and the angels of God
ascending and descending on the Son of man.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And on the third day a marriage took place
in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Jesus also, and his disciples, were
invited to the marriage.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And wine being deficient, the mother of
Jesus says to him, They have no wine.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Jesus says to her, What have I to do with
thee, woman? mine hour has not yet come.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> His mother says to the servants, Whatever
he may say to you, do.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now there were standing there six stone
water-vessels, according to the purification of the Jews, holding two or
three measures each.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Jesus says to them, Fill the water-vessels
with water. And they filled them up to the brim.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he says to them, Draw out now, and
carry \[it\] to the feast-master. And they carried \[it\].

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But when the feast-master had tasted the
water which had been made wine (and knew not whence it was, but the
servants knew who drew the water), the feast-master calls the
bridegroom,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and says to him, Every man sets on first
the good wine, and when \[men\] have well drunk, then the inferior; thou
hast kept the good wine till now.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana
of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his disciples believed on him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> After this he descended to Capernaum, he
and his mother and his brethren and his disciples; and there they abode
not many days.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the passover of the Jews was near,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And he found in the temple the sellers of
oxen and sheep and doves, and the money-changers sitting;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and, having made a scourge of cords, he
cast \[them\] all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he
poured out the change of the money-changers, and overturned the tables,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and said to the sellers of doves, Take
these things hence; make not my Father's house a house of merchandise.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> \[And\] his disciples remembered that it
is written, The zeal of thy house devours me.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The Jews therefore answered and said to
him, What sign shewest thou to us, that thou doest these things?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Jesus answered and said to them, Destroy
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The Jews therefore said, Forty and six
years was this temple building, and thou wilt raise it up in three days?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> But \*he\* spoke of the temple of his
body.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> When therefore he was raised from among
\[the\] dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and
believed the scripture and the word which Jesus had spoken.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And when he was in Jerusalem, at the
passover, at the feast, many believed on his name, beholding his signs
which he wrought.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But Jesus himself did not trust himself
to them, because he knew all \[men\],

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> and that he had not need that any should
testify of man, for himself knew what was in man.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> But there was a man from among the
Pharisees, his name Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> he came to him by night, and said to him,
Rabbi, we know that thou art come a teacher from God, for none can do
these signs that thou doest unless God be with him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Jesus answered and said to him, Verily,
verily, I say unto thee, Except any one be born anew he cannot see the
kingdom of God.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Nicodemus says to him, How can a man be
born being old? can he enter a second time into the womb of his mother
and be born?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto
thee, Except any one be born of water and of Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That which is born of the flesh is flesh;
and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Do not wonder that I said to thee, It is
needful that \*ye\* should be born anew.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The wind blows where it will, and thou
hearest its voice, but knowest not whence it comes and where it goes:
thus is every one that is born of the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Nicodemus answered and said to him, How can
these things be?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Jesus answered and said to him, Thou art
the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things!

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Verily, verily, I say unto thee, We speak
that which we know, and we bear witness of that which we have seen, and
ye receive not our witness.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> If I have said the earthly things to you,
and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye
believe?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And no one has gone up into heaven, save
he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> that every one who believes on him may
\[not perish, but\] have life eternal.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For God so loved the world, that he gave
his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish,
but have life eternal.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For God has not sent his Son into the
world that he may judge the world, but that the world may be saved
through him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> He that believes on him is not judged:
but he that believes not has been already judged, because he has not
believed on the name of the only-begotten Son of God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And this is the judgment, that light is
come into the world, and men have loved darkness rather than light; for
their works were evil.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For every one that does evil hates the
light, and does not come to the light that his works may not be shewn as
they are;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> but he that practises the truth comes to
the light, that his works may be manifested that they have been wrought
in God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> After these things came Jesus and his
disciples into the land of Judaea; and there he abode with them and
baptised.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And John also was baptising in Aenon,
near Salim, because there was a great deal of water there; and they came
to \[him\] and were baptised:

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> for John was not yet cast into prison.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> There was therefore a reasoning of the
disciples of John with a Jew about purification.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And they came to John and said to him,
Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, to whom thou barest
witness, behold, he baptises, and all come to him.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> John answered and said, A man can receive
nothing unless it be given him out of heaven.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Ye yourselves bear me witness that I
said, I am not the Christ, but, that I am sent before him.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> He that has the bride is the bridegroom;
but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices in
heart because of the voice of the bridegroom: this my joy then is
fulfilled.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> He must increase, but I must decrease.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> He who comes from above is above all. He
who has his origin in the earth is of the earth, and speaks \[as\] of
the earth. He who comes out of heaven is above all,

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> \[and\] what he has seen and has heard,
this he testifies; and no one receives his testimony.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> He that has received his testimony has
set to his seal that God is true;

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> for he whom God has sent speaks the words
of God, for God gives not the Spirit by measure.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The Father loves the Son, and has given
all things \[to be\] in his hand.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> He that believes on the Son has life
eternal, and he that is not subject to the Son shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides upon him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> When therefore the Lord knew that the
Pharisees had heard that Jesus makes and baptises more disciples than
John

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> (however, Jesus himself did not baptise,
but his disciples),

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> he left Judaea and went away again unto
Galilee.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And he must needs pass through Samaria.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> He comes therefore to a city of Samaria
called Sychar, near to the land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Now a fountain of Jacob's was there; Jesus
therefore, being wearied with the way he had come, sat just as he was at
the fountain. It was about the sixth hour.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> A woman comes out of Samaria to draw water.
Jesus says to her, Give me to drink

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> (for his disciples had gone away into the
city that they might buy provisions).

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The Samaritan woman therefore says to him,
How dost thou, being a Jew, ask to drink of me who am a Samaritan woman?
for Jews have no intercourse with Samaritans.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Jesus answered and said to her, If thou
knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to
drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee
living water.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The woman says to him, Sir, thou hast
nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: whence then hast thou the
living water?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Art thou greater than our father Jacob,
who gave us the well, and drank of it himself, and his sons, and his
cattle?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Jesus answered and said to her, Every one
who drinks of this water shall thirst again;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> but whosoever drinks of the water which I
shall give him shall never thirst for ever, but the water which I shall
give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into
eternal life.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The woman says to him, Sir, give me this
water, that I may not thirst nor come here to draw.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Jesus says to her, Go, call thy husband,
and come here.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The woman answered and said, I have not a
husband. Jesus says to her, Thou hast well said, I have not a husband;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> for thou hast had five husbands, and he
whom now thou hast is not thy husband: this thou hast spoken truly.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The woman says to him, Sir, I see that
thou art a prophet.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Our fathers worshipped in this mountain,
and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where one must worship.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Jesus says to her, Woman, believe me,
\[the\] hour is coming when ye shall neither in this mountain nor in
Jerusalem worship the Father.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Ye worship ye know not what; we worship
what we know, for salvation is of the Jews.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> But \[the\] hour is coming and now is,
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth;
for also the Father seeks such as his worshippers.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> God \[is\] a spirit; and they who worship
him must worship \[him\] in spirit and truth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> The woman says to him, I know that
Messias is coming, who is called Christ; when \*he\* comes he will tell
us all things.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Jesus says to her, I who speak to thee am
\[he\].

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And upon this came his disciples, and
wondered that he spoke with a woman; yet no one said, What seekest thou?
or, Why speakest thou with her?

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> The woman then left her waterpot and went
away into the city, and says to the men,

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Come, see a man who told me all things I
had ever done: is not he the Christ?

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> They went out of the city and came to
him.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> But meanwhile the disciples asked him
saying, Rabbi, eat.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> But he said to them, I have food to eat
which ye do not know.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> The disciples therefore said to one
another, Has any one brought him \[anything\] to eat?

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Jesus says to them, My food is that I
should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his
work.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Do not ye say, that there are yet four
months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, Lift up your eyes
and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> He that reaps receives wages and gathers
fruit unto life eternal, that both he that sows and he that reaps may
rejoice together.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> For in this is \[verified\] the true
saying, It is one who sows and another who reaps.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> I have sent you to reap that on which ye
have not laboured; others have laboured, and ye have entered into their
labours.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> But many of the Samaritans of that city
believed on him because of the word of the woman who bore witness, He
told me all things that I had ever done.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> When therefore the Samaritans came to him
they asked him to abide with them, and he abode there two days.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And more a great deal believed on account
of his word;

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> and they said to the woman, \[It is\] no
longer on account of thy saying that we believe, for we have heard him
ourselves, and we know that this is indeed the Saviour of the world.

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> But after the two days he went forth
thence and went away into Galilee,

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> for Jesus himself bore witness that a
prophet has no honour in his own country.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> When therefore he came into Galilee, the
Galileans received him, having seen all that he had done in Jerusalem
during the feast, for they also went to the feast.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> He came therefore again to Cana of
Galilee, where he made the water wine. And there was a certain courtier
in Capernaum whose son was sick.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> He, having heard that Jesus had come out
of Judaea into Galilee, went to him and asked \[him\] that he would come
down and heal his son, for he was about to die.

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> Jesus therefore said to him, Unless ye
see signs and wonders ye will not believe.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> The courtier says to him, Sir, come down
ere my child die.

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> Jesus says to him, Go, thy son lives. And
the man believed the word which Jesus said to him, and went his way.

<span id="an_4:51">4:51</span> But already, as he was going down, his
servants met him and brought \[him\] word saying, Thy child lives.

<span id="an_4:52">4:52</span> He inquired therefore from them the hour
at which he got better. And they said to him, Yesterday at the seventh
hour the fever left him.

<span id="an_4:53">4:53</span> The father therefore knew that \[it was\]
in that hour in which Jesus said to him, Thy son lives; and he believed,
himself and his whole house.

<span id="an_4:54">4:54</span> This second sign again did Jesus, being
come out of Judaea into Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After these things was a feast of the Jews,
and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Now there is in Jerusalem, at the
sheepgate, a pool, which is called in Hebrew, Bethesda, having five
porches.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> In these lay a multitude of sick, blind,
lame, withered, \[awaiting the moving of the water.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For an angel descended at a certain season
in the pool and troubled the water. Whoever therefore first went in
after the troubling of the water became well, whatever disease he
laboured under.\]

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> But there was a certain man there who had
been suffering under his infirmity thirty and eight years.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Jesus seeing this \[man\] lying \[there\],
and knowing that he was \[in that state\] now a great length of time,
says to him, Wouldest thou become well?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The infirm \[man\] answered him, Sir, I
have not a man, in order, when the water has been troubled, to cast me
into the pool; but while I am coming another descends before me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Jesus says to him, Arise, take up thy couch
and walk.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And immediately the man became well, and
took up his couch and walked: and on that day was sabbath.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The Jews therefore said to the healed
\[man\], It is sabbath, it is not permitted thee to take up thy couch.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> He answered them, He that made me well,
\*he\* said to me, Take up thy couch and walk.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> They asked him \[therefore\], Who is the
man who said to thee, Take up thy couch and walk?

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But he that had been healed knew not who
it was, for Jesus had slidden away, there being a crowd in the place.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> After these things Jesus finds him in the
temple, and said to him, Behold, thou art become well: sin no more, that
something worse do not happen to thee.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The man went away and told the Jews that
it was Jesus who had made him well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And for this the Jews persecuted Jesus
\[and sought to kill him\], because he had done these things on sabbath.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But Jesus answered them, My Father
worketh hitherto and I work.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For this therefore the Jews sought the
more to kill him, because he had not only violated the sabbath, but also
said that God was his own Father, making himself equal with God.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Jesus therefore answered and said to
them, Verily, verily, I say to you, The Son can do nothing of himself
save whatever he sees the Father doing: for whatever things \*he\* does,
these things also the Son does in like manner.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For the Father loves the Son and shews
him all things which he himself does; and he will shew him greater works
than these, that ye may wonder.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For even as the Father raises the dead
and quickens \[them\], thus the Son also quickens whom he will:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> for neither does the Father judge any
one, but has given all judgment to the Son;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> that all may honour the Son, even as they
honour the Father. He who honours not the Son, honours not the Father
who has sent him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Verily, verily, I say unto you, that he
that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal,
and does not come into judgment, but is passed out of death into life.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Verily, verily, I say unto you, that an
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that have heard shall live.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For even as the Father has life in
himself, so he has given to the Son also to have life in himself,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> and has given him authority to execute
judgment \[also\], because he is Son of man.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Wonder not at this, for an hour is coming
in which all who are in the tombs shall hear his voice,

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> and shall go forth; those that have
practised good, to resurrection of life, and those that have done evil,
to resurrection of judgment.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> I cannot do anything of myself; as I
hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous, because I do not seek my
will, but the will of him that has sent me.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> If I bear witness concerning myself, my
witness is not true.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> It is another who bears witness
concerning me, and I know that the witness which he bears concerning me
is true.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Ye have sent unto John, and he has borne
witness to the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But I do not receive witness from man,
but I say this that \*ye\* might be saved.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> \*He\* was the burning and shining lamp,
and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> But I have the witness \[that is\]
greater than \[that\] of John; for the works which the Father has given
me that I should complete them, the works themselves which I do, bear
witness concerning me that the Father has sent me.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And the Father who has sent me himself
has borne witness concerning me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any
time, nor have seen his shape,

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> and ye have not his word abiding in you;
for whom \*he\* hath sent, him ye do not believe.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> Ye search the scriptures, for ye think
that in them ye have life eternal, and they it is which bear witness
concerning me;

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> and ye will not come to me that ye might
have life.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> I do not receive glory from men,

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> but I know you, that ye have not the love
of God in you.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> I am come in my Father's name, and ye
receive me not; if another come in his own name, him ye will receive.

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> How can ye believe, who receive glory one
of another, and seek not the glory which \[comes\] from God alone?

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> Think not that I will accuse you to the
Father: there is \[one\] who accuses you, Moses, on whom ye trust;

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> for if ye had believed Moses, ye would
have believed me, for he wrote of me.

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> But if ye do not believe his writings,
how shall ye believe my words?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> After these things Jesus went away beyond
the sea of Galilee, \[or\] of Tiberias,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> and a great crowd followed him, because
they saw the signs which he wrought upon the sick.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And Jesus went up into the mountain, and
there sat with his disciples:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> but the passover, the feast of the Jews,
was near.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Jesus then, lifting up his eyes and seeing
that a great crowd is coming to him, says to Philip, Whence shall we buy
loaves that these may eat?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But this he said trying him, for he knew
what he was going to do.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Philip answered him, Loaves for two hundred
denarii are not sufficient for them, that each may have some little
\[portion\].

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother, says to him,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> There is a little boy here who has five
barley loaves and two small fishes; but this, what is it for so many?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> \[And\] Jesus said, Make the men sit
down. Now there was much grass in the place: the men therefore sat down,
in number about five thousand.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And Jesus took the loaves, and having
given thanks, distributed \[them\] to those that were set down; and in
like manner of the small fishes as much as they would.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And when they had been filled, he says to
his disciples, Gather together the fragments which are over and above,
that nothing may be lost.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> They gathered \[them\] therefore
together, and filled twelve hand-baskets full of fragments of the five
barley loaves, which were over and above to those that had eaten.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> The men therefore, having seen the sign
which Jesus had done, said, This is truly the prophet which is coming
into the world.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Jesus therefore knowing that they were
going to come and seize him, that they might make \[him\] king, departed
again to the mountain himself alone.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> But when evening was come, his disciples
went down to the sea,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and having gone on board ship, they went
over the sea to Capernaum. And it had already become dark, and Jesus had
not come to them,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and the sea was agitated by a strong wind
blowing.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Having rowed then about twenty-five or
thirty stadia, they see Jesus walking on the sea and coming near the
ship; and they were frightened.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But he says to them, It is I: be not
afraid.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> They were willing therefore to receive
him into the ship; and immediately the ship was at the land to which
they went.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> On the morrow the crowd which stood on
the other side of the sea, having seen that there was no other little
ship there except that into which his disciples had got, and that Jesus
had not gone with his disciples into the ship, but \[that\] his
disciples had gone away alone;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> (but other little ships out of Tiberias
came near to the place where they ate bread after the Lord had given
thanks;)

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> when therefore the crowd saw that Jesus
was not there, nor his disciples, \*they\* got into the ships, and came
to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And having found him the other side of
the sea, they said to him, Rabbi, when art thou arrived here?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Jesus answered them and said, Verily,
verily, I say to you, Ye seek me not because ye have seen signs, but
because ye have eaten of the loaves and been filled.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Work not \[for\] the food which perishes,
but \[for\] the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of
man shall give to you; for him has the Father sealed, \[even\] God.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> They said therefore to him, What should
we do that we may work the works of God?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Jesus answered and said to them, This is
the work of God, that ye believe on him whom \*he\* has sent.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> They said therefore to him, What sign
then doest thou that we may see and believe thee? what dost thou work?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Our fathers ate the manna in the
wilderness, as it is written, He gave them bread out of heaven to eat.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Jesus therefore said to them, Verily,
verily, I say to you, \[It is\] not Moses that has given you the bread
out of heaven; but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> For the bread of God is he who comes down
out of heaven and gives life to the world.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> They said therefore to him, Lord, ever
give to us this bread.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> \[And\] Jesus said to them, I am the
bread of life: he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that
believes on me shall never thirst at any time.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> But I have said to you, that ye have also
seen me and do not believe.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> All that the Father gives me shall come
to me, and him that comes to me I will not at all cast out.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> For I am come down from heaven, not that
I should do \*my\* will, but the will of him that has sent me.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And this is the will of him that has sent
me, that of all that he has given me I should lose nothing, but should
raise it up in the last day.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> For this is the will of my Father, that
every one who sees the Son, and believes on him, should have life
eternal; and I will raise him up at the last day.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> The Jews therefore murmured about him,
because he said, I am the bread which has come down out of heaven.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And they said, Is not this Jesus the son
of Joseph, whose father and mother we have known? how then does \*he\*
say, I am come down out of heaven?

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> Jesus therefore answered and said to
them, Murmur not among yourselves.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> No one can come to me except the Father
who has sent me draw him, and I will raise him up in the last day.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> It is written in the prophets, And they
shall be all taught of God. Every one that has heard from the Father
\[himself\], and has learned \[of him\], comes to me;

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> not that any one has seen the Father,
except he who is of God, he has seen the Father.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> Verily, verily, I say to you, He that
believes \[on me\] has life eternal.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> I am the bread of life.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> Your fathers ate the manna in the
wilderness and died.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> This is the bread which comes down out of
heaven, that one may eat of it and not die.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> I am the living bread which has come down
out of heaven: if any one shall have eaten of this bread he shall live
for ever; but the bread withal which I shall give is my flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world.

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> The Jews therefore contended among
themselves, saying, How can he give us this flesh to eat?

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> Jesus therefore said to them, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son
of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has life eternal, and I will raise him up at the last day:

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> for my flesh is truly food and my blood
is truly drink.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood
dwells in me and I in him.

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> As the living Father has sent me and I
live on account of the Father, \*he\* also who eats me shall live also
on account of me.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> This is the bread which has come down out
of heaven. Not as the fathers ate and died: he that eats this bread
shall live for ever.

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> These things he said in \[the\]
synagogue, teaching in Capernaum.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> Many therefore of his disciples having
heard \[it\] said, This word is hard; who can hear it?

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> But Jesus, knowing in himself that his
disciples murmur concerning this, said to them, Does this offend you?

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> If then ye see the Son of man ascending
up where he was before?

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> It is the Spirit which quickens, the
flesh profits nothing: the words which I have spoken unto you are spirit
and are life.

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> But there are some of you who do not
believe. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who did not
believe, and who would deliver him up.

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> And he said, Therefore said I unto you,
that no one can come to me unless it be given to him from the Father.

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> From that \[time\] many of his disciples
went away back and walked no more with him.

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> Jesus therefore said to the twelve, Will
ye also go away?

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom
shall we go? thou hast words of life eternal;

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> and we have believed and known that thou
art the holy one of God.

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen
you the twelve? and of you one is a devil.

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> Now he spoke of Judas \[the son\] of
Simon, Iscariote, for he \[it was who\] should deliver him up, being one
of the twelve.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And after these things Jesus walked in
Galilee, for he would not walk in Judaea, because the Jews sought to
kill him.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Now the tabernacles, the feast of the Jews,
was near.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> His brethren therefore said to him, Remove
hence and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may see thy works
which thou doest;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> for no one does anything in secret and
himself seeks to be \[known\] in public. If thou doest these things,
manifest thyself to the world:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> for neither did his brethren believe on
him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Jesus therefore says to them, My time is
not yet come, but your time is always ready.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The world cannot hate you, but me it hates,
because I bear witness concerning it that its works are evil.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ye, go ye up to this feast. I go not up to
this feast, for \*my\* time is not yet fulfilled.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Having said these things to them he abode
in Galilee.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But when his brethren had gone up, then
he himself also went up to the feast, not openly, but as in secret.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> The Jews therefore sought him at the
feast, and said, Where is he?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And there was much murmuring concerning
him among the crowds. Some said, He is \[a\] good \[man\]; others said,
No; but he deceives the crowd.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> However, no one spoke openly concerning
him on account of \[their\] fear of the Jews.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> But when it was now the middle of the
feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The Jews therefore wondered, saying, How
knows this \[man\] letters, having never learned?

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Jesus therefore answered them and said,
My doctrine is not mine, but \[that\] of him that has sent me.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If any one desire to practise his will,
he shall know concerning the doctrine, whether it is of God, or \[that\]
I speak from myself.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> He that speaks from himself seeks his own
glory; but he that seeks the glory of him that has sent him, he is true,
and unrighteousness is not in him.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Has not Moses given you the law, and no
one of you practises the law? Why do ye seek to kill me?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The crowd answered \[and said\], Thou
hast a demon: who seeks to kill thee?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Jesus answered and said to them, I have
done one work, and ye all wonder.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Therefore Moses gave you circumcision
(not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and ye circumcise a man
on sabbath.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> If a man receives circumcision on
sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be violated, are ye angry with me
because I have made a man entirely sound on sabbath?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Judge not according to sight, but judge
righteous judgment.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Some therefore of those of Jerusalem
said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill?

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> and behold, he speaks openly, and they
say nothing to him. Have the rulers then indeed recognised that this is
the Christ?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But \[as to\] this \[man\] we know whence
he is. Now \[as to\] the Christ, when he comes, no one knows whence he
is.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Jesus therefore cried out in the temple,
teaching and saying, Ye both know me and ye know whence I am; and I am
not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye do not know.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> I know him, because I am from him, and
\*he\* has sent me.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> They sought therefore to take him; and no
one laid his hand upon him, because his hour had not yet come.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> But many of the crowd believed on him,
and said, Will the Christ, when he comes, do more signs than those which
this \[man\] has done?

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring
these things concerning him, and the Pharisees and the chief priests
sent officers that they might take him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> Jesus therefore said, Yet a little while
I am with you, and I go to him that has sent me.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> Ye shall seek me and shall not find
\[me\], and where I am ye cannot come.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> The Jews therefore said to one another,
Where is he about to go that we shall not find him? Is he about to go to
the dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> What word is this which he said, Ye shall
seek me and shall not find \[me\]; and where I am ye cannot come?

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> In the last, the great day of the feast,
Jesus stood and cried saying, If any one thirst, let him come to me and
drink.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> He that believes on me, as the scripture
has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> But this he said concerning the Spirit,
which they that believed on him were about to receive; for \[the\]
Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> \[Some\] out of the crowd therefore,
having heard this word, said, This is truly the prophet.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> Others said, This is the Christ. Others
said, Does then the Christ come out of Galilee?

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Has not the scripture said that the
Christ comes of the seed of David, and from the village of Bethlehem,
where David was?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> There was a division therefore in the
crowd on account of him.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> But some of them desired to take him, but
no one laid hands upon him.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> The officers therefore came to the chief
priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, Why have ye not brought
him?

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> The officers answered, Never man spoke
thus, as this man \[speaks\].

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> The Pharisees therefore answered them,
Are ye also deceived?

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Has any one of the rulers believed on
him, or of the Pharisees?

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> But this crowd, which does not know the
law, are accursed.

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Nicodemus says to them (being one of
themselves),

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> Does our law judge a man before it have
first heard from himself, and know what he does?

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> They answered and said to him, Art thou
also of Galilee? Search and look, that no prophet arises out of Galilee.

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> And every one went to his home.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> But Jesus went to the mount of Olives.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And early in the morning he came again into
the temple, and all the people came to him; and he sat down and taught
them.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And the scribes and the Pharisees bring
\[to him\] a woman taken in adultery, and having set her in the midst,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> they say to him, Teacher, this woman has
been taken in the very act, committing adultery.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Now in the law Moses has commanded us to
stone such; thou therefore, what sayest thou?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> But this they said proving him, that they
might have \[something\] to accuse him \[of\]. But Jesus, having stooped
down, wrote with his finger on the ground.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> But when they continued asking him, he
lifted himself up and said to them, Let him that is without sin among
you first cast the stone at her.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And again stooping down he wrote on the
ground.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But they, having heard \[that\], went out
one by one beginning from the elder ones until the last; and Jesus was
left alone and the woman standing there.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Jesus, lifting himself up and seeing
no one but the woman, said to her, Woman, where are those thine
accusers? Has no one condemned thee?

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And she said, No one, sir. And Jesus said
to her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Again therefore Jesus spoke to them,
saying, I am the light of the world; he that follows me shall not walk
in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The Pharisees therefore said to him, Thou
bearest witness concerning thyself; thy witness is not true.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Jesus answered and said to them, Even if
I bear witness concerning myself, my witness is true, because I know
whence I came and whither I go: but ye know not whence I come and
whither I go.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Ye judge according to the flesh, I judge
no one.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And if also I judge, my judgment is true,
because I am not alone, but I and the Father who has sent me.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And in your law too it is written that
the testimony of two men is true:

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> I am \[one\] who bear witness concerning
myself, and the Father who has sent me bears witness concerning me.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> They said to him therefore, Where is thy
Father? Jesus answered, Ye know neither me nor my Father. If ye had
known me, ye would have known also my Father.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> These words spoke he in the treasury,
teaching in the temple; and no one took him, for his hour was not yet
come.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> He said therefore again to them, I go
away, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sin; where I go ye
cannot come.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The Jews therefore said, Will he kill
himself, that he says, Where I go ye cannot come?

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he said to them, Ye are from beneath;
I am from above. Ye are of this world; I am not of this world.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> I said therefore to you, that ye shall
die in your sins; for unless ye shall believe that I am \[he\], ye shall
die in your sins.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They said therefore to him, Who art thou?
\[And\] Jesus said to them, Altogether that which I also say to you.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> I have many things to say and to judge
concerning you, but he that has sent me is true, and I, what I have
heard from him, these things I say to the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> They knew not that he spoke to them of
the Father.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Jesus therefore said to them, When ye
shall have lifted up the Son of man, then ye shall know that I am
\[he\], and \[that\] I do nothing of myself, but as the Father has
taught me I speak these things.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he that has sent me is with me; he
has not left me alone, because I do always the things that are pleasing
to him.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> As he spoke these things many believed on
him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Jesus therefore said to the Jews who
believed him, If ye abide in my word, ye are truly my disciples;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> and ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall set you free.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> They answered him, We are Abraham's seed,
and have never been under bondage to any one; how sayest thou, Ye shall
become free?

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I
say to you, Every one that practises sin is the bondman of sin.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Now the bondman abides not in the house
for ever: the son abides for ever.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> If therefore the Son shall set you free,
ye shall be really free.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye
seek to kill me, because my word has no entrance in you.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> I speak what I have seen with my Father,
and ye then do what ye have seen with your father.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> They answered and said to him, Abraham is
our father. Jesus says to them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would
do the works of Abraham;

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> but now ye seek to kill me, a man who has
spoken the truth to you, which I have heard from God: this did not
Abraham.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> Ye do the works of your father. They said
\[therefore\] to him, We are not born of fornication; we have one
father, God.

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> Jesus said to them, If God were your
father ye would have loved me, for I came forth from God and am come
\[from him\]; for neither am I come of myself, but \*he\* has sent me.

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> Why do ye not know my speech? Because ye
cannot hear my word.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> Ye are of the devil, as \[your\] father,
and ye desire to do the lusts of your father. He was a murderer from the
beginning, and has not stood in the truth, because there is no truth in
him. When he speaks falsehood, he speaks of what is his own; for he is a
liar and its father:

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> and because I speak the truth, ye do not
believe me.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> Which of you convinces me of sin? If I
speak truth, why do ye not believe me?

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> He that is of God hears the words of God:
therefore ye hear \[them\] not, because ye are not of God.

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> The Jews answered and said to him, Say we
not well that thou art a Samaritan and hast a demon?

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> Jesus answered, I have not a demon; but I
honour my Father, and ye dishonour me.

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> But I do not seek my own glory: there is
he that seeks and judges.

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> Verily, verily, I say unto you, If any
one shall keep my word, he shall never see death.

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> The Jews therefore said to him, Now we
know that thou hast a demon. Abraham has died, and the prophets, and
thou sayest, If any one keep my word, he shall never taste death.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> Art thou greater than our father Abraham,
who has died? and the prophets have died: whom makest thou thyself?

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my
glory is nothing: it is my Father who glorifies me, \[of\] whom ye say,
He is our God.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> And ye know him not; but I know him; and
if I said, I know him not, I should be like you, a liar. But I know him,
and I keep his word.

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Your father Abraham exulted in that he
should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced.

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> The Jews therefore said to him, Thou hast
not yet fifty years, and hast thou seen Abraham?

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> Jesus said to them, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> They took up therefore stones that they
might cast \[them\] at him; but Jesus hid himself and went out of the
temple, \[going through the midst of them, and thus passed on.\]

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And as he passed on, he saw a man blind
from birth.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi,
who sinned, this \[man\] or his parents, that he should be born blind?

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Jesus answered, Neither has this \[man\]
sinned nor his parents, but that the works of God should be manifested
in him.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> I must work the works of him that has sent
me while it is day. \[The\] night is coming, when no one can work.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> As long as I am in the world, I am \[the\]
light of the world.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Having said these things, he spat on the
ground and made mud of the spittle, and put the mud, as ointment, on his
eyes.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he said to him, Go, wash in the pool of
Siloam, which is interpreted, Sent. He went therefore and washed, and
came seeing.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The neighbours therefore, and those who
used to see him before, that he was a beggar, said, Is not this he that
was sitting and begging?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Some said, It is he; others said, No, but
he is like him: \*he\* said, It is I.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> They said therefore to him, How have
thine eyes been opened?

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> He answered \[and said\], A man called
Jesus made mud and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam and
wash: and having gone and washed, I saw.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> They said therefore to him, Where is he?
He says, I do not know.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> They bring him who was before blind to
the Pharisees.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Now it was sabbath when Jesus made the
mud and opened his eyes.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The Pharisees therefore also again asked
him how he received his sight. And he said to them, He put mud upon mine
eyes, and I washed, and I see.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Some of the Pharisees therefore said,
This man is not of God, for he does not keep the sabbath. Others said,
How can a sinful man perform such signs? And there was a division among
them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> They say therefore again to the blind
\[man\], What dost thou say of him, that he has opened thine eyes? And
he said, He is a prophet.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> The Jews therefore did not believe
concerning him that he was blind and had received sight, until they had
called the parents of him that had received sight.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And they asked them saying, This is your
son, of whom ye say that he was born blind: how then does he now see?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> His parents answered \[them\] and said,
We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> but how he now sees we do not know, or
who has opened his eyes we do not know. \*He\* is of age: ask \*him\*;
\*he\* will speak concerning himself.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> His parents said these things because
they feared the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed that if any one
confessed him \[to be the\] Christ, he should be excommunicated from the
synagogue.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> On this account his parents said, He is
of age: ask \*him\*.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> They called therefore a second time the
man who had been blind, and said to him, Give glory to God: we know that
this man is sinful.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> He answered therefore, If he is sinful I
know not. One thing I know, that, being blind \[before\], now I see.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And they said to him again, What did he
do to thee? how opened he thine eyes?

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> He answered them, I told you already and
ye did not hear: why do ye desire to hear again? do ye also wish to
become his disciples?

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> They railed at him, and said, Thou art
his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> We know that God spoke to Moses; but \[as
to\] this \[man\], we know not whence he is.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> The man answered and said to them, Now in
this is a wonderful thing, that \*ye\* do not know whence he is, and he
has opened mine eyes.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> \[But\] we know that God does not hear
sinners; but if any one be God-fearing and do his will, him he hears.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Since time was, it has not been heard
that any one opened the eyes of one born blind.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> If this \[man\] were not of God he would
be able to do nothing.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> They answered and said to him, Thou hast
been wholly born in sins, and thou teachest us? And they cast him out.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Jesus heard that they had cast him out,
and having found him, he said to him, Thou, dost thou believe on the Son
of God?

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> He answered and said, And who is he,
Lord, that I may believe on him?

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And Jesus said to him, Thou hast both
seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And he said, I believe, Lord: and he did
him homage.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Jesus said, For judgment am I come
into this world, that they which see not may see, and they which see may
become blind.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> And \[some\] of the Pharisees who were
with him heard these things, and they said to him, Are we blind also?

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> Jesus said to them, If ye were blind ye
would not have sin; but now ye say, We see, your sin remains.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Verily, verily, I say to you, He that
enters not in by the door to the fold of the sheep, but mounts up
elsewhere, \*he\* is a thief and a robber;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> but he that enters in by the door is
\[the\] shepherd of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> To him the porter opens; and the sheep
hear his voice; and he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> When he has put forth all his own, he
goes before them, and the sheep follow him, because they know his voice.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> But they will not follow a stranger, but
will flee from him, because they know not the voice of strangers.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> This allegory spoke Jesus to them, but
they did not know what it was \[of\] which he spoke to them.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Jesus therefore said again to them,
Verily, verily, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> All whoever came before me are thieves
and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> I am the door: if any one enter in by me,
he shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out and shall find
pasture.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> The thief comes not but that he may
steal, and kill, and destroy: I am come that they might have life, and
might have \[it\] abundantly.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> I am the good shepherd. The good
shepherd lays down his life for the sheep:

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> but he who serves for wages, and who is
not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the wolf coming, and
leaves the sheep and flees; and the wolf seizes them and scatters the
sheep.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Now he who serves for wages flees
because he serves for wages, and is not himself concerned about the
sheep.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> I am the good shepherd; and I know
those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> as the Father knows me and I know the
Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And I have other sheep which are not of
this fold: those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and
there shall be one flock, one shepherd.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> On this account the Father loves me,
because I lay down my life that I may take it again.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> No one takes it from me, but I lay it
down of myself. I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to
take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> There was a division again among the
Jews on account of these words;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> but many of them said, He has a demon
and raves; why do ye hear him?

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Others said, These sayings are not
\[those\] of one that is possessed by a demon. Can a demon open blind
people's eyes?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Now the feast of the dedication was
celebrating at Jerusalem, and it was winter.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus walked in the temple in the
porch of Solomon.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The Jews therefore surrounded him, and
said to him, Until when dost thou hold our soul in suspense? If thou art
the Christ, say \[so\] to us openly.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye
do not believe. The works which I do in my Father's name, these bear
witness concerning me:

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> but ye do not believe, for ye are not
of my sheep, as I told you.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me;

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> and I give them life eternal; and they
shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> My Father who has given \[them\] to me
is greater than all, and no one can seize out of the hand of my Father.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> I and the Father are one.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The Jews therefore again took stones
that they might stone him.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Jesus answered them, Many good works
have I shewn you of my Father; for which work of them do ye stone me?

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> The Jews answered him, For a good work
we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because thou, being a man,
makest thyself God.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Jesus answered them, Is it not written
in your law, I said, Ye are gods?

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> If he called \*them\* gods to whom the
word of God came (and the scripture cannot be broken),

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> do ye say of him whom the Father has
sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I
am Son of God?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> If I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> but if I do, even if ye believe not me,
believe the works, that ye may know \[and believe\] that the Father is
in me and I in him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> They sought therefore again to take
him; and he went away from out of their hand

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> and departed again beyond the Jordan to
the place where John was baptising at the first: and he abode there.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And many came to him, and said, John
did no sign; but all things which John said of this \[man\] were true.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And many believed on him there.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now there was a certain \[man\] sick,
Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> It was \[the\] Mary who anointed the Lord
with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus
was sick.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The sisters therefore sent to him,
saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But when Jesus heard \[it\], he said,
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son
of God may be glorified by it.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister,
and Lazarus.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> When therefore he heard, He is sick, he
remained two days then in the place where he was.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then after this he says to his disciples,
Let us go into Judaea again.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The disciples say to him, Rabbi, \[even
but\] now the Jews sought to stone thee, and goest thou thither again?

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Jesus answered, Are there not twelve
hours in the day? If any one walk in the day, he does not stumble,
because he sees the light of this world;

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> but if any one walk in the night, he
stumbles, because the light is not in him.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> These things said he; and after this he
says to them, Lazarus, our friend, is fallen asleep, but I go that I may
awake him out of sleep.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> The disciples therefore said to him,
Lord, if he be fallen asleep, he will get well.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> But Jesus spoke of his death, but
\*they\* thought that he spoke of the rest of sleep.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Jesus therefore then said to them
plainly, Lazarus has died.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And I rejoice on your account that I
was not there, in order that ye may believe. But let us go to him.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Thomas therefore, called Didymus, said
to his fellow disciples, Let \*us\* also go, that we may die with him.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Jesus therefore \[on\] arriving found
him to have been four days already in the tomb.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about
fifteen stadia off,

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and many of the Jews came to Martha and
Mary, that they might console them concerning their brother.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Martha then, when she heard Jesus is
coming, went to meet him; but Mary sat in the house.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Martha therefore said to Jesus, Lord,
if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> but even now I know, that whatsoever
thou shalt ask of God, God will give thee.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Jesus says to her, Thy brother shall
rise again.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Martha says to him, I know that he will
rise again in the resurrection in the last day.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Jesus said to her, I am the
resurrection and the life: he that believes on me, though he have died,
shall live;

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and every one who lives and believes on
me shall never die. Believest thou this?

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> She says to him, Yea, Lord; I believe
that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the
world.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And having said this, she went away and
called her sister Mary secretly, saying, The teacher is come and calls
thee.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> She, when she heard \[that\], rises up
quickly and comes to him.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Now Jesus had not yet come into the
village, but was in the place where Martha came to meet him.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The Jews therefore who were with her in
the house and consoling her, seeing Mary that she rose up quickly and
went out, followed her, saying, She goes to the tomb, that she may weep
there.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> Mary therefore, when she came where
Jesus was, seeing him, fell at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou
hadst been here, my brother had not died.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Jesus therefore, when he saw her
weeping, and the Jews who came with her weeping, was deeply moved in
spirit, and was troubled,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> and said, Where have ye put him? They
say to him, Lord, come and see.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Jesus wept.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> The Jews therefore said, Behold how he
loved him!

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And some of them said, Could not this
\[man\], who has opened the eyes of the blind \[man\], have caused that
this \[man\] also should not have died?

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Jesus therefore, again deeply moved in
himself, comes to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay upon it.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> Jesus says, Take away the stone.
Martha, the sister of the dead, says to him, Lord, he stinks already,
for he is four days \[there\].

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Jesus says to her, Did I not say to
thee, that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of
God?

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> They took therefore the stone away. And
Jesus lifted up his eyes on high and said, Father, I thank thee that
thou hast heard me;

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> but I knew that thou always hearest me;
but on account of the crowd who stand around I have said \[it\], that
they may believe that thou hast sent me.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> And having said this, he cried with a
loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> And the dead came forth, bound feet and
hands with graveclothes, and his face was bound round with a
handkerchief. Jesus says to them, Loose him and let him go.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> Many therefore of the Jews who came to
Mary and saw what he had done, believed on him;

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> but some of them went to the Pharisees
and told them what Jesus had done.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> The chief priests, therefore, and the
Pharisees gathered a council, and said, What do we? for this man does
many signs.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> If we let him thus alone, all will
believe on him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place
and our nation.

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> But a certain one of them, Caiaphas,
being high priest that year, said to them, Ye know nothing

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> nor consider that it is profitable for
you that one man die for the people, and not that the whole nation
perish.

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> But this he did not say of himself;
but, being high priest that year, prophesied that Jesus was going to die
for the nation;

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> and not for the nation only, but that
he should also gather together into one the children of God who were
scattered abroad.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> From that day therefore they took
counsel that they might kill him.

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> Jesus therefore walked no longer openly
among the Jews, but went away thence into the country near the desert,
to a city called Ephraim, and there he sojourned with the disciples.

<span id="an_11:55">11:55</span> But the passover of the Jews was near,
and many went up to Jerusalem out of the country before the passover,
that they might purify themselves.

<span id="an_11:56">11:56</span> They sought therefore Jesus, and said
among themselves, standing in the temple, What do ye think? that he will
not come to the feast?

<span id="an_11:57">11:57</span> Now the chief priests and the Pharisees
had given commandment that if any one knew where he was, he should make
it known, that they might take him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Jesus therefore, six days before the
passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead \[man\] Lazarus, whom
Jesus raised from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> There therefore they made him a supper,
and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those at table with him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Mary therefore, having taken a pound of
ointment of pure nard of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus, and
wiped his feet with her hair, and the house was filled with the odour of
the ointment.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> One of his disciples therefore, Judas
\[son\] of Simon, Iscariote, who was about to deliver him up, says,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Why was this ointment not sold for three
hundred denarii and given to the poor?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But he said this, not that he cared for
the poor, but because he was a thief and had the bag, and carried what
was put into \[it\].

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Jesus therefore said, Suffer her to have
kept this for the day of my preparation for burial;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> for ye have the poor always with you, but
me ye have not always.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> A great crowd therefore of the Jews knew
that he was there; and they came, not because of Jesus only, but also
that they might see Lazarus whom he raised from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But the chief priests took counsel that
they might kill Lazarus also,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> because many of the Jews went away on
his account and believed on Jesus.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> On the morrow a great crowd who came to
the feast, having heard that Jesus is coming into Jerusalem,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> took branches of palms and went out to
meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed \[is\] he that comes in the name
of \[the\] Lord, the King of Israel.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And Jesus, having found a young ass,
sat upon it; as it is written,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Fear not, daughter of Zion: behold, thy
King cometh, sitting on an ass's colt.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> \[Now\] his disciples knew not these
things at the first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered
that these things were written of him, and that they had done these
things to him.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The crowd therefore that was with him
bore witness because he had called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised
him from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Therefore also the crowd met him
because they had heard that he had done this sign.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The Pharisees therefore said to one
another, Ye see that ye profit nothing: behold, the world is gone after
him.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And there were certain Greeks among
those who came up that they might worship in the feast;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> these therefore came to Philip, who was
of Bethsaida of Galilee, and they asked him saying, Sir, we desire to
see Jesus.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Philip comes and tells Andrew, \[and
again\] Andrew comes and Philip, and they tell Jesus.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> But Jesus answered them saying, The
hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except
the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if
it die, it bears much fruit.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> He that loves his life shall lose it,
and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If any one serve me, let him follow me;
and where I am, there also shall be \*my\* servant. \[And\] if any one
serve me, him shall the Father honour.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Now is my soul troubled, and what shall
I say? Father, save me from this hour. But on account of this have I
come to this hour.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Father, glorify thy name. There came
therefore a voice out of heaven, I both have glorified and will glorify
\[it\] again.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> The crowd therefore, which stood
\[there\] and heard \[it\], said that it had thundered. Others said, An
angel has spoken to him.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Jesus answered and said, Not on my
account has this voice come, but on yours.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Now is \[the\] judgment of this world;
now shall the prince of this world be cast out:

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> and I, if I be lifted up out of the
earth, will draw all to me.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> But this he said signifying by what
death he was about to die.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> The crowd answered him, We have heard
out of the law that the Christ abides for ever; and how sayest thou that
the Son of man must be lifted up? Who \*is\* this, the Son of man?

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> Jesus therefore said to them, Yet a
little while is the light amongst you. Walk while ye have the light,
that darkness may not overtake you. And he who walks in the darkness
does not know where he goes.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> While ye have the light, believe in the
light, that ye may become sons of light. Jesus said these things, and
going away hid himself from them.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> But though he had done so many signs
before them, they believed not on him,

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> that the word of the prophet Esaias
which he said might be fulfilled, Lord, who has believed our report? and
to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> On this account they could not believe,
because Esaias said again,

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> He has blinded their eyes and hardened
their heart, that they may not see with their eyes, and understand with
their heart and be converted, and I should heal them.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> These things said Esaias because he saw
his glory and spoke of him.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> Although indeed from among the rulers
also many believed on him, but on account of the Pharisees did not
confess \[him\], that they might not be put out of the synagogue:

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> for they loved glory from men rather
than glory from God.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> But Jesus cried and said, He that
believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me;

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> and he that beholds me, beholds him
that sent me.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> I am come into the world \[as\] light,
that every one that believes on me may not abide in darkness;

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> and if any one hear my words and do not
keep \[them\], I judge him not, for I am not come that I might judge the
world, but that I might save the world.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> He that rejects me and does not receive
my words, has him who judges him: the word which I have spoken, that
shall judge him in the last day.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> For I have not spoken from myself, but
the Father who sent me has himself given me commandment what I should
say and what I should speak;

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> and I know that his commandment is life
eternal. What therefore I speak, as the Father has said to me, so I
speak.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now before the feast of the passover,
Jesus, knowing that his hour had come that he should depart out of this
world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, loved
them to the end.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And during supper, the devil having
already put it into the heart of Judas \[son\] of Simon, Iscariote, that
he should deliver him up,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> \[Jesus,\] knowing that the Father had
given him all things into his hands, and that he came out from God and
was going to God,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> rises from supper and lays aside his
garments, and having taken a linen towel he girded himself:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> then he pours water into the washhand
basin, and began to wash the feet of the disciples, and to wipe them
with the linen towel with which he was girded.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> He comes therefore to Simon Peter; and
\*he\* says to him, Lord, dost thou wash \*my\* feet?

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Jesus answered and said to him, What I do
thou dost not know now, but thou shalt know hereafter.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Peter says to him, Thou shalt never wash
my feet. Jesus answered him, Unless I wash thee, thou hast not part with
me.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Simon Peter says to him, Lord, not my
feet only, but also my hands and my head.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Jesus says to him, He that is washed
all over needs not to wash save his feet, but is wholly clean; and ye
are clean, but not all.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For he knew him that delivered him up:
on account of this he said, Ye are not all clean.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> When therefore he had washed their
feet, and taken his garments, having sat down again, he said to them, Do
ye know what I have done to you?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Ye call me the Teacher and the Lord,
and ye say well, for I am \[so\].

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> If I therefore, the Lord and the
Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's
feet;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> for I have given you an example that,
as I have done to you, ye should do also.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Verily, verily, I say to you, The
bondman is not greater than his lord, nor the sent greater than he who
has sent him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> If ye know these things, blessed are ye
if ye do them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> I speak not of you all. I know those
whom I have chosen; but that the scripture might be fulfilled, He that
eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> I tell you \[it\] now before it
happens, that when it happens, ye may believe that I am \[he\].

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Verily, verily, I say to you, He who
receives whomsoever I shall send receives me; and he that receives me
receives him who has sent me.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Having said these things, Jesus was
troubled in spirit, and testified and said, Verily, verily, I say to
you, that one of you shall deliver me up.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The disciples therefore looked one on
another, doubting of whom he spoke.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Now there was at table one of his
disciples in the bosom of Jesus, whom Jesus loved.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Simon Peter makes a sign therefore to
him to ask who it might be of whom he spoke.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> But he, leaning on the breast of Jesus,
says to him, Lord, who is it?

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Jesus answers, He it is to whom I,
after I have dipped the morsel, give it. And having dipped the morsel,
he gives it to Judas \[son\] of Simon, Iscariote.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And, after the morsel, then entered
Satan into him. Jesus therefore says to him, What thou doest, do
quickly.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> But none of those at table knew why he
said this to him;

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> for some supposed, because Judas had
the bag, that Jesus was saying to him, Buy the things of which we have
need for the feast; or that he should give something to the poor.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Having therefore received the morsel,
he went out immediately; and it was night.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> When therefore he was gone out Jesus
says, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> If God be glorified in him, God also
shall glorify him in himself, and shall glorify him immediately.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Children, yet a little while I am with
you. Ye shall seek me; and, as I said to the Jews, Where I go ye cannot
come, I say to you also now.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> A new commandment I give to you, that
ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> By this shall all know that ye are
disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Simon Peter says to him, Lord, where
goest thou? Jesus answered him, Where I go thou canst not follow me now,
but thou shalt follow me after.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> Peter says to him, Lord, why cannot I
follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thee.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Jesus answers, Thou wilt lay down thy
life for me! Verily, verily, I say to thee, The cock shall not crow till
thou hast denied me thrice.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Let not your heart be troubled; ye
believe on God, believe also on me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> In my Father's house there are many
abodes; were it not so, I had told you: for I go to prepare you a place;

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and if I go and shall prepare you a
place, I am coming again and shall receive you to myself, that where I
am ye also may be.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And ye know where I go, and ye know the
way.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Thomas says to him, Lord, we know not
where thou goest, and how can we know the way?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Jesus says to him, I am the way, and the
truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father unless by me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> If ye had known me, ye would have known
also my Father, and henceforth ye know him and have seen him.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Philip says to him, Lord, shew us the
Father and it suffices us.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Jesus says to him, Am I so long a time
with you, and thou hast not known me, Philip? He that has seen me has
seen the Father; and how sayest thou, Shew us the Father?

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Believest thou not that I \[am\] in the
Father, and that the Father is in me? The words which I speak to you I
do not speak from myself; but the Father who abides in me, he does the
works.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Believe \*me\* that I \[am\] in the
Father and the Father in me; but if not, believe me for the works' sake
themselves.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Verily, verily, I say to you, He that
believes on me, the works which I do shall he do also, and he shall do
greater than these, because I go to the Father.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
this will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If ye shall ask anything in my name, I
will do it.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If ye love me, keep my commandments.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And I will beg the Father, and he will
give you another Comforter, that he may be with you for ever,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because it does not see him nor know him; but ye know
him, for he abides with you, and shall be in you.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I will not leave you orphans, I am
coming to you.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Yet a little and the world sees me no
longer; but ye see me; because I live ye also shall live.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> In that day ye shall know that I \[am\]
in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He that has my commandments and keeps
them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my
Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Judas, not the Iscariote, says to him,
Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself to us and not to the
world?

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> Jesus answered and said to him, If any
one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we
will come to him and make our abode with him.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> He that loves me not does not keep my
words; and the word which ye hear is not mine, but \[that\] of the
Father who has sent me.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> These things I have said to you,
abiding with you;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> but the Comforter, the Holy Spirit,
whom the Father will send in my name, \*he\* shall teach you all things,
and will bring to your remembrance all the things which I have said to
you.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> I leave peace with you; I give \*my\*
peace to you: not as the world gives do I give to you. Let not your
heart be troubled, neither let it fear.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Ye have heard that I have said unto
you, I go away and I am coming to you. If ye loved me ye would rejoice
that I go to the Father, for \[my\] Father is greater than I.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And now I have told you before it comes
to pass, that when it shall have come to pass ye may believe.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> I will no longer speak much with you,
for the ruler of the world comes, and in me he has nothing;

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> but that the world may know that I love
the Father, and as the Father has commanded me, thus I do. Rise up, let
us go hence.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> I am the true vine, and my Father is the
husbandman.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> \[As to\] every branch in me not bearing
fruit, he takes it away; and \[as to\] every one bearing fruit, he
purges it that it may bring forth more fruit.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Ye are already clean by reason of the
word which I have spoken to you.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Abide in me and I in you. As the branch
cannot bear fruit of itself unless it abide in the vine, thus neither
\[can\] ye unless ye abide in me.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> I am the vine, ye \[are\] the branches.
He that abides in me and I in him, \*he\* bears much fruit; for without
me ye can do nothing.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Unless any one abide in me he is cast out
as the branch, and is dried up; and they gather them and cast them into
the fire, and they are burned.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If ye abide in me, and my words abide in
you, ye shall ask what ye will and it shall come to pass to you.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> In this is my Father glorified, that ye
bear much fruit, and ye shall become disciples of mine.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> As the Father has loved me, I also have
loved you: abide in my love.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> If ye shall keep my commandments, ye
shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Father's commandments and
abide in his love.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> I have spoken these things to you that
my joy may be in you, and your joy be full.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> This is my commandment, that ye love
one another, as I have loved you.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> No one has greater love than this, that
one should lay down his life for his friends.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Ye are my friends if ye practise
whatever I command you.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> I call you no longer bondmen, for the
bondman does not know what his master is doing; but I have called you
friends, for all things which I have heard of my Father I have made
known to you.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you, and have set you that ye should go and \[that\] ye should
bear fruit, and \[that\] your fruit should abide, that whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my name he may give you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> These things I command you, that ye
love one another.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> If the world hate you, know that it has
hated me before you.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If ye were of the world, the world
would love its own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, on account of this the world hates you.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Remember the word which I said unto
you, The bondman is not greater than his master. If they have persecuted
me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my word, they will
keep also yours.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But they will do all these things to
you on account of my name, because they have not known him that sent me.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> If I had not come and spoken to them,
they had not had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He that hates me hates also my Father.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> If I had not done among them the works
which no other one has done, they had not had sin; but now they have
both seen and hated both me and my Father.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But that the word written in their law
might be fulfilled, They hated me without a cause.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> But when the Comforter is come, whom I
will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes forth
from with the Father, \*he\* shall bear witness concerning me;

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> and ye too bear witness, because ye are
with me from \[the\] beginning.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> These things I have spoken unto you that
ye may not be offended.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> They shall put you out of the synagogues;
but the hour is coming that every one who kills you will think to render
service to God;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and these things they will do because
they have not known the Father nor me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> But I have spoken these things to you,
that when their hour shall have come, ye may remember them, that I have
said \[them\] unto you. But I did not say these things unto you from
\[the\] beginning, because I was with you.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But now I go to him that has sent me, and
none of you demands of me, Where goest thou?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But because I have spoken these things to
you, sorrow has filled your heart.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But I say the truth to you, It is
profitable for you that I go away; for if I do not go away, the
Comforter will not come to you; but if I go I will send him to you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And having come, he will bring
demonstration to the world, of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment:

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> of sin, because they do not believe on
me;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> of righteousness, because I go away to
\[my\] Father, and ye behold me no longer;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> of judgment, because the ruler of this
world is judged.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I have yet many things to say to you,
but ye cannot bear them now.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> But when \*he\* is come, the Spirit of
truth, he shall guide you into all the truth: for he shall not speak
from himself; but whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak; and he will
announce to you what is coming.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine and shall announce \[it\] to you.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> All things that the Father has are
mine; on account of this I have said that he receives of mine and shall
announce \[it\] to you.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> A little while and ye do not behold me;
and again a little while and ye shall see me, \[because I go away to the
Father\].

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> \[Some\] of his disciples therefore
said to one another, What is this he says to us, A little while and ye
do not behold me; and again a little while and ye shall see me, and,
Because I go away to the Father?

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> They said therefore, What is this which
he says \[of\] the little while? We do not know \[of\] what he speaks.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Jesus knew therefore that they desired
to demand of him, and said to them, Do ye inquire of this among
yourselves that I said, A little while and ye do not behold me; and
again a little while and ye shall see me?

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Verily, verily, I say to you, that ye
shall weep and lament, ye, but the world shall rejoice; and ye will be
grieved, but your grief shall be turned to joy.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> A woman, when she gives birth to a
child, has grief because her hour has come; but when the child is born,
she no longer remembers the trouble, on account of the joy that a man
has been born into the world.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And ye now therefore have grief; but I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no one
takes from you.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And in that day ye shall demand nothing
of me: verily, verily, I say to you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father
in my name, he will give you.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my
name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> These things I have spoken to you in
allegories; the hour is coming that I will no longer speak to you in
allegories, but will declare to you openly concerning the Father.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> In that day ye shall ask in my name;
and I say not to you that I will demand of the Father for you,

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> for the Father himself has affection
for you, because ye have had affection for me, and have believed that I
came out from God.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> I came out from the Father and have
come into the world; again, I leave the world and go to the Father.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> His disciples say to him, Lo, now thou
speakest openly and utterest no allegory.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> Now we know that thou knowest all
things, and hast not need that any one should demand of thee. By this we
believe that thou art come from God.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> Behold, \[the\] hour is coming, and has
come, that ye shall be scattered, each to his own, and shall leave me
alone; and \[yet\] I am not alone, for the Father is with me.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> These things have I spoken to you that
in me ye might have peace. In the world ye have tribulation; but be of
good courage: I have overcome the world.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> These things Jesus spoke, and lifted up
his eyes to heaven and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son,
that thy Son may glorify thee;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> as thou hast given him authority over all
flesh, that \[as to\] all that thou hast given to him, he should give
them life eternal.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And this is the eternal life, that they
should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast
sent.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> I have glorified \*thee\* on the earth, I
have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it;

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> and now glorify \*me\*, \*thou\* Father,
along with thyself, with the glory which I had along with thee before
the world was.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> I have manifested thy name to the men
whom thou gavest me out of the world. They were thine, and thou gavest
them me, and they have kept thy word.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Now they have known that all things that
thou hast given me are of thee;

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> for the words which thou hast given me I
have given them, and they have received \[them\], and have known truly
that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou sentest me.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> I demand concerning them; I do not demand
concerning the world, but concerning those whom thou hast given me, for
they are thine,

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> (and all that is mine is thine, and
\[all\] that is thine mine,) and I am glorified in them.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And I am no longer in the world, and
these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in
thy name which thou hast given me, that they may be one as we.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> When I was with them I kept them in thy
name; those thou hast given me I have guarded, and not one of them has
perished, but the son of perdition, that the scripture might be
fulfilled.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And now I come to thee. And these
things I speak in the world, that they may have my joy fulfilled in
them.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I have given them thy word, and the
world has hated them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of
the world.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> I do not demand that thou shouldest
take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them out of
evil.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> They are not of the world, as I am not
of the world.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Sanctify them by the truth: thy word is
truth.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> As thou hast sent me into the world, I
also have sent them into the world;

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> and I sanctify myself for them, that
they also may be sanctified by truth.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And I do not demand for these only, but
also for those who believe on me through their word;

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> that they may be all one, as thou,
Father, \[art\] in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
that the world may believe that thou hast sent me.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And the glory which thou hast given me
I have given them, that they may be one, as we are one;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> I in them and thou in me, that they may
be perfected into one \[and\] that the world may know that thou hast
sent me, and \[that\] thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Father, \[as to\] those whom thou hast
given me, I desire that where I am they also may be with me, that they
may behold my glory which thou hast given me, for thou lovedst me before
\[the\] foundation of \[the\] world.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Righteous Father, -- and the world has
not known thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou
hast sent me.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And I have made known to them thy name,
and will make \[it\] known; that the love with which thou hast loved me
may be in them and I in them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Jesus, having said these things, went out
with his disciples beyond the torrent Cedron, where was a garden, into
which he entered, he and his disciples.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Judas also, who delivered him up,
knew the place, because Jesus was often there, in company with his
disciples.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Judas therefore, having got the band, and
officers of the chief priests and Pharisees, comes there with lanterns
and torches and weapons.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Jesus therefore, knowing all things that
were coming upon him, went forth and said to them, Whom seek ye?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> They answered him, Jesus the Nazaraean.
Jesus says to them, I am \[he\]. And Judas also, who delivered him up,
stood with them.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> When therefore he said to them, I am
\[he\], they went away backward and fell to the ground.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> He demanded of them therefore again, Whom
seek ye? And they said, Jesus the Nazaraean.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Jesus answered, I told you that I am
\[he\]: if therefore ye seek me, let these go away;

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> that the word might be fulfilled which he
spoke, \[As to\] those whom thou hast given me, I have not lost one of
them.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Simon Peter therefore, having a sword,
drew it, and smote the bondman of the high priest and cut off his right
ear; and the bondman's name was Malchus.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Jesus therefore said to Peter, Put the
sword into the sheath; the cup which the Father has given me, shall I
not drink it?

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> The band therefore, and the chiliarch,
and the officers of the Jews, took Jesus and bound him:

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> and they led him away to Annas first;
for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> But it was Caiaphas who counselled the
Jews that it was better that one man should perish for the people.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Now Simon Peter followed Jesus, and the
other disciple. But that disciple was known to the high priest, and went
in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> but Peter stood at the door without.
The other disciple therefore, who was known to the high priest, went out
and spoke to the porteress and brought in Peter.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> The maid therefore, who was porteress,
says to Peter, Art thou also of the disciples of this man? He says, I am
not.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> But the bondmen and officers, having
made a fire of coals (for it was cold), stood and warmed themselves; and
Peter was standing with them and warming himself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> The high priest therefore demanded of
Jesus concerning his disciples and concerning his doctrine.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to
the world; I taught always in \[the\] synagogue and in the temple, where
all the Jews come together, and in secret I have spoken nothing.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Why demandest thou of me? Demand of
those who have heard, what I have spoken to them; behold, they know what
I have said.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> But as he said these things, one of the
officers who stood by gave a blow on the face to Jesus, saying,
Answerest thou the high priest thus?

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Jesus answered him, If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Annas \[then\] had sent him bound to
Caiaphas the high priest.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> But Simon Peter was standing and
warming himself. They said therefore to him, Art thou also of his
disciples? He denied, and said, I am not.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> One of the bondmen of the high priest,
who was kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, says, Did not I see thee
in the garden with him?

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Peter denied therefore again, and
immediately \[the\] cock crew.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> They lead therefore Jesus from Caiaphas
to the praetorium; and it was early morn. And \*they\* entered not into
the praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but eat the passover.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Pilate therefore went out to them and
said, What accusation do ye bring against this man?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> They answered and said to him, If this
\[man\] were not an evildoer, we should not have delivered him up to
thee.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Pilate therefore said to them, Take
him, ye, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said to
him, It is not permitted to us to put any one to death;

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> that the word of Jesus might be
fulfilled which he spoke, signifying what death he should die.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Pilate therefore entered again into the
praetorium and called Jesus, and said to him, Thou art the king of the
Jews?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Jesus answered \[him\], Dost thou say
this of thyself, or have others said it to thee concerning me?

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thy nation
and the chief priests have delivered thee up to me: what hast thou done?

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of
this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought
that I might not be delivered up to the Jews; but now my kingdom is not
from hence.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Pilate therefore said to him, Thou art
then a king? Jesus answered, Thou sayest \[it\], that I am a king. I
have been born for this, and for this I have come into the world, that I
might bear witness to the truth. Every one that is of the truth hears my
voice.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Pilate says to him, What is truth? And
having said this he went out again to the Jews, and says to them, I find
no fault whatever in him.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> But ye have a custom that I release
\[some\] one to you at the passover; will ye therefore that I release
unto you the king of the Jews?

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> They cried therefore again all, saying,
Not this \[man\], but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and
scourged \[him\].

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And the soldiers having plaited a crown
of thorns put it on his head, and put a purple robe on him,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and came to him and said, Hail, king of
the Jews! and gave him blows on the face.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Pilate went out again and says to
them, Lo, I bring him out to you, that ye may know that I find in him no
fault whatever.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> (Jesus therefore went forth without,
wearing the crown of thorn, and the purple robe.) And he says to them,
Behold the man!

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> When therefore the chief priests and the
officers saw him they cried out saying, Crucify, crucify \[him\]. Pilate
says to them, Take him ye and crucify \[him\], for I find no fault in
him.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The Jews answered him, We have a law, and
according to \[our\] law he ought to die, because he made himself Son of
God.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> When Pilate therefore heard this word, he
was the rather afraid,

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> and went into the praetorium again and
says to Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Pilate therefore says to him, Speakest
thou not to \*me\*? Dost thou not know that I have authority to release
thee and have authority to crucify thee?

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Jesus answered, Thou hadst no authority
whatever against me if it were not given to thee from above. On this
account he that has delivered me up to thee has \[the\] greater sin.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> From this time Pilate sought to release
him; but the Jews cried out saying, If thou releasest this \[man\], thou
art not a friend to Caesar. Every one making himself a king speaks
against Caesar.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Pilate therefore, having heard these
words, led Jesus out and sat down upon \[the\] judgment-seat, at a place
called Pavement, but in Hebrew Gabbatha;

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> (now it was \[the\] preparation of the
passover; it was about the sixth hour;) and he says to the Jews, Behold
your king!

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> But they cried out, Take \[him\] away,
take \[him\] away, crucify him. Pilate says to them, Shall I crucify
your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Then therefore he delivered him up to
them, that he might be crucified; and they took Jesus and led him away.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And he went out, bearing his cross, to
the place called \[place\] of a skull, which is called in Hebrew,
Golgotha;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> where they crucified him, and with him
two others, \[one\] on this side, and \[one\] on that, and Jesus in the
middle.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And Pilate wrote a title also and put
it on the cross. But there was written: Jesus the Nazaraean, the King of
the Jews.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> This title therefore many of the Jews
read, for the place of the city where Jesus was crucified was near; and
it was written in Hebrew, Greek, Latin.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> The chief priests of the Jews therefore
said to Pilate, Do not write, The king of the Jews, but that \*he\*
said, I am king of the Jews.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Pilate answered, What I have written, I
have written.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The soldiers therefore, when they had
crucified Jesus, took his clothes, and made four parts, to each soldier
a part, and the body-coat; but the body-coat was seamless, woven through
the whole from the top.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> They said therefore to one another, Let
us not rend it, but let us cast lots for it, whose it shall be; that the
scripture might be fulfilled which says, They parted my garments among
themselves, and on my vesture they cast lots. The soldiers therefore did
these things.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And by the cross of Jesus stood his
mother, and the sister of his mother, Mary the \[wife\] of Clopas, and
Mary of Magdala.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Jesus therefore, seeing his mother, and
the disciple standing by, whom he loved, says to his mother, Woman,
behold thy son.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then he says unto the disciple, Behold
thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> After this, Jesus, knowing that all
things were now finished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, says, I
thirst.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> There was a vessel therefore there full
of vinegar, and having filled a sponge with vinegar, and putting hyssop
round it, they put it up to his mouth.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> When therefore Jesus had received the
vinegar, he said, It is finished; and having bowed his head, he
delivered up his spirit.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> The Jews therefore, that the bodies
might not remain on the cross on the sabbath, for it was \[the\]
preparation, (for the day of that sabbath was a great \[day\],) demanded
of Pilate that their legs might be broken and they taken away.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> The soldiers therefore came and broke
the legs of the first and of the other that had been crucified with him;

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> but coming to Jesus, when they saw that
he was already dead they did not break his legs,

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> but one of the soldiers pierced his
side with a spear, and immediately there came out blood and water.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And he who saw it bears witness, and
his witness is true, and he knows that he says true that ye also may
believe.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> For these things took place that the
scripture might be fulfilled, Not a bone of him shall be broken.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And again another scripture says, They
shall look on him whom they pierced.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And after these things Joseph of
Arimathaea, who was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly through fear of
the Jews, demanded of Pilate that he might take the body of Jesus: and
Pilate allowed it. He came therefore and took away the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> And Nicodemus also, who at first came
to Jesus by night, came, bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a
hundred pounds \[weight\].

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> They took therefore the body of Jesus
and bound it up in linen with the spices, as it is the custom with the
Jews to prepare for burial.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> But there was in the place where he had
been crucified a garden, and in the garden a new tomb in which no one
had ever been laid.

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> There therefore, on account of the
preparation of the Jews, because the tomb was near, they laid Jesus.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And on the first \[day\] of the week Mary
of Magdala comes in early morn to the tomb, while it was still dark, and
sees the stone taken away from the tomb.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> She runs therefore and comes to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple, to whom Jesus was attached, and says
to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we know not
where they have laid him.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Peter therefore went forth, and the other
disciple, and came to the tomb.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And the two ran together, and the other
disciple ran forward faster than Peter, and came first to the tomb,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> and stooping down he sees the linen
cloths lying; he did not however go in.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Simon Peter therefore comes, following
him, and entered into the tomb, and sees the linen cloths lying,

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> and the handkerchief which was upon his
head, not lying with the linen cloths, but folded up in a distinct place
by itself.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Then entered in therefore the other
disciple also who came first to the tomb, and he saw and believed;

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> for they had not yet known the scripture,
that he must rise from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> The disciples therefore went away again
to their own home.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> But Mary stood at the tomb weeping
without. As therefore she wept, she stooped down into the tomb,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> and beholds two angels sitting in white
\[garments\], one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of
Jesus had lain.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And they say to her, Woman, why dost
thou weep? She says to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I
know not where they have laid him.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Having said these things she turned
backward and beholds Jesus standing \[there\], and knew not that it was
Jesus.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Jesus says to her, Woman, why dost thou
weep? Whom seekest thou? She, supposing that it was the gardener, says
to him, Sir, if thou hast borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid
him, and I will take him away.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Jesus says to her, Mary. She, turning
round, says to him in Hebrew, Rabboni, which means Teacher.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Jesus says to her, Touch me not, for I
have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to
them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and \[to\] my God and your
God.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Mary of Magdala comes bringing word to
the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and \[that\] he had said these
things to her.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When therefore it was evening on that
day, which was the first \[day\] of the week, and the doors shut where
the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in
the midst, and says to them, Peace \[be\] to you.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And having said this, he shewed to them
his hands and his side. The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen
the Lord.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> \[Jesus\] said therefore again to them,
Peace \[be\] to you: as the Father sent me forth, I also send you.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And having said this, he breathed into
\[them\], and says to them, Receive \[the\] Holy Spirit:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted to them; whose soever \[sins\] ye retain, they are retained.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But Thomas, one of the twelve, called
Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> The other disciples therefore said to
him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Unless I see in his
hands the mark of the nails, and put my finger into the mark of the
nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And eight days after, his disciples
were again within, and Thomas with them. Jesus comes, the doors being
shut, and stood in the midst and said, Peace \[be\] to you.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Then he says to Thomas, Bring thy
finger here and see my hands; and bring thy hand and put it into my
side; and be not unbelieving, but believing.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Thomas answered and said to him, My
Lord and my God.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Jesus says to him, Because thou hast
seen me thou hast believed: blessed they who have not seen and have
believed.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Many other signs therefore also Jesus
did before his disciples, which are not written in this book;

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> but these are written that ye may
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye
might have life in his name.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> After these things Jesus manifested
himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. And he manifested
\[himself\] thus.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> There were together Simon Peter, and
Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael who was of Cana of Galilee, and the
\[sons\] of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Simon Peter says to them, I go to fish.
They say to him, We also come with thee. They went forth, and went on
board, and that night took nothing.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And early morn already breaking, Jesus
stood on the shore; the disciples however did not know that it was
Jesus.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Jesus therefore says to them, Children,
have ye anything to eat? They answered him, No.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he said to them, Cast the net at the
right side of the ship and ye will find. They cast therefore, and they
could no longer draw it, from the multitude of fishes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved
says to Peter, It is the Lord. Simon Peter therefore, having heard that
it was the Lord, girded his overcoat \[on him\] (for he was naked), and
cast himself into the sea;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> and the other disciples came in the small
boat, for they were not far from the land, but somewhere about two
hundred cubits, dragging the net of fishes.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> When therefore they went out on the land,
they see a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Jesus says to them, Bring of the fishes
which ye have now taken.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Simon Peter went up and drew the net to
the land full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three; and though
there were so many, the net was not rent.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Jesus says to them, Come \[and\] dine.
But none of the disciples dared inquire of him, Who art thou? knowing
that it was the Lord.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Jesus comes and takes the bread and
gives it to them, and the fish in like manner.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> This is already the third time that
Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among
\[the\] dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> When therefore they had dined, Jesus
says to Simon Peter, Simon, \[son\] of Jonas, lovest thou me more than
these? He says to him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I am attached to
thee. He says to him, Feed my lambs.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> He says to him again a second time,
Simon, \[son\] of Jonas, lovest thou me? He says to him, Yea, Lord; thou
knowest that I am attached to thee. He says to him, Shepherd my sheep.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He says to him the third time, Simon,
\[son\] of Jonas, art thou attached to me? Peter was grieved because he
said to him the third time, Art thou attached to me? and said to him,
Lord, thou knowest all things; thou knowest that I am attached to thee.
Jesus says to him, Feed my sheep.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Verily, verily, I say to thee, When
thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst where thou
desiredst; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee, and bring thee where thou dost not
desire.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> But he said this signifying by what
death he should glorify God. And having said this, he says to him,
Follow me.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Peter, turning round, sees the disciple
whom Jesus loved following, who also leaned at supper on his breast, and
said, Lord, who is it that delivers thee up?

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Peter, seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord,
and what \[of\] this \[man\]?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Jesus says to him, If I will that he
abide until I come, what \[is that\] to thee? Follow thou me.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> This word therefore went out among the
brethren, That disciple does not die. And Jesus did not say to him, He
does not die; but, If I will that he abide until I come, what \[is
that\] to thee?

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> This is the disciple who bears witness
concerning these things, and who has written these things; and we know
that his witness is true.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And there are also many other things
which Jesus did, the which if they were written one by one, I suppose
that not even the world itself would contain the books written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts](act.md)
