[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sa2)  [Next](kg2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 1 Kings

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And king David was old \[and\] advanced in
age; and they covered him with clothes, but he obtained no warmth.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And his servants said to him, Let there be
found for my lord the king a young virgin; and let her stand before the
king, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my
lord the king may get warm.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And they sought for a fair damsel
throughout the territory of Israel, and found Abishag a Shunammite, and
brought her to the king.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the damsel was very fair; and cherished
the king, and ministered to him; but the king knew her not.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted
himself, saying, I will be king; and he provided himself chariots and
horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And his father had not grieved him at any
time in saying, Why doest thou so? and he was also a very comely man;
and \[his mother\] bore him after Absalom.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he conferred with Joab the son of
Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest; and they helped Adonijah and
followed \[him\].

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty
men whom David had, were not with Adonijah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Adonijah sacrificed sheep and oxen and
fatted cattle by the stone of Zoheleth, which is by En-rogel, and
invited all his brethren, the king's sons, and all the men of Judah, the
king's servants;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and
the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he did not invite.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And Nathan spoke to Bathsheba the mother
of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith
is king, and David our lord does not know \[it\]?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And now, come, let me, I pray thee, give
thee counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy
son Solomon.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Go and get thee in to king David, and say
to him, Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear to thy handmaid saying,
Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne? why
then does Adonijah reign?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Behold, while thou yet talkest there with
the king, I also will come in after thee and confirm thy words.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Bathsheba went in to the king into
the chamber; and the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite
ministered to the king.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Bathsheba bowed and did obeisance to
the king. And the king said, What wouldest thou?

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And she said to him, My lord, thou hast
sworn by Jehovah thy God to thy handmaid, \[saying,\] Solomon thy son
shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And now behold, Adonijah is king; and
now, my lord the king, thou knowest it not.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And he has sacrificed oxen and fatted
cattle and sheep in abundance, and has invited all the sons of the king
and Abiathar the priest and Joab the captain of the host; but Solomon
thy servant has he not invited.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And thou, my lord the king, the eyes of
all Israel are upon thee, that thou shouldest tell them who shall sit on
the throne of my lord the king after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Otherwise it shall come to pass when my
lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon
will be counted offenders.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And behold, while she yet talked with the
king, Nathan the prophet also came in.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they told the king saying, Behold,
Nathan the prophet. And when he was come in before the king, he bowed
himself before the king with his face to the ground.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast
thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne?

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> For he is gone down this day, and has
sacrificed oxen and fatted cattle and sheep in abundance, and has
invited all the king's sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar
the priest; and behold, they eat and drink before him, and say, God save
king Adonijah!

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But me, \[even\] me thy servant, and
Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant
Solomon, he has not invited.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Is this thing done by my lord the king,
and thou hast not shewn to thy servants who should sit on the throne of
my lord the king after him?

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then king David answered and said, Call
me Bathsheba. And she came into the king's presence, and stood before
the king.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And the king swore, and said, \[As\]
Jehovah liveth, who has redeemed my soul out of all distress,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> even as I swore to thee by Jehovah the
God of Israel, saying, Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he
shall sit on my throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this
day.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And Bathsheba bowed with her face to the
earth, and did reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David
live for ever.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And king David said, Call me Zadok the
priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And
they came before the king.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And the king said to them, Take with you
the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine
own mule, and bring him down to Gihon;

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> and let Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over Israel; and blow ye with the trumpet,
and say, Long live king Solomon!

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And ye shall come up after him, that he
may come and sit on my throne; for he shall reign in my stead, and I
have appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered
the king and said, Amen: Jehovah, the God of my lord the king, say so
too.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> As Jehovah has been with my lord the
king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the
throne of my lord king David.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule,
and brought him to Gihon.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil
out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet;
and all the people said, Long live king Solomon!

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And all the people came up after him, and
the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the
earth rent with the sound of them.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And Adonijah and all the guests that were
with him heard \[it\] as they were finishing their repast; and Joab
heard the sound of the trumpet, and he said, Wherefore this noise of the
city in an uproar?

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> While he yet spoke, behold, Jonathan the
son of Abiathar the priest came; and Adonijah said \[to him\], Come in;
for thou art a valiant man, and bringest good news.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And Jonathan answered and said to
Adonijah, Indeed, our lord king David has made Solomon king.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And the king has sent with him Zadok the
priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the
Cherethites and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon
the king's mule;

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> and Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet have anointed him king at Gihon; and they are come up from
thence rejoicing, so that the city is in an uproar. This is the noise
which ye have heard.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> And also Solomon is sitting on the throne
of the kingdom.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> And moreover the king's servants came to
bless our lord king David, saying, Thy God make the name of Solomon more
excellent than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne!
And the king bowed himself on the bed.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> And also thus said the king: Blessed be
Jehovah, the God of Israel, who has given one to sit on my throne this
day, mine eyes even seeing it.

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> And all Adonijah's guests were afraid,
and rose up and went every man his way.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> And Adonijah feared because of Solomon,
and arose and went and caught hold of the horns of the altar.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> And it was told Solomon saying, Behold,
Adonijah fears king Solomon; for behold, he has caught hold of the horns
of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear to me this day that he will
not put his servant to death with the sword.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> And Solomon said, If he be a worthy man,
there shall not one of his hairs fall to the earth; but if wickedness be
found in him, he shall die.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> And king Solomon sent, and they brought
him down from the altar. And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon;
and Solomon said to him, Go to thy house.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And the days of David were at hand that he
should die; and he enjoined Solomon his son saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I go the way of all the earth: be of good
courage therefore, and be a man;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and keep the charge of Jehovah thy God, to
walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his
ordinances, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses,
that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest and whithersoever thou
turnest thyself;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> that Jehovah may confirm his word which he
spoke concerning me, saying, If thy sons take heed to their way, to walk
before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there
shall not fail thee, said he, a man upon the throne of Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And thou knowest also what Joab the son of
Zeruiah did to me, what he did to the two captains of the hosts of
Israel, to Abner the son of Ner, and to Amasa the son of Jether, whom he
slew, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon
his girdle that was about his loins, and upon his sandals that were on
his feet.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou shalt do according to thy wisdom,
and not let his hoar head go down to Sheol in peace.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But shew kindness to the sons of Barzillai
the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table; for so
they came up to me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And behold, there is with thee Shimei the
son of Gera, the Benjaminite of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous
curse in the day that I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to meet me at
the Jordan, and I swore to him by Jehovah saying, I will not put thee to
death with the sword.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And now hold him not guiltless; for thou
art a wise man, and thou shalt know what thou oughtest to do to him; but
bring his hoar head down to Sheol with blood.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And David slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the city of David.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the days that David reigned over
Israel were forty years: he reigned seven years in Hebron, and he
reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Solomon sat on the throne of David
his father; and his kingdom was established greatly.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And Adonijah the son of Haggith came to
Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably?
And he said, Peaceably.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And he said, I have something to say to
thee. And she said, Speak.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And he said, Thou knowest that the
kingdom was mine, and all Israel had set their faces on me that I should
reign; but the kingdom is turned about and is become my brother's, for
it was his from Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And now I ask one petition of thee;
refuse me not. And she said to him, Speak.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And he said, Speak, I pray thee, to
Solomon the king -- for he will not refuse thee -- that he give me
Abishag the Shunammite as wife.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And Bathsheba said, Well, I will speak
for thee to the king.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Bathsheba went to king Solomon, to
speak to him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed
himself to her, and sat down on his throne; and he caused a throne to be
set for the king's mother, and she sat on his right hand.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then she said, I desire one small
petition of thee; refuse me not. And the king said to her, Ask, my
mother, for I will not refuse thee.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite
be given to Adonijah thy brother as wife.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And king Solomon answered and said to his
mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? ask
for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him,
and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And king Solomon swore by Jehovah saying,
God do so to me, and more also, -- Adonijah has spoken this word against
his own life!

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And now \[as\] Jehovah liveth, who has
established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who has
made me a house, as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this
day.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And king Solomon sent by the hand of
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; who fell on him, that he died.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And the king said to Abiathar the priest,
Go to Anathoth, to thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death; but I
will not at this time put thee to death, because thou didst bear the ark
of Adonai Jehovah before David my father, and because thou hast been
afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And Solomon thrust out Abiathar from
being priest to Jehovah, to fulfil the word of Jehovah, which he had
spoken concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And the report came to Joab (for Joab had
turned after Adonijah, though he had not turned after Absalom); and Joab
fled to the tent of Jehovah, and caught hold of the horns of the altar.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> And it was told king Solomon that Joab
had fled to the tent of Jehovah; and behold, he is by the altar. And
Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall on him.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And Benaiah came to the tent of Jehovah
and said to him, Thus saith the king: Come forth. And he said, No; for I
will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus
said Joab, and thus he answered me.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And the king said to him, Do as he has
said, and fall upon him, and bury him; and take away the innocent blood,
which Joab shed, from me and from the house of my father.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And Jehovah shall requite the blood which
he shed upon his own head, because he fell upon two men more righteous
and better than he, and slew them with the sword, without my father
David's knowledge: Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel,
and Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And their blood shall be requited upon
the head of Joab, and upon the head of his seed for ever; but upon
David, and upon his seed, and upon his house, and upon his throne, shall
there be peace for ever from Jehovah.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up
and fell upon him, and put him to death; and he was buried in his own
house in the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And the king put Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada in his stead over the host; and Zadok the priest the king put
in the stead of Abiathar.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> And the king sent and called for Shimei,
and said to him, Build thee a house in Jerusalem, and abide there, and
go not forth thence anywhere.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> And it shall be that on the day thou
goest forth, and passest over the torrent of Kidron, ... know for
certain that thou shalt surely die: thy blood shall be upon thine own
head.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And Shimei said to the king, The saying
is good: as my lord the king has said, so will thy servant do. And
Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And it came to pass at the end of three
years, that two servants of Shimei's ran away to Achish son of Maachah,
king of Gath. And they told Shimei saying, Behold, thy servants are in
Gath.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> Then Shimei arose, and saddled his ass,
and went to Gath, to Achish, to seek his servants; and Shimei went, and
brought his servants from Gath.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And it was told Solomon that Shimei had
gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and had come again.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And the king sent and called for Shimei,
and said to him, Did I not make thee swear by Jehovah, and protest to
thee, saying, Know for certain, that on the day thou goest forth, and
walkest abroad anywhere, thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst to me,
The word that I have heard is good.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> Why then hast thou not kept the oath of
Jehovah, and the commandment that I charged thee with?

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And the king said to Shimei, Thou knowest
all the wickedness of which thy heart is conscious, which thou didst to
David my father; and Jehovah returns thy wickedness upon thine own head;

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> and king Solomon shall be blessed, and
the throne of David shall be established before Jehovah for ever.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And the king commanded Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada; who went out and fell upon him, and he died. And the kingdom
was established in the hand of Solomon.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Solomon allied himself by marriage with
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into
the city of David, until he had ended building his own house, and the
house of Jehovah, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Only, the people sacrificed on the high
places; for there was no house built to the name of Jehovah, until those
days.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Solomon loved Jehovah, walking in the
statutes of David his father; only, he sacrificed and burned incense on
the high places.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice
there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt-offerings did
Solomon offer up upon that altar.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> In Gibeon Jehovah appeared to Solomon in a
dream by night; and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And Solomon said, Thou hast shewn unto thy
servant David my father great loving-kindness, according as he walked
before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart
with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great loving-kindness, that
thou hast given him a son who sits upon his throne, as it is this day.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And now, Jehovah my God, thou hast made thy
servant king instead of David my father; and I am but a little child: I
know not to go out and to come in.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And thy servant is in the midst of thy
people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered
nor counted for multitude.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give therefore to thy servant an
understanding heart, to judge thy people, to discern between good and
bad; for who is able to judge this thy numerous people?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the word pleased the Lord, that
Solomon had asked this thing.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And God said to him, Because thou hast
asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life, neither hast
asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies, but
hast asked for thyself discernment to understand judgment;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> behold, I have done according to thy
word: behold, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so
that there hath been none like unto thee before thee, neither after thee
shall any arise like unto thee.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And I have also given thee that which
thou hast not asked, both riches and glory; so that there shall not be
any among the kings like unto thee all thy days.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep
my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I
will prolong thy days.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Solomon awoke, and behold, it was a
dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the
covenant of Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings, and offered
peace-offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then came two women, harlots, to the
king, and stood before him.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the first woman said, Ah, my lord! I
and this woman abode in one house; and I was delivered of a child with
her in the house.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And it came to pass the third day after I
was delivered, that this woman was delivered also; and we were together;
no stranger was with us in the house, only we two were in the house.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And this woman's child died in the night;
because she had lain upon it.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And she arose at midnight, and took my
son from beside me, while thy handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom,
and laid her dead son in my bosom.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And when I rose in the morning to give my
child suck, behold, it was dead; and I considered it in the morning, and
behold, it was not my son, whom I bore.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the other woman said, No, for the
living is my son, and the dead is thy son. And this one said, No, but
the dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they spoke before
the king.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then said the king, The one says, This
that is living is my son, and thy son is the dead; and the other says,
No, for thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And the king said, Bring me a sword. And
they brought a sword before the king.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And the king said, Divide the living
child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then spoke the woman whose was the living
child to the king, for her bowels yearned over her son, and she said,
Ah, my lord! give her the living child, and in no wise put it to death.
But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine; divide it.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And the king answered and said, Give this
one the living child, and in no wise put it to death: she is its mother.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And all Israel heard of the judgment
which the king had judged; and they feared the king, for they saw that
the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And king Solomon was king over all Israel.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And these are the princes whom he had:
Azariah the son of Zadok was priest;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha,
scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, chronicler;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over
the host; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the
superintendents; and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal officer, the
king's friend;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and Ahishar was over the household; and
Adoniram the son of Abda was over the levy-service.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And Solomon had twelve superintendents over
all Israel; and they provided food for the king and his household: each
man his month in the year had to make provision.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And these are their names: Ben-Hur, in
mount Ephraim.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Ben-Deker in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and
Beth-shemesh, and Elon-Beth-hanan.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Ben-Hesed, in Arubboth; he had Sochoh,
and all the land of Hepher.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Ben-Abinadab had all the upland of Dor;
Taphath the daughter of Solomon was his wife.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Baana the son of Ahilud had Taanach and
Megiddo, and all Beth-shean, which is by Zaretan beneath Jizreel, from
Beth-shean to Abel-Meholah, as far as beyond Jokneam.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Ben-Geber, in Ramoth-Gilead; he had the
villages of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; he had the
region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and
bars of bronze.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Ahinadab the son of Iddo, at Mahanaim.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Ahimaaz, in Nephtali; he also took
Basmath the daughter of Solomon as wife.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Baanah the son of Hushai, in Asher and in
Aloth.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in
Issachar.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Shimei the son of Ela, in Benjamin.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Geber the son of Uri, in the land of
Gilead, the land of Sihon the king of the Amorites, and of Og the king
of Bashan; and \[he was\] the only superintendent that was in the land.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Judah and Israel were many, as the sand
which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Solomon ruled over all kingdoms from
the river to the land of the Philistines, and as far as the border of
Egypt: they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his
life.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And Solomon's provision for one day was
thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of meal,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> ten fatted oxen, and twenty oxen out of
the pastures, and a hundred sheep, besides harts, and gazelles, and
fallow-deer, and fatted fowl.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For he had dominion over all on this side
the river, from Tiphsah as far as Gazah, over all the kings on this side
the river; and he had peace on all sides round about.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every
man under his vine and under his fig-tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba,
all the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of
horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And those officers provided food for king
Solomon, and for all who came to king Solomon's table, every man in his
month: they let nothing be wanting.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And the barley, and the straw for the
horses and coursers, they brought to the place where \[the
superintendents\] were, every man according to his charge.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And God gave Solomon wisdom and very
great understanding and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on
the sea-shore.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom
of all the sons of the east, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan
the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol; and
his fame was in all the nations round about.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And he spoke three thousand proverbs; and
his songs were a thousand and five.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And he spoke of the trees, from the
cedar-tree that is on Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the
wall; he spoke also of cattle, and of fowls, and of creeping things, and
of fishes.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And there came of all peoples to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, from all the kings of the earth who had heard of his
wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to
Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the place
of his father; for Hiram always loved David.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Thou knowest that David my father could not
build a house unto the name of Jehovah his God, because of the wars
which were about him on every side, until Jehovah put them under the
soles of his feet.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But now Jehovah my God has given me rest on
every side: there is neither adversary nor evil event.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And behold, I purpose to build a house unto
the name of Jehovah my God, as Jehovah spoke to David my father saying,
Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy stead, he shall build a
house unto my name.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And now command that they hew me
cedar-trees out of Lebanon; and my servants shall be with thy servants;
and I will give thee hire for thy servants according to all that thou
shalt say; for thou knowest that there is not among us any that are
experienced in cutting timber like to the Zidonians.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it came to pass when Hiram heard the
words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be Jehovah
this day, who has given to David a wise son over this great people.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have
heard the things which thou sentest to me for: I will do all thy desire
concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of cypress.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> My servants shall bring \[them\] down from
Lebanon to the sea; and I will convey them by sea \[in\] rafts to the
place that thou shalt appoint me, and will cause them to be broken up
there, and thou shalt receive them. And thou shalt accomplish my desire
in giving food for my household.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So Hiram gave Solomon cedar-trees and
cypress-trees \[according to\] all his desire.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand
measures of wheat as food for his household, and twenty measures of
beaten oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And Jehovah gave Solomon wisdom as he
promised him. And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they
two made a league.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And king Solomon raised a levy out of all
Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand
a month by courses; a month they were in Lebanon, two months at home;
and Adoniram was over the levy.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And Solomon had seventy thousand that
bore burdens, and eighty thousand stone-masons in the mountains;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> besides the overseers whom Solomon had
set over the work, three thousand three hundred, who ruled over the
people that wrought in the work.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the king commanded, and they brought
great stones, costly stones, hewn stones, to lay the foundation of the
house.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And Solomon's builders and Hiram's
builders and the Giblites hewed them, and prepared timber and stones to
build the house.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And it came to pass in the four hundred and
eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of
Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month
Zif, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the house that king Solomon built for
Jehovah was sixty cubits in length, and twenty in breadth, and thirty
cubits in height.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And the porch, in front of the temple of
the house, was twenty cubits in length, in front of the house broadways,
\[and\] ten cubits was its breadth, in front of the house.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And for the house he made closed windows
with fixed lattices.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And against the wall of the house he built
floors round about, \[against\] the walls of the house, round about the
temple and the oracle; and he made side-chambers round about.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The lowest floor was five cubits broad, and
the middle one was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits
broad; for in the \[thickness of the wall of\] the house he made resets
round about outside, that nothing should be fastened in the walls of the
house.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the house, when it was being built, was
built of stone entirely made ready before it was brought thither; so
that there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the
house while it was being built.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> The entrance to the side-chambers of the
middle \[floor\] was in the right side of the house; and they went up by
winding stairs into the middle \[floor\], and out of the middle into the
third.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And he built the house, and finished it;
and covered the house with beams and boards of cedar.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he built the floors against all the
house, five cubits high; and they held to the house by the timbers of
cedar.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Solomon
saying,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> As to this house which thou art building,
if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and practise mine ordinances, and keep
all my commandments to walk in them, then will I perform my word as to
thee which I spoke unto David thy father;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And Solomon built the house and finished
it.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And he built the walls of the house
within with boards of cedar, from the floor of the house to the walls of
the roof; he overlaid \[them\] on the inside with wood, and overlaid the
floor of the house with boards of cypress.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And he built twenty cubits of the
innermost part of the house, both floor and walls, with boards of cedar;
and he built \[them\] for it within, to \[be\] the oracle, the most holy
place.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And the house, that is, the temple before
it, was forty cubits \[long\].

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And the cedar of the house within was
carved with colocynths and half-open flowers: all was cedar; there was
no stone seen.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And he prepared the oracle in the midst
of the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And the oracle within was twenty cubits
in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height
thereof; and he overlaid it with pure gold; and he overlaid the
cedar-wood altar --

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> and Solomon overlaid the house within
with pure gold, and shut off the oracle in front with chains of gold,
and overlaid it with gold.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the whole house he overlaid with
gold, the whole house entirely; also the whole altar that was by the
oracle he overlaid with gold.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he made in the oracle two cherubim of
olive-wood, ten cubits high;

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> and one wing of the cherub was five
cubits, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub, ten cubits from
the end of one wing to the end of the other wing;

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> and the other cherub was ten cubits: both
the cherubim were of one measure and one form.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> The height of the one cherub was ten
cubits, and so of the other cherub.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And he set the cherubim in the midst of
the inner house; and the wings of the cherubim were stretched forth, so
that the wing of the one touched the wall, and the wing of the other
cherub touched the other wall; and their wings touched, wing to wing, in
the midst of the house.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And he overlaid the cherubim with gold.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And he carved all the walls of the house
round about with carved sculptures of cherubim, and palm-trees, and
half-open flowers, within and without.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the floor of the house he overlaid
with gold, within and without.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And for the entrance of the oracle he
made doors of olive-wood: the lintel \[and\] side posts were the fifth
part \[of the breadth of the house\].

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> The two doors were of olive-wood; and he
carved on them carvings of cherubim, and palm-trees and half-open
flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold on the cherubim
and on the palm-trees.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And he also made for the doorway of the
temple posts of olive-wood, of the fourth part \[of the breadth of the
house\].

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And the two folding-doors were of
cypress-wood: the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two
leaves of the other door were folding.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And he carved on them cherubim, and
palm-trees, and half-open flowers; and overlaid them with gold fitted on
the carved work.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> And he built the inner court of three
rows of hewn stone, and a row of cedar-beams.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> In the fourth year was the foundation of
the house of Jehovah laid, in the month Zif;

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> and in the eleventh year, in the month
Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished in all its parts,
and according to all the fashion of it. So he was seven years in
building it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Solomon was thirteen years building his
own house; and he finished all his house.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And he built the house of the forest of
Lebanon; its length was a hundred cubits, and its breadth fifty cubits,
and its height thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar-pillars, with
cedar-beams upon the pillars;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and it was covered with cedar above upon
the side-chambers, which were on forty-five pillars, fifteen in a row.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And there were cross-beams in three rows,
and window was against window in three ranks.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And all the doors and posts were square,
with an architrave; and window was against window in three ranks.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And he made the porch of pillars; its
length was fifty cubits, and its breadth thirty cubits; and there was a
porch in front of them; and there were pillars, and steps in front of
them.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And he made the porch for the throne where
he judged, the porch of judgment; and it was covered with cedar from
floor to floor.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And his house where he dwelt had another
court within the porch, which was of the like work. And he made, like to
this porch, a house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom Solomon had taken.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> All these \[buildings\] were of costly
stones, hewn stones, according to the measures, sawed with saws, within
and without, even from the foundation to the coping, and on the outside
as far as the great court.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the foundations were of costly
stones, great stones, stones of ten cubits and stones of eight cubits.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And above were costly stones, hewn
stones, according to the measures, and cedar.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the great court round about had three
rows of hewn stones, and a row of cedar-beams; and so it was for the
inner court of the house of Jehovah, and the porch of the house.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram
out of Tyre.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> He was a widow's son of the tribe of
Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass; and he
was full of wisdom and understanding and knowledge, to do all kinds of
works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and made all his work.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And he formed the two pillars of brass;
the height of one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a line of twelve
cubits encompassed the second pillar.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And he made two capitals of molten brass,
to set upon the tops of the pillars; the height of the one capital was
five cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> \[and\] nets of checker-work, wreaths of
chain-work, for the capitals which were upon the top of the pillars;
seven for the one capital and seven for the other capital.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And he made pomegranates, namely two rows
round about upon the one network, to cover the capitals that were upon
the top of the pillars; and so he did for the other capital.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the capitals that were upon the top
of the pillars were of lily-work \[as\] in the porch, four cubits.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And the capitals upon the two pillars,
above also, close to the enlargement which was behind the network, had
two hundred pomegranates in rows round about, \[also\] on the other
capital.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And he set up the pillars for the porch
of the temple; and he set up the right pillar, and called its name
Jachin; and he set up the left pillar, and called its name Boaz.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And upon the top of the pillars was
lily-work; and the work of the pillars was finished.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And he made the sea, molten, ten cubits
from brim to brim, round all about; and its height was five cubits; and
a line of thirty cubits encompassed it round about.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And under the brim of it round about
there were colocynths, encompassing it, ten in a cubit enclosing the sea
round about; two rows of colocynths, cast when it was cast.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking
toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking
toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was
above upon them, and all their hinder parts were inward.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And its thickness was a hand-breadth, and
its brim was like the work of the brim of a cup, with lily-blossoms; it
held two thousand baths.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And he made ten bases of brass: four
cubits was the length of one base, and the breadth four cubits, and the
height three cubits.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And the work of the bases was this: they
had panels, and the panels were between the fillets.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And on the panels that were between the
fillets were lions, oxen and cherubim; and over the fillets there was a
base above; and beneath the lions and oxen were garlands of
festoon-work.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And every base had four wheels of brass,
and axles of brass; and on its four corners were shoulder-pieces: under
the laver were shoulder-pieces molten, behind every garland.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And the mouth of it within the crown and
above was a cubit; and its mouth was rounded, \[as\] the work of the
base, a cubit and a half; and also upon its mouth was sculpture; but
their panels were square, not round.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And the four wheels were under the
panels; and the supports of the wheels were in the base; and the height
of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the work of the wheels was like the
work of a chariot wheel: their supports, and their rims, and their
spokes and their naves were all molten.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And there were four shoulder-pieces to
the four corners of one base; of the base itself were its
shoulder-pieces.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And in the top of the base there was a
circular elevation of half a cubit round about; and on the top of the
base its stays and its panels were of the same.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And he engraved on the plates of its
stays and on its panels cherubim, lions and palm-trees, according to the
space upon each; and garlands were round about.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> After this \[manner\] he made the ten
bases: all of them had one casting, one measure, one form.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> And he made ten lavers of brass: one
laver contained forty baths; every laver was four cubits; upon every one
of the ten bases one laver.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> And he put the bases, five on the right
side of the house, and five on the left side of the house; and he set
the sea on the right side of the house eastward, over against the south.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> And Hiram made the lavers, and the
shovels, and the bowls. So Hiram ended doing all the work that he made
for king Solomon \[for\] the house of Jehovah:

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> two pillars, and the globes of the
capitals that were on the top of the pillars, two; and the two networks,
to cover the two globes of the capitals which were on the top of the
pillars;

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> and the four hundred pomegranates for the
two networks, two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the two
globes of the capitals which were upon the pillars;

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> and the ten bases, and the ten lavers on
the bases;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> and one sea, and the twelve oxen under
the sea;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> and the pots, and the shovels, and the
bowls. And all these things, which Hiram made king Solomon for the house
of Jehovah, were of bright brass.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> In the plain of the Jordan did the king
cast them, in the clay-ground between Succoth and Zaretan.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> And Solomon left all the vessels
\[unweighed\] from their exceeding number; the weight of the brass was
not ascertained.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> And Solomon made all the vessels that
were \[in\] the house of Jehovah: the golden altar; and the table of
gold, whereon was the shewbread;

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> and the candlesticks of pure gold, five
on the right, and five on the left, before the oracle; and the flowers,
and the lamps, and the tongs of gold,

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> and the basons, and the knives, and the
bowls, and the cups, and the censers of pure gold; and the hinges of
gold, for the folding-doors of the inner house, the most holy place,
\[and\] for the doors of the house, of the temple.

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> And all the work was finished that king
Solomon made for the house of Jehovah. And Solomon brought in the things
that David his father had dedicated; the silver and the gold and the
vessels he put among the treasures of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers of
the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the
ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David, which is Zion.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And all the men of Israel assembled
themselves to king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, that is,
the seventh month.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And all the elders of Israel came; and the
priests took up the ark.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And they brought up the ark of Jehovah, and
the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent: the
priests and the Levites brought them up.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And king Solomon, and all the assembly of
Israel that were assembled to him, \[who were\] with him before the ark,
sacrificed sheep and oxen, which could not be counted nor numbered for
multitude.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the priests brought in the ark of the
covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, into the
most holy place, under the wings of the cherubim;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> for the cherubim stretched forth \[their\]
wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and
its staves above.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the staves were long, so that the ends
of the staves were seen from the holy place before the oracle, but they
were not seen without. And there they are to this day.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> There was nothing in the ark save the two
tables of stone which Moses placed there at Horeb, when Jehovah made \[a
covenant\] with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And it came to pass when the priests were
come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and the priests could not stand to do
their service because of the cloud; for the glory of Jehovah had filled
the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then said Solomon: Jehovah said that he
would dwell in the thick darkness.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I have indeed built a house of habitation
for thee, a settled place for thee to abide in for ever.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And the king turned his face, and blessed
the whole congregation of Israel; and the whole congregation of Israel
stood.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he said: Blessed be Jehovah the God
of Israel, who spoke with his mouth unto David my father, and hath with
his hand fulfilled it, saying,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Since the day that I brought forth my
people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of
Israel to build a house in, that my name might be there; but I have
chosen David to be over my people Israel.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And it was in the heart of David my
father to build a house unto the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But Jehovah said to David my father,
Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house unto my name, thou didst
well that it was in thy heart;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> nevertheless thou shalt not build the
house; but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall
build the house unto my name.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jehovah has performed his word which
he spoke; and I am risen up in the room of David my father, and sit on
the throne of Israel, as Jehovah promised, and I have built the house
unto the name of Jehovah the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And I have set there a place for the ark,
wherein is the covenant of Jehovah, which he made with our fathers when
he brought them out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And Solomon stood before the altar of
Jehovah in the presence of the whole congregation of Israel, and spread
forth his hands toward the heavens.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he said, Jehovah, God of Israel!
there is no God like thee, in the heavens above, or on the earth
beneath, who keepest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk
before thee with all their heart;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> who hast kept with thy servant David my
father that which thou didst promise him; thou spokest with thy mouth,
and hast fulfilled \[it\] with thy hand, as at this day.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And now, Jehovah, God of Israel, keep
with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him,
saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne
of Israel, if only thy sons take heed to their way, to walk before me as
thou hast walked before me.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And now, O God of Israel, let thy words,
I pray thee, be verified, which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David
my father.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But will God indeed dwell on the earth?
Behold, the heavens, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee; how
much less this house which I have built!

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Yet have respect unto the prayer of thy
servant, and to his supplication, Jehovah, my God, to hearken unto the
cry and to the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thee this day;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> that thine eyes may be open upon this
house night and day, upon the place of which thou hast said, My name
shall be there: to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth
toward this place.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And hearken unto the supplication of thy
servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this
place, and hear thou in thy dwelling-place, in the heavens, and when
thou hearest, forgive.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> If a man have sinned against his
neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to adjure him, and the oath come
before thine altar in this house;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> then hear thou in the heavens, and do,
and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his
own head; and justifying the righteous, giving him according to his
righteousness.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> When thy people Israel are put to the
worse before the enemy, because they have sinned against thee, and shall
turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray, and make
supplication unto thee in this house;

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> then hear thou in the heavens, and
forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land
that thou gavest unto their fathers.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> When the heavens are shut up, and there
is no rain, because they have sinned against thee; if they pray toward
this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin, because thou
hast afflicted them;

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> then hear thou in the heavens, and
forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou
teachest them the good way wherein they should walk; and give rain upon
thy land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> If there be famine in the land, if there
be pestilence, if there be blight, mildew, locust, caterpillar; if their
enemy besiege them in the land of their gates; whatever plague, whatever
sickness there be:

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> what prayer, what supplication soever be
made by any man, of all thy people Israel, when they shall know every
man the plague of his own heart, and shall spread forth his hands toward
this house;

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> then hear thou in the heavens, the
settled place of thy dwelling, and forgive, and do, and render unto
every man according to all his ways, whose heart thou knowest (for thou,
thou only, knowest the hearts of all the children of men),

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> that they may fear thee all the days that
they live upon the land which thou gavest unto our fathers.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> And as to the stranger also, who is not
of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name's
sake

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> (for they shall hear of thy great name,
and of thy mighty hand, and of thy stretched-out arm); when he shall
come and pray toward this house,

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> hear thou in the heavens thy
dwelling-place, and do according to all that the stranger calleth to
thee for; in order that all peoples of the earth may know thy name,
\[and\] that they may fear thee as do thy people Israel; and that they
may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> If thy people go out to battle against
their enemy, by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray to
Jehovah toward the city that thou hast chosen, and the house that I have
built unto thy name;

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> then hear thou in the heavens their
prayer and their supplication, and maintain their right.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> If they have sinned against thee, (for
there is no man that sinneth not,) and thou be angry with them, and give
them up to the enemy, and they have carried them away captives unto the
enemy's land, far or near;

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> and if they shall take it to heart in the
land whither they were carried captive, and repent, and make
supplication unto thee in the land of them that carried them captive,
saying, We have sinned, and have done iniquity, we have dealt
perversely;

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> and if they return unto thee with all
their heart and with all their soul, in the land of their enemies who
led them away captive, and pray unto thee toward their land which thou
gavest unto their fathers, the city that thou hast chosen, and the house
that I have built unto thy name;

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> then hear thou in the heavens, the
settled place of thy dwelling, their prayer and their supplication, and
maintain their right;

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> and forgive thy people their sin against
thee, and all their transgressions whereby they have transgressed
against thee, and give them to find compassion with those who carried
them captive, that they may have compassion on them

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> (for they are thy people, and thine
inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of
the furnace of iron) --

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> thine eyes being open unto the
supplication of thy servant, and unto the supplication of thy people
Israel, to hearken unto them in all that they call for unto thee.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> For thou hast separated them from among
all peoples of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spokest
through Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of
Egypt, O Lord Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> And it was so, that when Solomon had
ended praying all this prayer and supplication to Jehovah, he arose from
before the altar of Jehovah, from kneeling on his knees with his hands
spread forth to the heavens,

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> and he stood and blessed the whole
congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying,

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Blessed be Jehovah, who has given rest to
his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there has not
failed one word of all his good promises which he spoke through Moses
his servant!

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> Jehovah our God be with us, as he was
with our fathers; let him not forsake us nor cast us off:

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> that he may incline our hearts to him, to
walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and
his ordinances, which he commanded our fathers.

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> And let these my words, with which I have
made supplication before Jehovah, be nigh to Jehovah our God day and
night, that he maintain the right of his servant, and the right of his
people Israel, as the matter of each day shall require;

<span id="an_8:60">8:60</span> that all peoples of the earth may know
that Jehovah is God, that there is none else;

<span id="an_8:61">8:61</span> and that your heart may be perfect with
Jehovah our God, to walk in his statutes and to keep his commandments,
as at this day.

<span id="an_8:62">8:62</span> And the king, and all Israel with him,
offered sacrifices before Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:63">8:63</span> And Solomon sacrificed a sacrifice of
peace-offerings, which he sacrificed to Jehovah, twenty-two thousand
oxen and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the
children of Israel dedicated the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:64">8:64</span> The same day the king hallowed the middle
of the court that was before the house of Jehovah; for there he offered
the burnt-offerings, and the oblations, and the fat of the
peace-offerings, because the brazen altar that was before Jehovah was
too small to receive the burnt-offerings, and the oblations, and the fat
of the peace-offerings.

<span id="an_8:65">8:65</span> And at that time Solomon held the feast,
and all Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entrance of
Hamath unto the torrent of Egypt, before Jehovah our God, seven days and
seven days, fourteen days.

<span id="an_8:66">8:66</span> On the eighth day he sent the people
away; and they blessed the king, and went to their tents, joyful and
glad of heart for all the goodness that Jehovah had done to David his
servant, and to Israel his people.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And it came to pass when Solomon had
completed the building of the house of Jehovah, and the king's house,
and all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that Jehovah appeared to Solomon the second
time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And Jehovah said to him, I have heard thy
prayer and thy supplication which thou hast made before me: I have
hallowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for
ever; and mine eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And \[as for\] thee, if thou wilt walk
before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in
uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, \[and\]
wilt keep my statutes and mine ordinances;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> then will I establish the throne of thy
kingdom over Israel for ever, as I promised to David thy father, saying,
There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> \[But\] if ye shall at all turn from
following me, ye or your children, and will not keep my commandments, my
statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and
worship them;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> then will I cut off Israel out of the land
which I have given them; and the house, which I have hallowed to my
name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a
by word among all peoples;

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and this house, \[which\] is high, every
one that passes by it shall be astonished at, and shall hiss, and they
shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land and to this house?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And they shall say, Because they forsook
Jehovah their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of
Egypt, and have attached themselves to other gods, and have worshipped
them and served them; therefore has Jehovah brought upon them all this
evil.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And it came to pass at the end of twenty
years, when Solomon had built the two houses, the house of Jehovah and
the king's house,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Hiram the king of Tyre having furnished
Solomon with cedar-trees and cypress-trees, and with gold, according to
all his desire, -- that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in
the land of Galilee.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the
cities that Solomon had given him; and they did not please him.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And he said, What cities are these which
thou hast given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul to
this day.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Hiram had sent to the king one
hundred and twenty talents of gold.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And this is the account of the levy which
king Solomon raised, to build the house of Jehovah, and his own house,
and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> -- Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up and
taken Gezer, and burned it with fire, and slain the Canaanites that
dwelt in the city, and given it as a dowry to his daughter, Solomon's
wife.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> -- And Solomon built Gezer, and lower
Beth-horon,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and Baalath, and Tadmor in the
wilderness, in the land,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and all the store-cities that Solomon
had, and cities for chariots, and cities for the horsemen, and that
which Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and on Lebanon, and in all
the land of his dominion.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> All the people that were left of the
Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites,
who were not of the children of Israel,

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> their children that were left after them
in the land, whom the children of Israel were not able utterly to
destroy, upon them did Solomon impose a tribute of bondservice until
this day.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon
make no bondmen; but they were men of war, and his servants, and his
chiefs, and his captains, and captains of his chariots, and his
horsemen.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> These were the chief superintendents that
were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, that ruled over the
people that wrought in the work.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the
city of David to her house which he had built for her: then he built
Millo.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And three times in the year did Solomon
offer up burnt-offerings and peace-offerings upon the altar that he had
built to Jehovah, and he burned incense upon that which was before
Jehovah. So he finished the house.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And king Solomon made a fleet of ships in
Ezion-Geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the
land of Edom.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Hiram sent in the fleet his servants,
shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> and they went to Ophir, and fetched
thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king
Solomon.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And the queen of Sheba heard of the fame
of Solomon in connection with the name of Jehovah, and came to prove him
with enigmas.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And she came to Jerusalem with a very
great train, with camels that bore spices and gold in very great
abundance, and precious stones; and she came to Solomon, and spoke to
him of all that was in her heart.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Solomon explained to her all she
spoke of: there was not a thing hidden from the king that he did not
explain to her.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when the queen of Sheba saw all
Solomon's wisdom, and the house that he had built,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and the food of his table, and the
deportment of his servants, and the order of service of his attendants,
and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went
up to the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And she said to the king, It was a true
report that I heard in mine own land of thine affairs, and of thy
wisdom;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> but I gave no credit to the words, until
I came and mine eyes had seen; and behold, the half was not told me: in
wisdom and prosperity thou exceedest the report that I heard.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Happy are thy men! happy are these thy
servants, who stand continually before thee, who hear thy wisdom!

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted
in thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel! Because Jehovah loves
Israel for ever, therefore did he make thee king, to do judgment and
justice.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And she gave the king a hundred and
twenty talents of gold, and spices in very great abundance, and precious
stones: there came no more such abundance of spices as those which the
queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> (And the fleet also of Hiram, which
carried gold from Ophir, brought from Ophir sandal-wood in very great
abundance, and precious stones.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the king made of the sandal-wood a
balustrade for the house of Jehovah, and for the king's house, and harps
and lutes for the singers. There came no such sandal-wood, nor was there
seen to this day.)

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And king Solomon gave to the queen of
Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides what he gave her of
the bounty of king Solomon. And she turned and went to her own land, she
and her servants.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> besides what \[came\] by the dealers,
and by the traffic of the merchants, and by all the kings of Arabia, and
by the governors of the country.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And king Solomon made two hundred
targets of beaten gold, -- he applied six hundred \[shekels\] of gold to
one target;

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> and three hundred shields of beaten
gold, -- he applied three minas of gold to one shield; and the king put
them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the king made a great throne of
ivory, and overlaid it with refined gold:

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> the throne had six steps, and the top
of the throne was rounded behind; and there were arms on each side at
the place of the seat, and two lions stood beside the arms;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> and twelve lions stood there on the one
side and on the other upon the six steps: there was not the like made in
any kingdom.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And all king Solomon's drinking vessels
were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon
were of precious gold: none were of silver, \[which\] was not of the
least account in the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For the king had on the sea a
Tarshish-fleet, with the fleet of Hiram: once in three years came the
Tarshish-fleet, bringing gold and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And king Solomon was greater than all
the kings of the earth in riches and in wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And all the earth sought the presence
of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And they brought every man his present,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and clothing, and armour, and
spices, horses and mules, a rate year by year.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Solomon gathered chariots and
horsemen; and he had a thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve
thousand horsemen; and he placed them in the chariot-cities, and with
the king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And the king made silver in Jerusalem
as stones, and cedars made he as the sycamores that are in the lowland
for abundance.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And the exportation of horses that
Solomon had was from Egypt: a caravan of the king's merchants fetched a
drove \[of horses\], at a price.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And a chariot came up and went out of
Egypt for six hundred \[shekels\] of silver, and a horse for a hundred
and fifty; and so they brought \[them\] by their means, for all the
kings of the Hittites and for the kings of Syria.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> But king Solomon loved many foreign
women, besides the daughter of Pharaoh: women of the Moabites,
Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, Hittites;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> of the nations of which Jehovah had said
to the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall
they come in to you; they would certainly turn away your heart after
their gods: to these Solomon was attached in love.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And he had seven hundred wives,
princesses, and three hundred concubines; and his wives turned away his
heart.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And it came to pass when Solomon was old,
\[that\] his wives turned away his heart after other gods; and his heart
was not perfect with Jehovah his God, as the heart of David his father.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And Solomon went after Ashtoreth the
goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the
Ammonites.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And Solomon did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, and followed not fully Jehovah, as David his father.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then did Solomon build a high place for
Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, on the hill that is before
Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And so he did for all his foreign wives,
who burned incense and sacrificed to their gods.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And Jehovah was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned away from Jehovah the God of Israel, who
had appeared to him twice,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and had commanded him concerning this
thing, not to go after other gods; but he kept not what Jehovah had
commanded.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Jehovah said to Solomon, Forasmuch
as this is done by thee, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my
statutes which I commanded thee, I will certainly rend the kingdom from
thee, and will give it to thy servant:

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> notwithstanding in thy days I will not
do it, for David thy father's sake; I will rend it out of the hand of
thy son;

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> only, I will not rend away all the
kingdom: I will give one tribe to thy son, for David my servant's sake,
and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Jehovah stirred up an adversary to
Solomon, Hadad the Edomite; he was of the king's seed in Edom.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Now it came to pass when David was in
Edom, when Joab the captain of the host had gone up to bury the slain,
after he had smitten every male in Edom

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> (for Joab abode there six months with
all Israel, until he had cut off every male in Edom),

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> that Hadad fled, he and certain
Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt, Hadad
being yet a little child.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And they arose out of Midian, and came
to Paran, and took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt,
to Pharaoh king of Egypt; who gave him a house, and appointed him
victuals, and gave him land.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And Hadad found great favour in the
sight of Pharaoh, and he gave him as wife the sister of his own wife,
the sister of Tahpenes the queen.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And the sister of Tahpenes bore him
Genubath his son; and Tahpenes brought him up in Pharaoh's house; and
Genubath was in Pharaoh's household, among the sons of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Hadad heard in Egypt that David
slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was dead;
and Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I may go to mine own
country.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Pharaoh said to him, What then dost
thou lack with me, that behold, thou desirest to go to thine own
country? And he said, Nothing; but in any case let me depart.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> God stirred him up yet an adversary,
Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from Hadadezer king of Zobah, his
lord.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And he collected men to him, and became
captain of a band, when David slew them \[of Zobah\]; and they went to
Damascus, and dwelt there, and reigned in Damascus.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And he was an adversary to Israel all
the days of Solomon, besides the mischief that Hadad \[did\]; and he
abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an
Ephrathite of Zeredah, Solomon's servant (whose mother's name was
Zeruah, a widow woman), even he lifted up his hand against the king.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And this was the cause that he lifted
up his hand against the king: Solomon was building Millo, and closing
the breach of the city of David his father;

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and the man Jeroboam was strong and
valiant; and Solomon saw the young man that he was industrious, and he
made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And it came to pass at that time that
Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, and the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite
found him in the way; and he had clad himself with a new garment; and
they two were alone in the field.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Then Ahijah seized the new garment that
was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> and said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten
pieces; for thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: Behold, I will rend
the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to
thee;

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> but one tribe shall he have for my
servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel:

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> because they have forsaken me, and have
worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of
the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not
walked in my ways, to do that which is right in my sight, and my
statutes and mine ordinances, as David his father.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> But I will not take the whole kingdom
out of his hand; for I will make him prince all the days of his life for
David my servant's sake, whom I chose, who kept my commandments and my
statutes;

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> but I will take the kingdom out of his
son's hand, and will give it unto thee, -- the ten tribes.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And unto his son will I give one tribe,
that David my servant may have a lamp always before me in Jerusalem, the
city that I have chosen for myself to put my name there.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And I will take thee, that thou mayest
reign over all that thy soul desireth, and thou shalt be king over
Israel.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken
unto all that I command thee, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that
which is right in my sight, in keeping my statutes and my commandments,
as David my servant did, that I will be with thee, and build thee a
lasting house, as I built for David, and will give Israel unto thee.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And I will for this afflict the seed of
David, but not for ever.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> And Solomon sought to kill Jeroboam;
and Jeroboam arose and fled into Egypt, to Shishak king of Egypt; and he
was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> And the rest of the acts of Solomon,
and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of
the acts of Solomon?

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> And the time that Solomon reigned in
Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> And Solomon slept with his fathers, and
was buried in the city of David his father; and Rehoboam his son reigned
in his stead.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Rehoboam went to Shechem; for all
Israel had come to Shechem to make him king.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And it came to pass when Jeroboam the son
of Nebat heard it (now he was yet in Egypt, whither he had fled from the
presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and they sent and called him), that
Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came and spoke to Rehoboam,
saying,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Thy father made our yoke grievous; and
now lighten thou the grievous servitude of thy father and his heavy yoke
that he put upon us, and we will serve thee.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And he said to them, Depart yet for three
days, then come again to me. And the people departed.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And king Rehoboam consulted with the old
men, who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying,
How do ye advise to return answer to this people?

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And they spoke to him saying, If this day
thou wilt be a servant to this people, and wilt serve them and answer
them and speak good words to them, they will be thy servants for ever.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But he forsook the advice of the old men
which they had given him, and consulted with the young men, who had
grown up with him, that stood before him.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said to them, What advice give ye
that we may return answer to this people who have spoken to me saying,
Lighten the yoke which thy father put upon us?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And the young men that had grown up
with him spoke to him saying, Thus shalt thou say to this people that
have spoken to thee saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, and lighten
thou it for us, -- thus shalt thou say to them: My little \[finger\] is
thicker than my father's loins;

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and whereas my father laid a heavy yoke
upon you, \*I\* will add to your yoke: my father chastised you with
whips, but \*I\* will chastise you with scorpions.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Jeroboam and all the people came to
Rehoboam the third day, as the king had appointed saying, Come again to
me on the third day.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the king answered the people
roughly, and forsook the advice of the old men which they had given him;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> and he spoke to them according to the
advice of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but
\*I\* will add to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but
\*I\* will chastise you with scorpions.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> So the king hearkened not to the
people; for it was brought about by Jehovah, that he might give effect
to his word, which Jehovah spoke through Ahijah the Shilonite to
Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And all Israel saw that the king
hearkened not to them; and the people answered the king saying, What
portion have we in David? And \[we have\] no inheritance in the son of
Jesse: To your tents, O Israel! Now see to thine own house, David! And
Israel went to their tents.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But as for the children of Israel that
dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was
over the levy; but all Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. And
king Rehoboam hastened to mount his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And Israel rebelled against the house
of David, unto this day.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And it came to pass when all Israel
heard that Jeroboam had come back, that they sent and called him to the
assembly, and made him king over all Israel: none followed the house of
David, but the tribe of Judah only.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And Rehoboam came to Jerusalem; and he
assembled all the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred
and eighty thousand chosen men apt for war, to fight against the house
of Israel, that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of
Solomon.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But the word of God came to Shemaiah
the man of God, saying,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of
Solomon, king of Judah, and unto all the house of Judah and Benjamin,
and to the remainder of the people, saying,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Go not up, nor
fight with your brethren, the children of Israel; return every man to
his house, for this thing is from me. And they hearkened to the word of
Jehovah, and returned to depart, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Jeroboam built Shechem in mount
Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and went out from thence, and built Penuel.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now
shall the kingdom return to the house of David.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> If this people go up to do sacrifice in
the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, the heart of this people will turn
again to their lord, to Rehoboam king of Judah, and they will kill me,
and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the king took counsel, and made two
calves of gold. And he said to them, It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem: behold thy gods, Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt!

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And he set the one in Bethel, and the
other he put in Dan.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And this thing became a sin; and the
people went \[to worship\] before the one, as far as Dan.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he made a house of high places, and
made priests from all classes of the people, who were not of the sons of
Levi.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the
eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast that was
in Judah, and he offered upon the altar. So did he in Bethel,
sacrificing to the calves that he had made; and he placed in Bethel the
priests of the high places that he had made.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And he offered upon the altar that he
had made in Bethel, on the fifteenth day of the eighth month, in the
month which he had devised of his own heart; and he made a feast for the
children of Israel, and he offered upon the altar, burning incense.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And behold, there came a man of God from
Judah, by the word of Jehovah, to Bethel; and Jeroboam stood by the
altar to burn incense.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And he cried against the altar by the
word of Jehovah, and said, O altar, altar! thus saith Jehovah: Behold, a
child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon
thee shall he sacrifice the priests of the high places that burn incense
upon thee, and men's bones shall be burned upon thee.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he gave a sign the same day, saying,
This is the sign that Jehovah hath spoken: Behold, the altar shall be
rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And it came to pass when the king heard
the word of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in Bethel,
that Jeroboam stretched forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold
on him. And his hand which he stretched out against him dried up, so
that he could not bring it back again to him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And the altar was rent, and the ashes
poured out from the altar, according to the sign that the man of God had
given by the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And the king answered and said to the man
of God, Intreat now Jehovah thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may
be restored to me again. And the man of God intreated Jehovah, and the
king's hand was restored to him again, and became as before.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And the king said to the man of God, Come
home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a present.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And the man of God said to the king, If
thou wilt give me half thy house, I will not go in with thee, neither
will I eat bread nor drink water in this place;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for so was it charged me by the word of
Jehovah, saying, Thou shalt eat no bread, nor drink water, nor return by
the way that thou shalt go.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So he went another way, and returned
not by the way that he had come to Bethel.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Now there dwelt a certain old prophet
in Bethel; and his sons came and told him all the works that the man of
God had done that day in Bethel; the words that he had spoken to the
king, them they told also to their father.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And their father said to them, Which
way went he? for his sons had seen which way the man of God went, who
came from Judah.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And he said to his sons, Saddle me the
ass. So they saddled him the ass; and he rode thereon,

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> and went after the man of God, and
found him sitting under a terebinth; and he said to him, Art thou the
man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And he said to him, Come home with me,
and eat bread.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he said, I cannot return with thee,
nor go in with thee; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee
in this place.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For it was said to me by the word of
Jehovah, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again
to go by the way that thou wentest.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And he said to him, I am a prophet also
as thou art; and an angel spoke to me by the word of Jehovah saying,
Bring him back with thee into thy house, that he may eat bread and drink
water. He lied unto him.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Then he went back with him, and ate
bread in his house, and drank water.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And it came to pass as they sat at the
table, that the word of Jehovah came to the prophet that brought him
back;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and he cried to the man of God that
came from Judah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah: Forasmuch as thou hast
disobeyed the word of Jehovah, and hast not kept the commandment that
Jehovah thy God commanded thee,

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> but camest back, and hast eaten bread
and drunk water in the place of which he said to thee, Eat no bread and
drink no water; thy carcase shall not come to the sepulchre of thy
fathers.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And it came to pass, after he had eaten
bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled the ass for him, for the
prophet that he had brought back;

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> and he departed. And a lion met him by
the way and slew him; and his corpse was cast in the way, and the ass
stood by it; the lion also stood by the corpse.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And behold, men passed by, and saw the
corpse cast in the way and the lion standing by the corpse; and they
came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And the prophet that brought him back
from the way heard \[of it\] and said, It is the man of God who was
disobedient to the word of Jehovah; therefore Jehovah has delivered him
to the lion, which has torn him and slain him, according to the word of
Jehovah which he spoke to him.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And he spoke to his sons saying, Saddle
me the ass; and they saddled it.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he went and found his corpse cast
in the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the corpse: the lion
had not eaten the corpse, nor torn the ass.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And the prophet took up the corpse of
the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back; and the
old prophet came into the city, to mourn and to bury him.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And he laid his corpse in his own
sepulchre; and they mourned over him \[saying\], Alas, my brother!

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And it came to pass after he had buried
him, that he spoke to his sons saying, When I am dead, bury me in the
sepulchre in which the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his
bones.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> For the word that he cried by the word
of Jehovah against the altar in Bethel, and against all the houses of
the high places that are in the cities of Samaria, shall certainly come
to pass.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> After this thing Jeroboam turned not
from his evil way, but made again from all classes of the people priests
of the high places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became
\[one\] of the priests of the high places.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And by this thing there was sin on the
house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off and to destroy it from off the
face of the earth.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam
was sick.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I
pray thee, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife
of Jeroboam; and go to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, who
told me that \[I should be\] king over this people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And take with thee ten loaves, and cakes,
and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he will tell thee what shall become
of the lad.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose and
went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. And Ahijah could not
see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And Jehovah said to Ahijah, Behold, the
wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask a thing of thee about her son; for he is
sick: thus and thus shalt thou say unto her; for it shall be, when she
cometh in, that she shall feign to be another.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And it was so, when Ahijah heard the
sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in,
thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou to be another? But I am sent to
thee with a hard \[message\].

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go, tell Jeroboam, Thus saith Jehovah the
God of Israel: Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and
made thee prince over my people Israel,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and rent the kingdom away from the house
of David, and gave it thee; and thou hast not been as my servant David,
who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart, to do
only that which is right in my sight;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> but thou hast done evil above all that
were before thee, and hast gone and made thee other gods, and molten
images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me behind thy back:

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> therefore behold, I will bring evil
upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam every male,
him that is shut up and left in Israel, and will take away the house of
Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, till it be all gone.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city
shall the dogs eat, and him that dieth in the field shall the fowl of
the heavens eat; for Jehovah hath spoken.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And thou, arise, go to thine own house;
when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And all Israel shall mourn for him, and
they shall bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave,
because in him there is found something good toward Jehovah the God of
Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Jehovah shall raise up for himself
a king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day;
and what? ... even now.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And Jehovah will smite Israel, as a
reed is shaken in the water, and he will root up Israel out of this good
land which he gave to their fathers, and will scatter them beyond the
river, because they have made their Asherahs, provoking Jehovah to
anger.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he will give Israel up because of
the sins of Jeroboam, wherewith he has sinned, and made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And Jeroboam's wife arose and departed,
and came to Tirzah; when she came to the threshold of the door, the
child died.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And they buried him; and all Israel
mourned for him, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke
through his servant Ahijah the prophet.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,
how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And the days that Jeroboam reigned were
twenty-two years; and he slept with his fathers. And Nadab his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned
in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city that Jehovah had
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there; and his
mother's name was Naamah, an Ammonitess.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And Judah did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they
committed more than all that their fathers had done.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And they also built for themselves high
places, and columns, and Asherahs on every high hill and under every
green tree;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and there were also sodomites in the
land. They did according to all the abominations of the nations that
Jehovah had dispossessed before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And it came to pass in the fifth year
of king Rehoboam, \[that\] Shishak king of Egypt came up against
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And he took away the treasures of the
house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took
away all; and he took away all the shields of gold that Solomon had
made.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And king Rehoboam made in their stead
brazen shields, and committed them to the hands of the chief of the
couriers who kept the entrance of the king's house.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And it was so, that as often as the
king entered into the house of Jehovah, the couriers bore them, and
brought them again into the chamber of the couriers.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And the rest of the acts of Rehoboam,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And there was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all \[their\] days.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And Rehoboam slept with his fathers,
and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother's
name was Naamah, an Ammonitess. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And in the eighteenth year of king
Jeroboam the son of Nebat began Abijam to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> He reigned three years in Jerusalem; and
his mother's name was Maachah, a daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And he walked in all the sins of his
father, which he had done before him; and his heart was not perfect with
Jehovah his God, as the heart of David his father.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> But for David's sake Jehovah his God gave
him a lamp in Jerusalem, setting up his son after him, and establishing
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> because David did that which was right in
the sight of Jehovah, and turned not aside from anything that he
commanded him all the days of his life, except in the matter of Urijah
the Hittite.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And there had been war between Rehoboam
and Jeroboam all the days of his life.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And the rest of the acts of Abijam, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And Abijam slept with his fathers; and
they buried him in the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his
stead.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam
king of Israel, Asa began to reign over Judah;

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> and he reigned forty-one years in
Jerusalem; and his mother's name was Maachah, daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And Asa did what was right in the sight
of Jehovah, as David his father.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And he put away the sodomites out of
the land, and removed all the idols that his father had made.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And also Maachah his mother he removed
from being queen, because she had made an idol for the Asherah; and Asa
cut down her idol, and burned it in the valley of Kidron.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But the high places were not removed;
only, Asa's heart was perfect with Jehovah all his days.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And he brought into the house of
Jehovah the things which his father had dedicated, and the things which
he himself had dedicated, silver and gold and vessels.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And there was war between Asa and
Baasha king of Israel all their days.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Baasha king of Israel came up
against Judah, and built Ramah, in order to let none go out or come in
to Asa king of Judah.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And Asa took all the silver and the
gold that were left in the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and in the
treasures of the king's house, and gave them into the hand of his
servants; and king Asa sent them to Ben-Hadad, the son of Tabrimmon, the
son of Hezion, king of Syria, who dwelt at Damascus, saying,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> There is a league between me and thee,
\[as\] between my father and thy father; behold, I send thee a present
of silver and gold: go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel,
that he may depart from me.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Ben-Hadad hearkened to king Asa,
and sent the captains of his forces against the cities of Israel, and
smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-Beth-Maachah, and all Kinneroth, with all
the land of Naphtali.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And it came to pass when Baasha heard
of it, that he left off building Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And king Asa called together all Judah:
none was exempted; and they carried away the stones and the timber from
Ramah, with which Baasha had been building; and king Asa built with them
Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And the rest of all the acts of Asa,
and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities that he built,
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah? Only, in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And Asa slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Jehoshaphat
his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to
reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah; and he
reigned over Israel two years.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin with which
he made Israel sin.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the
house of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasha smote him at
Gibbethon, which \[belonged\] to the Philistines, when Nadab and all
Israel were besieging Gibbethon.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And Baasha slew him in the third year
of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And it came to pass when he was king,
he smote all the house of Jeroboam; he left to Jeroboam none that
breathed; until he had destroyed him, according to the word of Jehovah
which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite,

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> because of the sins of Jeroboam which
he sinned, and wherewith he made Israel to sin; by his provocation with
which he provoked Jehovah the God of Israel to anger.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And the rest of the acts of Nadab, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And there was war between Asa and
Baasha king of Israel all their days.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> In the third year of Asa king of Judah
began Baasha the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, for
twenty-four years.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin where with he
made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Jehu the
son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the
dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel, and thou hast walked
in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, provoking
me to anger with their sins;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> behold, I will take away Baasha and his
house, and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Him that dieth of Baasha in the city
shall the dogs eat, and him that dieth of his in the field shall the
fowl of the heavens eat.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the rest of the acts of Baasha, and
what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Baasha slept with his fathers, and
was buried in Tirzah; and Elah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And also through the prophet Jehu the son
of Hanani the word of Jehovah came against Baasha, and against his
house, even for all the evil that he did in the sight of Jehovah,
provoking him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the
house of Jeroboam; and because he had smitten him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of
Judah, Elah the son of Baasha began to reign over Israel in Tirzah for
two years.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And his servant Zimri, captain of half
\[his\] chariots, conspired against him; and he was in Tirzah, drinking
himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was the steward of his house in
Tirzah;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and Zimri went in and smote him, and
killed him, in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and he
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And it came to pass when he began to
reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, he slew all the house of Baasha:
he left him not a male, neither of his kinsmen nor of his friends.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And Zimri destroyed all the house of
Baasha, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke against Baasha
through Jehu the prophet,

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> for all the sins of Baasha, and the
sins of Elah his son, which they sinned and wherewith they made Israel
to sin, provoking Jehovah the God of Israel to anger with their
vanities.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And the rest of the acts of Elah, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king
of Judah, Zimri reigned seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were
encamped against Gibbethon, which \[belonged\] to the Philistines.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And the people that were encamped heard
say, Zimri has conspired, and has also smitten the king; and all Israel
made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the
camp.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and
all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And it came to pass when Zimri saw that
the city was taken, that he went into the citadel of the king's house,
and burned the king's house over him with fire;

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> and he died for his sins which he
sinned in doing evil in the sight of Jehovah, in walking in the way of
Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, making Israel to sin.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And the rest of the acts of Zimri, and
his conspiracy which he wrought, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Then were the people of Israel divided
into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But the people that followed Omri
overcame the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginath; and Tibni
died, and Omri reigned.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> In the thirty-first year of Asa king of
Judah, Omri began to reign over Israel, -- twelve years; he reigned six
years in Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And he bought the hill Samaria of
Shemer for two talents of silver; and built on the hill, and called the
name of the city that he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the
hill, Samaria.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Omri wrought evil in the sight of
Jehovah, and did worse than all that were before him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And he walked in all the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sins wherewith he made Israel to
sin, provoking Jehovah the God of Israel to anger with their vanities.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the rest of the acts of Omri, what
he did, and his might which he shewed, are they not written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And Omri slept with his fathers, and
was buried in Samaria; and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And Ahab the son of Omri began to reign
over Israel in the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah; and Ahab the
son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty-two years.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And Ahab the son of Omri wrought evil
in the sight of Jehovah more than all that were before him.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And it came to pass, as if it was a
light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
that he took as wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the
Zidonians; and he went and served Baal and worshipped him.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And he reared up an altar for Baal in
the house of Baal, which he built in Samaria.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Ahab made the Asherah; and Ahab did
more to provoke Jehovah the God of Israel to anger than all the kings of
Israel that were before him.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> In his days Hiel the Bethelite built
Jericho; he laid its foundation in Abiram his firstborn, and set up its
gates in Segub his youngest, according to the word of Jehovah which he
spoke through Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And Elijah the Tishbite, of the
inhabitants of Gilead, said to Ahab, As Jehovah the God of Israel
liveth, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these
years, except by my word.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And the word of Jehovah came to him
saying,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward,
and hide thyself by the torrent Cherith, which is before the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of
the torrent; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And he went and did according to the word
of Jehovah; he went and abode by the torrent Cherith, which is before
the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the ravens brought him bread and
flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank
of the torrent.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And it came to pass after a while that
the torrent dried up, for there had been no rain in the land.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And the word of Jehovah came to him
saying,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Arise, go to Zarephath, which is by
Zidon, and abide there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to
maintain thee.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And he arose and went to Zarephath; and
when he came to the entrance of the city, behold, a widow woman was
there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, Fetch me, I pray
thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And she went to fetch \[it\], and he
called to her and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy
hand.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And she said, As Jehovah thy God
liveth, I have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a
little oil in a cruse; and behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may
go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Elijah said to her, Fear not; go,
do as thou hast said; but make me thereof a little cake first; and bring
it to me; and afterwards make for thee and for thy son.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> For thus saith Jehovah the God of
Israel: The meal in the barrel shall not waste, neither shall the oil in
the cruse fail, until the day that Jehovah sendeth rain upon the face of
the earth!

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And she went and did according to the
word of Elijah; and she, and he, and her house, ate a whole year.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> The meal in the barrel did not waste,
neither did the oil in the cruse fail, according to the word of Jehovah
which he had spoken through Elijah.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And it came to pass after these things,
that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his
sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And she said to Elijah, What have I to
do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come to me to call mine
iniquity to remembrance, and to slay my son?

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And he said to her, Give me thy son.
And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the upper
chamber where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And he cried to Jehovah and said,
Jehovah, my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I
sojourn, by slaying her son?

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And he stretched himself upon the child
three times, and cried to Jehovah and said, Jehovah, my God, I pray
thee, let this child's soul come into him again!

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And Jehovah heard the voice of Elijah,
and the soul of the child came into him again, and he lived.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And Elijah took the child, and brought
him down from the upper chamber into the house, and delivered him to his
mother; and Elijah said, See, thy son lives.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And the woman said to Elijah, Now by
this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in
thy mouth is truth.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And it came to pass after many days, that
the word of Jehovah came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew
thyself to Ahab; and I will send rain upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Elijah went to shew himself to Ahab.
And the famine was severe in Samaria.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And Ahab called Obadiah, who was the
steward of his house (now Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly;

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> and it was so, when Jezebel cut off the
prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them
by fifty in a cave, and maintained them with bread and water);

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> and Ahab said to Obadiah, Go through the
land, to all the fountains of water and to all the torrents, perhaps we
may find grass to save the horses and the mules alive, so that we may
not have to destroy some of \[our\] beasts.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And they divided the land between them to
pass through it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another
way by himself.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And as Obadiah was on the way, behold,
Elijah met him; and he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Is it
indeed thou, my lord Elijah?

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And he said to him, I \[am he\]: go, say
to thy lord, Behold Elijah!

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And he said, What have I sinned, that
thou givest thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to put me to death?

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> As Jehovah thy God liveth, there is no
nation or kingdom whither my lord has not sent to seek thee; and when
they said, He is not \[here\], he took an oath of the kingdom or nation
that they found thee not.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And now thou sayest, Go, say to thy
lord, Behold Elijah!

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And it shall come to pass when I am
gone from thee, that the Spirit of Jehovah shall carry thee whither I
know not; and when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he
will kill me; and I thy servant fear Jehovah from my youth.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Was it not told my lord what I did when
Jezebel slew the prophets of Jehovah, how I hid a hundred men of
Jehovah's prophets by fifty in a cave, and maintained them with bread
and water?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And now thou sayest, Go, say to thy
lord, Behold Elijah! and he will kill me.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Elijah said, As Jehovah of hosts
liveth, before whom I stand, I will certainly shew myself to him to-day.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Then Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and
told him. And Ahab went to meet Elijah.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And it came to pass when Ahab saw
Elijah, that Ahab said to him, Is it thou, the troubler of Israel?

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And he said, I have not troubled
Israel, but thou and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the
commandments of Jehovah, and thou hast followed the Baals.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And now send, gather to me all Israel
to mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and
the prophets of the Asherah four hundred, who eat at Jezebel's table.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> So Ahab sent to all the children of
Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then Elijah drew near to all the
people, and said, How long do ye halt between two opinions? if Jehovah
be God, follow him; and if Baal, follow him. And the people answered him
not a word.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And Elijah said to the people, I, only
I, remain a prophet of Jehovah; and Baal's prophets are four hundred and
fifty men.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Let them therefore give us two
bullocks: and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in
pieces, and put it on the wood, and put no fire; and I will sacrifice
the other bullock, and put it on the wood, and put no fire.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And call ye on the name of your gods,
and I will call on the name of Jehovah; and the god that answers by
fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, The word is
good.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Elijah said to the prophets of
Baal, Choose one bullock for yourselves, and sacrifice it first; for ye
are the many; and call on the name of your god, but put no fire.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they took the bullock which had
been given them, and sacrificed it, and called on the name of Baal from
morning until noon, saying, O Baal, answer us! But there was no voice,
and none answered. And they leaped about the altar that had been made.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And it came to pass at noon that Elijah
mocked them and said, Cry aloud; for he is a god; for he is meditating,
or gone aside, or he is on a journey; perhaps he sleeps, and will awake.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And they cried aloud, and cut
themselves after their manner with swords and spears, till the blood
gushed out upon them.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And it came to pass when midday was
past, that they prophesied until the \[time\] of the offering up of the
oblation; but there was neither voice, nor any that answered, nor any
attention.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Then Elijah said to all the people,
Draw near to me. And all the people drew near to him. And he repaired
the altar of Jehovah which was broken down.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And Elijah took twelve stones,
according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the
word of Jehovah came saying, Israel shall be thy name;

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> and with the stones he built an altar
in the name of Jehovah, and made a trench round about the altar, of the
capacity of two measures of seed;

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> and he put the wood in order, and cut
the bullock in pieces, and laid it on the wood. And he said, Fill four
pitchers with water, and pour it on the burnt-offering, and on the wood.

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And he said, Do it the second time. And
they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And they
did it the third time.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> And the water ran round about the
altar; and he filled the trench also with water.

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> And it came to pass at \[the time of\]
the offering up of the oblation, that Elijah the prophet drew near, and
said, Jehovah, God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, let it be known this
day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I
have done all these things by thy word.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Answer me, Jehovah, answer me, that
this people may know that thou Jehovah art God, and \[that\] \*thou\*
hast turned their heart back again.

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> And the fire of Jehovah fell, and
consumed the burnt-offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust,
and licked up the water that was in the trench.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> And all the people saw \[it\], and they
fell on their faces and said, Jehovah, he is God! Jehovah, he is God!

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> And Elijah said to them, Seize the
prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape! And they seized them; and
Elijah brought them down to the torrent of Kishon, and slaughtered them
there.

<span id="an_18:41">18:41</span> And Elijah said to Ahab, Go up, eat and
drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain.

<span id="an_18:42">18:42</span> And Ahab went up to eat and to drink.
And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he bowed down on the earth,
and put his face between his knees.

<span id="an_18:43">18:43</span> And he said to his servant, Go up now,
look toward the sea. And he went up and looked, and said, \[There is\]
nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.

<span id="an_18:44">18:44</span> And it came to pass at the seventh time
that he said, Behold there is a cloud, small as a man's hand, arising
out of the sea. And he said, Go up, say to Ahab, Harness and go down,
that the pour of rain stop thee not.

<span id="an_18:45">18:45</span> And it came to pass in the mean while,
that the heavens became black \[with\] clouds and wind, and there was a
great pour of rain. And Ahab got on the chariot, and went to Jizreel.

<span id="an_18:46">18:46</span> And the hand of Jehovah was upon
Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance
of Jizreel.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had
done, and in detail how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah
saying, So do the gods \[to me\], and more also, if I make not thy life
as the life of one of them by to-morrow about this time!

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And when he saw \[that\], he arose, and
went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongs to Judah, and
left his servant there.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And he himself went a day's journey into
the wilderness, and came and sat down under a certain broom-bush, and
requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough: now,
Jehovah, take my life; for I am not better than my fathers.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And he lay down and slept under the
broom-bush. And behold, an angel touched him, and said to him, Arise,
eat!

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And he looked, and behold, at his head
was a cake, baked on hot stones, and a cruse of water. And he ate and
drank, and lay down again.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the angel of Jehovah came again the
second time, and touched him, and said, Arise, eat; for the journey is
too great for thee.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And he arose, and ate and drank, and went
in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the
mount of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And there he went into a cave, and lodged
there. And behold, the word of Jehovah \[came\] to him, and he said to
him, What doest thou here, Elijah?

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And he said, I have been very jealous
for Jehovah the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken
thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I am left, I alone, and they seek my life, to take it away.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And he said, Go forth, and stand upon
the mount before Jehovah. And behold, Jehovah passed by, and a great and
strong wind rent the mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before
Jehovah: Jehovah was not in the wind. And after the wind, an earthquake:
Jehovah was not in the earthquake.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And after the earthquake, a fire:
Jehovah was not in the fire. And after the fire, a soft gentle voice.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And it came to pass, when Elijah heard
it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in
the entrance of the cave. And behold, a voice \[came\] to him and said,
What doest thou here, Elijah?

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And he said, I have been very jealous
for Jehovah the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken
thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the
sword; and I am left, I alone, and they seek my life, to take it away.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Jehovah said to him, Go, return on
thy way to the wilderness of Damascus; and when thou comest, anoint
Hazael king over Syria;

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou
anoint king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah
shalt thou anoint prophet in thy stead.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And it shall come to pass, \[that\] him
that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that escapeth
the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Yet I have left \[myself\] seven
thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and
every mouth that hath not kissed him.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And he departed thence, and found
Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was ploughing \[with\] twelve yokes
before him, and he with the twelfth; and Elijah went over to him, and
cast his mantle on him.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And he left the oxen, and ran after
Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and
I will follow thee. And he said to him, Go back again; for what have I
done to thee?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he returned back from him, and took
the yoke of oxen, and killed them, and boiled their flesh with the
implements of the oxen, and gave to the people, and they ate. And he
arose and went after Elijah, and ministered to him.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And Ben-Hadad king of Syria assembled all
his host; and there were thirty-two kings with him, and horses and
chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought against it.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he sent messengers to Ahab king of
Israel into the city, and said to him, Thus says Ben-Hadad:

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy
wives also and thy children, the goodliest, are mine.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And the king of Israel answered and said,
My lord, O king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I
have.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And the messengers came again, and said,
Thus speaks Ben-Hadad saying: I sent to thee indeed, saying, Thou shalt
deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> but to-morrow about this time I will send
my servants to thee, and they shall search thy house, and the houses of
thy servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thy sight,
they shall put in their hand and take away.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And the king of Israel called all the
elders of the land and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this \[man\]
seeks mischief; for he sent to me for my wives, and for my children, and
for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And all the elders and all the people
said to him, Hearken not, nor consent.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And he said to the messengers of
Ben-Hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou didst send for to thy
servant at the first I will do; but this thing I cannot do. And the
messengers departed, and brought him word again.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Ben-Hadad sent to him and said, The
gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice
for handfuls for all the people that follow me!

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And the king of Israel answered and
said, Tell \[him\], Let not him that girdeth on boast himself as he that
putteth off!

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And it came to pass when he heard this
word, as he was drinking, he and the kings in the tents, that he said to
his servants, Set yourselves. And they set themselves against the city.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And behold, a prophet drew near to Ahab
king of Israel, and said, Thus saith Jehovah: Hast thou seen all this
great multitude? behold, I will deliver it into thy hand this day; and
thou shalt know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Ahab said, By whom? And he said,
Thus saith Jehovah: By the servants of the princes of the provinces.
Then he said, Who shall begin the battle? And he said, Thou.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And he numbered the servants of the
princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty-two; and
after them he numbered all the people, all the children of Israel, seven
thousand.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And they went out at noon; and
Ben-Hadad drank himself drunk in the tents, he and the kings, the
thirty-two kings that helped him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And the servants of the princes of the
provinces went out first; and Ben-Hadad sent out, and they told him
saying, There are men come out of Samaria.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And he said, Whether they be come out
for peace, take them alive; or whether they be come out for war, take
them alive.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And these servants of the princes of
the provinces came out of the city, and the army that followed them.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And they slew every one his man; and
the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them; and Ben-Hadad the king of
Syria escaped on a horse with the horsemen.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the king of Israel went out, and
smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great
slaughter.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And the prophet drew near to the king
of Israel, and said to him, Go, strengthen thyself, and understand, and
see what thou shalt do; for at the return of the year the king of Syria
will come up against thee.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And the servants of the king of Syria
said to him, Their gods are gods of the mountains; therefore they were
stronger than we; but if we fight against them on the plateau, shall we
not be stronger than they?

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And do this: take the kings away, every
man out of his place, and put governors in their stead;

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> and number thee an army, like the army
that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot; and we
will fight against them on the plateau: shall we not be stronger than
they? And he hearkened to their voice, and did so.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> And it came to pass, at the return of
the year, that Ben-Hadad numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to
fight against Israel.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And the children of Israel were
numbered and victualled, and they went against them; and the children of
Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of goats; but the
Syrians filled the land.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And the man of God drew near, and spoke
to the king of Israel and said, Thus saith Jehovah: Because the Syrians
have said, Jehovah is a god of the mountains, but he is not a god of the
valleys, I will give all this great multitude into thy hand, and ye
shall know that I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And they encamped one over against the
other seven days; and it came to pass that on the seventh day the battle
was joined; and the children of Israel smote of the Syrians a hundred
thousand footmen in one day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And the rest fled to Aphek, into the
city; and the wall fell on twenty-seven thousand men of them that were
left. And Ben-Hadad fled, and came into the city, \[from\] chamber to
chamber.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And his servants said to him, Behold
now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful
kings: let us, I pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon
our heads, and go out to the king of Israel; perhaps he will save thy
life.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And they girded sackcloth on their
loins, and ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and
said, Thy servant Ben-Hadad says, I pray thee, let me live. And he said,
Is he yet alive? he is my brother.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> And the men took it as a good omen, and
hastened to catch what came from him, and they said, Thy brother
Ben-Hadad. ... And he said, Go, bring him. And Ben-Hadad came forth to
him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And \[Ben-Hadad\] said to him, The
cities that my father took from thy father I will restore; and thou
shalt make streets for thyself in Damascus, as my father made in
Samaria. And I \[said Ahab\] will send thee away with this covenant. So
he made a covenant with him, and sent him away.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And a certain man of the sons of the
prophets said to another by the word of Jehovah, Smite me, I pray thee.
But the man refused to smite him.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Then said he to him, Because thou hast
not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah, behold, when thou departest from
me, the lion will slay thee. And when he had departed from him, the lion
found him and slew him.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> Then he found another man, and said,
Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him violently, and wounded
\[him\].

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> And the prophet departed, and waited
for the king by the way, and disguised himself with a sash over his
eyes.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> And as the king passed by, he cried to
the king and said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle;
and behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man to me and said, Keep
this man; if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his
life, or thou shalt pay a talent of silver.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> And as thy servant was busy here and
there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said to him, So \[is\] thy
judgment: thyself hast decided \[it\].

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> Then he hastily took the sash away from
his face; and the king of Israel discerned him, that he was of the
prophets.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And he said to him, Thus saith Jehovah:
Because thou hast let go out of thy hand the man that I had devoted to
destruction, thy life shall be for his life, and thy people for his
people.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And the king of Israel went to his
house sullen and vexed, and came to Samaria.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And it came to pass after these things,
\[that\] Naboth the Jizreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jizreel, by
the side of the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And Ahab spoke to Naboth saying, Give me
thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, for it is near,
by the side of my house; and I will give thee for it a better vineyard
than it; if it seem good to thee, I will give thee its value in money.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Naboth said to Ahab, Jehovah forbid
it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers to thee!

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And Ahab came into his house sullen and
vexed because of the word that Naboth the Jizreelite had spoken to him;
for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And
he lay down on his bed, and turned away his face, and ate no bread.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And Jezebel his wife came to him, and
said to him, Why is thy spirit sullen, and thou eatest no bread?

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he said to her, Because I spoke to
Naboth the Jizreelite and said to him, Give me thy vineyard for money;
or else, if it please thee, I will give thee a vineyard for it; and he
said, I will not give thee my vineyard.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And Jezebel his wife said to him, Dost
thou now exercise sovereignty over Israel? arise, eat bread, and let thy
heart be glad: I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jizreelite.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And she wrote a letter in Ahab's name,
and sealed it with his seal, and sent the letter to the elders and to
the nobles that were in his city, dwelling with Naboth.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And she wrote in the letter saying,
Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth at the head of the people;

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> and set two men, sons of Belial, before
him, and they shall bear witness against him saying, Thou didst curse
God and the king; and carry him out, and stone him, that he may die.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the men of his city, the elders and
the nobles that dwelt in his city, did as Jezebel had sent to them, as
it was written in the letter that she had sent to them:

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> they proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth
at the head of the people.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And there came the two men, sons of
Belial, and sat before him; and the men of Belial witnessed against him,
against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth blasphemed
God and the king. And they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned
him with stones, that he died.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And they sent to Jezebel saying, Naboth
is stoned, and is dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And it came to pass when Jezebel heard
that Naboth was stoned and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise,
take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jizreelite, which he
refused to give thee for money; for Naboth is not alive, but dead.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And it came to pass when Ahab heard
that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of
Naboth the Jizreelite, to take possession of it.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah
the Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of
Israel, who is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth,
whither he is gone down to take possession of it.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And thou shalt speak unto him saying,
Thus saith Jehovah: Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? And
thou shalt speak unto him saying, Thus saith Jehovah: In the place where
the dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall the dogs lick thy blood, even
thine.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou
found me, mine enemy? And he said, I have found \[thee\]; because thou
hast sold thyself to do evil in the sight of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Behold, I will bring evil upon thee,
and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab every male,
and him that is shut up and left in Israel;

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> and I will make thy house like the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son
of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger,
and made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And of Jezebel also spoke Jehovah
saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the moat of Jizreel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Him that dieth of Ahab in the city
shall the dogs eat, and him that dieth in the field shall the fowl of
the heavens eat.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> (Surely there was none like to Ahab,
who did sell himself to do evil in the sight of Jehovah, Jezebel his
wife urging him on.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And he did very abominably in following
idols, according to all that the Amorites did, whom Jehovah had
dispossessed before the children of Israel.)

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And it came to pass when Ahab heard
these words, that he rent his garments, and put sackcloth upon his
flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah
the Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself
before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I will not bring the
evil in his days: in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his
house.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And they continued three years without
war between Syria and Israel.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And it came to pass in the third year,
that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And the king of Israel said to his
servants, Do ye know that Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we keep quiet
without taking it out of the hand of the king of Syria?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And he said to Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou go
with me to battle to Ramoth-Gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of
Israel, I am as thou, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And Jehoshaphat said to the king of
Israel, Inquire, I pray thee, this day of the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And the king of Israel assembled the
prophets, about four hundred men, and said to them, Shall I go against
Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up, and
the Lord will give it into the king's hand.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a
prophet of Jehovah besides, that we might inquire of him?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Jehovah; but
I hate him, for he prophesies no good concerning me, but evil: \[it is\]
Micah the son of Imlah. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then the king of Israel called a
chamberlain, and said, Fetch quickly Micah the son of Imlah.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah, having put on their robes, sat each on his throne, in
the open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the
prophets prophesied before them.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made
for himself horns of iron, and he said, Thus saith Jehovah: With these
shalt thou push the Syrians, until thou have exterminated them.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And all the prophets prophesied so,
saying, Go up to Ramoth-Gilead, and prosper; for Jehovah will give it
into the king's hand.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And the messenger that went to call
Micah spoke to him saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets
\[declare\] good to the king with one assent: let thy word, I pray thee,
be like the word of one of them, and speak good.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Micah said, As Jehovah liveth, even
what Jehovah shall say to me, that will I speak.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And he came to the king. And the king
said to him, Micah, shall we go against Ramoth-Gilead to battle, or
shall we forbear? And he said to him, Go up, and prosper; for Jehovah
will give it into the hand of the king.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And the king said to him, How many
times shall I adjure thee that thou tell me nothing but truth in the
name of Jehovah?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And he said, I saw all Israel scattered
upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And Jehovah said,
These have no master: let them return every man to his house in peace.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he prophesies no good concerning
me, but evil?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And he said, Hear therefore the word of
Jehovah: I saw Jehovah sitting upon his throne, and all the host of
heaven standing by him, on his right hand and on his left;

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> and Jehovah said, Who shall entice Ahab
that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? And one said after this
manner, and another said after that manner.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And there came forth a spirit, and
stood before Jehovah, and said, I will entice him.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And Jehovah said unto him, Wherewith?
And he said, I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of
all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt entice \[him\], and also
succeed: go forth, and do so.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And now, behold, Jehovah has put a
lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and Jehovah has
spoken evil concerning thee.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah went
near, and smote Micah upon the cheek, and said, Where now went the
Spirit of Jehovah from me to speak to thee?

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And Micah said, Behold, thou shalt see
on that day when thou shalt go from chamber to chamber to hide thyself.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And the king of Israel said, Take Micah
and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the
king's son;

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> and thou shalt say, Thus says the king:
Put this \[man\] in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction
and with water of affliction, until I come in peace.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And Micah said, If thou return at all
in peace, Jehovah has not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O peoples,
all of you!

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-Gilead.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And the king of Israel said to
Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and will enter into the battle; but
put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and
went into the battle.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And the king of Syria commanded the
thirty-two captains of his chariots saying, Fight neither with small nor
great, but with the king of Israel only.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> And it came to pass when the captains
of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely that is the king
of Israel; and they turned against him to fight; and Jehoshaphat cried
out.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And it came to pass that when the
captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel,
they turned back from pursuing him.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And a man drew a bow at a venture, and
smote the king of Israel between the fastenings and the corslet. And he
said to his charioteer, Turn thy hand, and drive me out of the camp; for
I am wounded.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And the battle increased that day; and
the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and he died
at even; and the blood of the wound ran out into the hollow of the
chariot.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> And there went the cry throughout the
host at the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and
every man to his own country!

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> And the king died, and was brought to
Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> And one washed the chariot in the pool
of Samaria; and the dogs licked his blood, where the harlots bathed:
according to the word of Jehovah, which he had spoken.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And the rest of the acts of Ahab, and
all that he did, and the ivory house that he built, and all the cities
that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> And Ahab slept with his fathers; and
Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to
reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem;
and his mother's name was Azubah, the daughter of Shilhi.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> And he walked in all the way of Asa his
father; he turned not aside from it, doing what was right in the sight
of Jehovah. Only, the high places were not removed: the people offered
and burned incense still on the high places.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> And Jehoshaphat was at peace with the
king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> And the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, and his might which he shewed, and how he warred, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> And the remainder of the sodomites,
which were left in the days of his father Asa, he put away from out of
the land.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> And there was no king in Edom: a deputy
reigned.

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> Jehoshaphat made Tarshish-ships to go
to Ophir for gold; but they went not, for the ships were broken at
Ezion-geber.

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab to
Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But
Jehoshaphat would not.

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers,
and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and
Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign
over Israel in Samaria the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of
Judah; and he reigned two years over Israel.

<span id="an_22:52">22:52</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his
mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to
sin.

<span id="an_22:53">22:53</span> And he served Baal, and worshipped him,
and provoked Jehovah the God of Israel to anger, according to all that
his father had done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings](kg2.md)
