[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kg1)  [Next](ch1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 2 Kings

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And Moab rebelled against Israel after the
death of Ahab.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And Ahaziah fell down through the lattice
in his upper chamber which was in Samaria, and was sick; and he sent
messengers and said to them, Go, inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron,
whether I shall recover from this disease.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And the angel of Jehovah said to Elijah the
Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria,
and say to them, Is it because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go
to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Now therefore thus saith Jehovah: Thou
shalt not come down from the bed on which thou art gone up, but shalt
certainly die. And Elijah departed.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the messengers returned to him; and he
said to them, Why have ye returned?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And they said unto him, A man came up to
meet us, and said to us, Go, return to the king that sent you and say to
him, Thus saith Jehovah: Is it because there is not a God in Israel,
that thou sendest to inquire of Baal-zebub the god of Ekron? therefore
thou shalt not come down from the bed on which thou art gone up, but
shalt certainly die.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he said to them, What manner of man was
he that came up to meet you, and told you these words?

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And they said to him, He was a man in a
hairy \[garment\], and girt with a girdle of leather about his loins.
And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he sent to him a captain of fifty with
his fifty. And he went up to him, and behold, he sat on the top of the
mount. And he spoke to him: Man of God, the king says, Come down!

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Elijah answered and said to the
captain of fifty, And if I be a man of God, let fire come down from the
heavens and consume thee and thy fifty. And there came down fire from
the heavens, and consumed him and his fifty.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And again he sent to him another captain
of fifty with his fifty. And he spoke and said to him, Man of God, thus
says the king: Come down quickly!

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Elijah answered and said to them, If
I be a man of God, let fire come down from the heavens and consume thee
and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from the heavens, and
consumed him and his fifty.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And again he sent the captain of a third
fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came
and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him and said to him,
Man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy
servants, be precious in thy sight.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Behold, there came down fire from the
heavens, and consumed the two captains of the former fifties with their
fifties; but now, let my life be precious in thy sight.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the angel of Jehovah said to Elijah,
Go down with him: be not afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with
him to the king.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And he said to him, Thus saith Jehovah:
Forasmuch as thou hast sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub the god
of Ekron, is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of his
word? therefore thou shalt not come down from the bed on which thou art
gone up, but shalt certainly die.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And he died according to the word of
Jehovah that Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram began to reign in his stead,
in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah; for
he had no son.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the rest of the acts of Ahaziah, what
he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And it came to pass when Jehovah would take
up Elijah into the heavens by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha
from Gilgal.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Elijah said to Elisha, Abide here, I
pray thee; for Jehovah has sent me to Bethel. And Elisha said, As
Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! So they
went down to Bethel.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the sons of the prophets that were at
Bethel came forth to Elisha, and said to him, Dost thou know that
Jehovah will take away thy master from over thy head to-day? And he
said, I also know it: be silent!

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Elijah said to him, Elisha, abide here,
I pray thee; for Jehovah has sent me to Jericho. And he said, As Jehovah
liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! And they came to
Jericho.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And the sons of the prophets that were at
Jericho drew near to Elisha and said to him, Dost thou know that Jehovah
will take away thy master from over thy head to-day? And he said, I also
know it: be silent!

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And Elijah said to him, Abide here, I pray
thee; for Jehovah has sent me to the Jordan. And he said, As Jehovah
liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! And they two went
on.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And fifty men of the sons of the prophets
went and stood opposite afar off; and they two stood by the Jordan.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it
together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and
thither; and they two went over on dry ground.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And it came to pass when they had gone
over, that Elijah said to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I
am taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double
portion of thy spirit be upon me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he said, Thou hast asked a hard
thing: if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee;
but if not, it shall not be \[so\].

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And it came to pass as they went on, and
talked, that behold, a chariot of fire and horses of fire; and they
parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into the
heavens.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And Elisha saw \[it\], and he cried, My
father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof! And
he saw him no more. Then he took hold of his own garments and rent them
in two pieces.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he took up the mantle of Elijah which
fell from him, and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and he took the mantle of Elijah which
had fallen from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is Jehovah,
the God of Elijah? He also smote the waters, and they parted hither and
thither, and Elisha went over.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And the sons of the prophets who were at
Jericho on the opposite side saw him, and they said, The spirit of
Elijah rests on Elisha. And they came to meet him, and bowed themselves
to the ground before him,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and said to him, Behold now, there are
with thy servants fifty valiant men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek
thy master, lest perhaps the Spirit of Jehovah have taken him up, and
cast him upon some mountain, or into some ravine. And he said, Ye shall
not send.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And they pressed him till he was ashamed,
and he said, Send. They sent therefore fifty men, and they sought three
days, but did not find him.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And they came again to him (now he was
staying at Jericho); and he said to them, Did I not say to you, Go not?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And the men of the city said to Elisha,
Behold now, the situation of the city is good, as my lord sees; but the
water is bad, and the land is barren.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and
put salt in it. And they brought it to him.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And he went forth to the source of the
waters, and cast the salt in there, and said, Thus saith Jehovah: I have
healed these waters: there shall not be from thence any more death or
barrenness.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the waters were healed to this day,
according to the saying of Elisha which he spoke.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And he went up from thence to Bethel, and
as he went up by the way, there came forth little boys out of the city,
and mocked him, and said to him, Go up, bald head; go up, bald head!

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And he turned back, and looked on them,
and cursed them in the name of Jehovah. And there came forth two
she-bears out of the wood, and tore forty-two children of them.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he went from thence to mount Carmel,
and from thence he returned to Samaria.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign
over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of
Judah; and he reigned twelve years.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And he wrought evil in the sight of
Jehovah, but not like his father, and like his mother; and he took away
the column of Baal that his father had made.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Only, he clave to the sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat who made Israel to sin: he did not depart therefrom.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Mesha king of Moab was a sheepmaster,
and rendered to the king of Israel a hundred thousand lambs and a
hundred thousand rams, with the wool.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And it came to pass when Ahab was dead,
that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And at that time king Jehoram went out of
Samaria and inspected all Israel.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the
king of Judah saying, The king of Moab has rebelled against me: wilt
thou go with me against Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up: I am
as thou, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he said, Which way shall we go up? And
he said, By way of the wilderness of Edom.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And the king of Israel went, and the king
of Judah, and the king of Edom, and they made a circuit of seven days'
journey. And there was no water for the army, and for the cattle that
followed them.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the king of Israel said, Alas! that
Jehovah has called these three kings together, to give them into the
hand of Moab!

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a
prophet of Jehovah that we may inquire of Jehovah by him? And one of the
king of Israel's servants answered and said, Here is Elisha the son of
Shaphat, who poured water on the hands of Elijah.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And Jehoshaphat said, The word of Jehovah
is with him. And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom
went down to him.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Elisha said to the king of Israel,
What have I to do with thee? go to the prophets of thy father and to the
prophets of thy mother. And the king of Israel said to him, Not so, for
Jehovah has called these three kings to give them into the hand of Moab.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And Elisha said, As Jehovah of hosts
liveth, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the
presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee
nor see thee.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And now fetch me a minstrel. And it came
to pass when the minstrel played, that the hand of Jehovah was upon him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And he said, Thus saith Jehovah: Make
this valley full of ditches.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For thus saith Jehovah: Ye shall not see
wind, neither shall ye see rain; yet this valley shall be filled with
water, and ye shall drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And this is a light thing in the sight of
Jehovah: he will give the Moabites also into your hand.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And ye shall smite every fortified city,
and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop all
wells of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And it came to pass in the morning, when
the oblation was offered up, that behold, there came water by the way of
Edom, and the country was filled with water.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And all the Moabites heard that the kings
were come up to fight against them, and they were called together, all
that were able to put on armour, and upward, and stood by the border.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And they rose up early in the morning,
and the sun rose upon the water, and the Moabites saw the water on the
other side red as blood.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And they said, This is blood: the kings
are entirely destroyed, and have smitten one another; and now, Moab, to
the spoil!

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And when they came to the camp of Israel,
the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, and they fled before
them; and they entered in and smote Moab.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And they beat down the cities, and on
every good piece of land cast every man his stone and filled it, and
they stopped every well of water, and felled every good tree, until they
left \[only\] the stones at Kirhareseth; and the slingers went about it,
and smote it.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And the king of Moab saw that the battle
was too severe for him, and he took with him seven hundred men that drew
swords, to break through to the king of Edom, but they could not.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And he took his eldest son, that should
have reigned in his stead, and offered him up for a burnt-offering upon
the wall. And there was great wrath against Israel; and they departed
from him, and returned to \[their own\] land.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And a woman of the wives of the sons of the
prophets cried to Elisha saying, Thy servant my husband is dead, and
thou knowest that thy servant feared Jehovah; and the creditor is come
to take my two children to be bondmen.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And Elisha said to her, What shall I do for
thee? Tell me, what hast thou in the house? And she said, Thy handmaid
has not anything at all in the house but a pot of oil.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he said, Go, borrow for thyself vessels
abroad from all thy neighbours, empty vessels; let it not be few;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and go in, and shut the door upon thee and
upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels, and set aside what
is full.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And she went from him, and shut the door
upon her and upon her sons: they brought \[the vessels\] to her, and she
poured out.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And it came to pass when the vessels were
full, that she said to her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said to
her, There is not a vessel more. And the oil stayed.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And she came and told the man of God; and
he said, Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou \[and\] thy
sons on the rest.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And it came to pass on a day, that Elisha
passed to Shunem, where was a wealthy woman; and she constrained him to
eat bread. And so it was, \[that\] as oft as he passed by, he turned in
thither to eat bread.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And she said to her husband, Behold now, I
perceive that this is a holy man of God, who passes by us continually.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Let us make, I pray thee, a small upper
chamber with walls, and let us set for him there a bed, and a table, and
a seat, and a lampstand; and it shall be when he cometh to us, he shall
turn in thither.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And it came to pass on a day, that he
came thither, and he turned into the upper chamber, and lay there.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call
this Shunammite. And he called her, and she stood before him.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he said to him, Say now to her,
Behold, thou hast been careful for us with all this care; what is to be
done for thee? wouldest thou be spoken for to the king, or to the
captain of the host? And she said, I dwell among mine own people.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And he said, What then is to be done for
her? And Gehazi said, Verily, she has no son, and her husband is old.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he said, Call her; and he called her;
and she stood in the doorway.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he said, At this appointed time, when
thy term is come, thou shalt embrace a son. And she said, No, my lord,
man of God, do not lie to thy handmaid.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the woman conceived, and bore a son
at that appointed time in the next year as Elisha had said to her.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And the child grew, and it came to pass
one day, that he went out to his father to the reapers.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And he said to his father, My head, my
head! And he said to the servant, Carry him to his mother.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And he carried him, and brought him to
his mother; and he sat on her knees till noon, and died.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And she went up, and laid him on the bed
of the man of God, and shut \[the door\] upon him, and went out.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And she called to her husband, and said,
Send me, I pray thee, one of the young men, and one of the asses, and I
will run to the man of God, and come again.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And he said, Why wilt thou go to him
to-day? It is neither new moon nor sabbath. And she said, \[It is\]
well.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Then she saddled the ass, and said to her
servant, Drive and go forward; slack not the riding for me, except I bid
thee.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And she went and came to the man of God,
to mount Carmel. And it came to pass when the man of God saw her afar
off, that he said to Gehazi his servant, Behold, there is the
Shunammite:

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and
say unto her, Is it well with thee? is it well with thy husband? is it
well with the child? And she said, It is well.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And she came to the man of God to the
mountain, and caught him by the feet; and Gehazi drew near to thrust her
away; but the man of God said, Let her alone, for her soul is troubled
within her, and Jehovah has hidden it from me, and has not told me.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And she said, Did I desire a son of my
lord? did I not say, Do not deceive me?

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins,
and take my staff in thy hand, and go thy way. If thou meet any man,
salute him not, and if any salute thee, answer him not again; and lay my
staff upon the face of the lad.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And the mother of the lad said, As
Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! And he
rose up and followed her.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And Gehazi passed on before them, and
laid the staff upon the face of the lad; but there was neither voice,
nor sign of attention. And he returned to meet him, and told him saying,
The lad is not awaked.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And when Elisha came into the house,
behold, the child was dead, \[and\] laid upon his bed.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And he went in and shut the door upon
them both, and prayed to Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And he went up, and lay upon the child,
and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his
hands upon his hands, and bent over him; and the flesh of the child grew
warm.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And he returned, and walked in the house
to and fro; and went up, and bent over him. And the lad sneezed seven
times, and the lad opened his eyes.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this
Shunammite. And he called her; and she came to him. And he said, Take up
thy son.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And she came and fell at his feet, and
bowed herself to the ground; and she took up her son, and went out.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And Elisha came again to Gilgal. And
there was a famine in the land; and the sons of the prophets were
sitting before him. And he said to his servant, Set on the great pot,
and boil pottage for the sons of the prophets.

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> Then one went out into the field to
gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered from it his lap full
of wild colocynths, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage; for
they did not know them.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And they poured out for the men to eat.
And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried
out and said, Man of God, there is death in the pot! And they could not
eat \[it\].

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And he said, Then bring meal. And he cast
\[it\] into the pot, and said, Pour out for the people, that they may
eat. And there was no harm in the pot.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And there came a man from Baal-shalishah,
and brought the man of God bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of
barley, and fresh ears of corn in his sack. And he said, Give to the
people that they may eat.

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> And his attendant said, How shall I set
this before a hundred men? And he said, Give the people that they may
eat; for thus saith Jehovah: They shall eat, and shall have to spare.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> And he set \[it\] before them, and they
ate and left \[thereof\], according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Naaman, captain of the host of the king
of Syria, was a great man before his master, and honourable, for by him
Jehovah had given deliverance to Syria; and he was a mighty man of
valour, \[but\] a leper.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And the Syrians had gone out in bands, and
had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maid; and
she waited on Naaman's wife.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And she said to her mistress, Oh, would
that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! then he would
cure him of his leprosy.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And he went and told his lord saying, Thus
and thus said the maid that is of the land of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the king of Syria said, Well! go, and I
will send a letter to the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with
him ten talents of silver, and six thousand \[shekels\] of gold, and ten
changes of raiment.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And he brought the letter to the king of
Israel, saying, And now, when this letter comes to thee, behold, I have
sent Naaman my servant to thee, that thou mayest cure him of his
leprosy.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it came to pass when the king of Israel
had read the letter, that he rent his garments, and said, Am I God, to
kill and to make alive, that this man sends to me to cure a man of his
leprosy? Wherefore consider, I pray you, and see how he seeks an
occasion against me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And it was so, when Elisha the man of God
had heard that the king of Israel had rent his garments, that he sent to
the king, saying, Why hast thou rent thy garments? let him come now to
me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Naaman came with his horses and with
his chariot, and stood at the doorway of the house of Elisha.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And Elisha sent a messenger to him,
saying, Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come
again to thee, and thou shalt be clean.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Naaman was wroth, and went away and
said, Behold, I thought, He will certainly come out to me, and stand,
and call on the name of Jehovah his God, and wave his hand over the
place, and cure the leper.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Are not the Abanah and the Pharpar,
rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? may I not wash
in them and be clean? And he turned and went away in a rage.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And his servants drew near, and spoke to
him and said, My father, \[if\] the prophet had bidden thee \[do some\]
great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when
he says to thee, Wash and be clean?

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Then he went down, and plunged himself
seven times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God.
And his flesh became again like the flesh of a little child, and he was
clean.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And he returned to the man of God, he and
all his company, and came and stood before him; and he said, Behold, I
know that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel; and now, I
pray thee, take a present of thy servant.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But he said, As Jehovah liveth, before
whom I stand, I will receive none! And he urged him to take it; but he
refused.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And Naaman said, If not, then let there,
I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules' burden of \[this\]
earth; for thy servant will no more offer burnt-offering and sacrifice
to other gods, but to Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> In this thing Jehovah pardon thy servant:
when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to bow down there, and he
leans on my hand, and I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon -- when I
bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, Jehovah pardon thy servant, I
pray thee, in this thing.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he said to him, Go in peace. And he
departed from him a little way.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man
of God, said, Behold, my master has spared Naaman, this Syrian, in not
receiving at his hands that which he brought; but as Jehovah liveth, I
will run after him and take somewhat of him.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Gehazi followed after Naaman. And
when Naaman saw him running after him, he sprang down from the chariot
to meet him, and said, Is all well?

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And he said, All is well. My master has
sent me saying, Behold, even now there are come to me from mount Ephraim
two young men of the sons of the prophets; give them, I pray thee, a
talent of silver, and two changes of raiment.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And Naaman said, Consent to take two
talents. And he urged him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags,
with two changes of raiment, and laid them upon two of his young men;
and they bore them before him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And when he came to the hill, he took
them from their hand, and stowed them in the house; and he let the men
go, and they departed.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And he entered in and stood before his
master. And Elisha said to him, Whence \[comest thou\], Gehazi? And he
said, Thy servant went no whither.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he said to him, Did not my heart go,
when the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to
receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards,
and sheep, and oxen, and bondmen, and bondwomen?

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> But the leprosy of Naaman shall fasten
upon thee, and upon thy seed for ever. And he went out from his presence
leprous, as snow.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the sons of the prophets said to
Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too strait
for us.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Let us go, we pray thee, to the Jordan, and
take thence every man a beam, and let us make us a place there, where we
may dwell. And he said, Go.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And one said, Consent, I pray thee, to go
with thy servants. And he said, I will go.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And he went with them. And they came to the
Jordan and cut down the trees.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And it came to pass as one was felling a
beam, that the iron fell into the water; and he cried and said, Alas,
master, and it was borrowed!

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And the man of God said, Where did it fall?
And he shewed him the place. And he cut down a stick, and cast it in
thither, and made the iron to swim.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he said, Take \[it\] up to thee. And he
put out his hand and took it.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And the king of Syria warred against
Israel; and he took counsel with his servants, saying, In such and such
a place \[shall be\] my camp.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the man of God sent to the king of
Israel, saying, Beware that thou pass not such a place, for thither the
Syrians are come down.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the king of Israel sent to the place
which the man of God told him and warned him of, and he was on his guard
there. \[That took place\] not once, nor twice.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the heart of the king of Syria was
troubled because of this thing; and he called his servants, and said to
them, Will ye not shew me which of us is for the king of Israel?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And one of his servants said, None, my
lord, O king; but Elisha, the prophet that is in Israel, tells the king
of Israel the words that thou speakest in thy bedchamber.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And he said, Go and see where he is, and
I will send and fetch him. And it was told him saying, Behold, he is in
Dothan.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And he sent thither horses and chariots,
and a great host, and they came by night and surrounded the city.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And when the attendant of the man of God
rose early and went forth, behold, an army surrounded the city, with
horses and chariots. And his servant said to him, Alas, my master! how
shall we do?

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And he said, Fear not, for they that are
with us are more than they that are with them.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And Elisha prayed and said, Jehovah, I
pray thee, open his eyes that he may see. And Jehovah opened the eyes of
the young man, and he saw; and, behold, the mountain was full of horses
and chariots of fire round about Elisha.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And they came down to him; and Elisha
prayed to Jehovah and said, Smite this nation, I pray thee, with
blindness. And he smote them with blindness according to the word of
Elisha.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And Elisha said to them, This is not the
way, neither is this the city: follow me, and I will bring you to the
man whom ye seek. And he led them to Samaria.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And it came to pass when they entered
into Samaria, that Elisha said, Jehovah, open the eyes of these \[men\]
that they may see. And Jehovah opened their eyes, and they saw, and
behold, they were in the midst of Samaria.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the king of Israel said to Elisha,
when he saw them, My father, shall I smite? shall I smite \[them\]?

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And he said, Thou shalt not smite
\[them\]: wouldest thou smite those whom thou hast taken captive with
thy sword and with thy bow? Set bread and water before them, that they
may eat and drink, and go to their master.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he prepared a great repast for them,
and they ate and drank; and he sent them away, and they went to their
master. And the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And it came to pass after this that
Ben-Hadad king of Syria gathered all his army, and went up and besieged
Samaria.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And there was a great famine in Samaria;
and behold, they besieged it, until an ass's head was worth eighty
silver-pieces, and the fourth part of a cab of dove's dung five
silver-pieces.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And it came to pass as the king of Israel
was passing by upon the wall, there cried a woman to him saying, Help,
my lord O king!

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And he said, If Jehovah do not help thee,
whence should I help thee? Out of the threshing-floor, or out of the
winepress?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And the king said to her, What aileth
thee? And she said, This woman said to me, Give thy son, that we may eat
him to-day, and we will eat my son to-morrow.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And we boiled my son, and ate him: and I
said to her on the next day, Give thy son, that we may eat him; and she
has hidden her son.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And it came to pass when the king heard
the words of the woman, that he rent his garments; and he was passing by
upon the wall, and the people looked, and behold, he had sackcloth
within upon his flesh.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And he said, God do so, and more also to
me, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall remain on him this
day!

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And Elisha sat in his house, and the
elders sat with him. And \[the king\] sent a man before him. Before the
messenger came to him, he himself said to the elders, Do ye see how this
son of a murderer has sent to take away my head? See, when the messenger
comes; shut the door, and keep him off with the door: is not the sound
of his master's feet behind him?

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And while he yet talked with them,
behold, the messenger came down to him. And \[the king\] said, Behold,
this evil is of Jehovah: why should I wait for Jehovah any longer?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And Elisha said, Hear the word of Jehovah.
Thus saith Jehovah: To-morrow about this time shall the measure of fine
flour be at a shekel, and two measures of barley at a shekel, in the
gate of Samaria.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And the captain on whose hand the king
leaned answered the man of God and said, Behold, if Jehovah should make
windows in the heavens, would this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou
shalt see it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And there were four leprous men at the
entrance of the gate, and they said one to another, Why do we abide here
until we die?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> If we say, Let us enter into the city, the
famine is in the city, and we shall die there; and if we abide here, we
shall die. And now come, let us fall away to the camp of the Syrians: if
they save us alive, we shall live; and if they put us to death, we shall
but die.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And they rose up in the dusk to go to the
camp of the Syrians; and they came to the extremity of the camp of the
Syrians; and behold, there was no man there.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For the Lord had made the army of the
Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, a noise of a
great host; and they said one to another, Behold, the king of Israel has
hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the
Egyptians, to come upon us.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And they rose up and fled in the dusk, and
left their tents, and their horses, and their asses, the camp as it was,
and fled for their life.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And those lepers came to the extremity of
the camp; and they went into one tent, and ate and drank, and carried
thence silver and gold, and garments, and went and hid it; and they came
again, and entered into another tent, and carried thence, and went and
hid \[it\].

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And they said one to another, We are not
doing right; this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace:
if we tarry till the morning light, the iniquity will find us out; and
now come, let us go and tell the king's household.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And they came and called to the porters
of the city, and told them saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians,
and behold, there was no one there, no sound of man, but the horses
tied, and the asses tied, and the tents as they were.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And the porters cried \[it\] and told
\[it\] to the king's house within.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And the king rose up in the night and
said to his servants, Let me tell you what the Syrians have done to us.
They know that we are hungry, and they have gone out of the camp to hide
themselves in the field, saying, When they come out of the city, we
shall catch them alive, and get into the city.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And one of his servants answered and
said, Let some one take, I pray thee, five of the horses that remain,
which are left in the city (behold, they are as all the multitude of
Israel that are left in it: behold, they are even as all the multitude
of the Israelites that have perished), and let us send and see.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And they took two chariots with their
horses; and the king sent after the army of the Syrians, saying, Go and
see.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And they went after them to the Jordan;
and behold, all the way was full of garments and materials, which the
Syrians had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned and
told the king.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And the people went out and plundered the
camp of the Syrians; and the measure of fine flour was at a shekel, and
two measures of barley at a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And the king had appointed the captain on
whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate; and the people
trampled upon him in the gate, and he died, according to what the man of
God had said, -- what he had said when the king came down to him.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And it came to pass as the man of God had
spoken to the king saying, Two measures of barley shall be at a shekel,
and the measure of fine flour at a shekel, to-morrow about this time in
the gate of Samaria.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the captain answered the man of God
and said, Behold, if Jehovah should make windows in the heavens, would
such a thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine eyes,
but shalt not eat thereof.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And so it happened to him; and the people
trampled upon him in the gate, and he died.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Elisha had spoken to the woman whose
son he had restored to life, saying, Rise up and go, thou and thy
household, and sojourn wheresoever thou canst sojourn; for Jehovah has
called for a famine, and it shall also come upon the land for seven
years.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And the woman rose up, and did according to
the saying of the man of God, and went, she and her household, and
sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And it came to pass at the seven years'
end, that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines; and she
went forth to cry to the king for her house and for her land.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the king was talking with Gehazi, the
servant of the man of God, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great
things that Elisha has done.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And it came to pass as he was telling the
king how he had restored a dead body to life, that behold, the woman
whose son he had restored to life cried to the king for her house and
for her land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and
this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the king asked the woman, and she told
him. And the king appointed a certain chamberlain, saying, Restore all
that was hers, and all the revenue of the land since the day that she
left the country even until now.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And Elisha came to Damascus; and Ben-Hadad
the king of Syria was sick; and it was told him saying, The man of God
is come hither.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the king said to Hazael, Take a present
in thy hand, and go, meet the man of God, and inquire of Jehovah by him,
saying, Shall I recover from this disease?

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Hazael went to meet him, and took with
him a present, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels'
burden; and he came and stood before him, and said, Thy son Ben-Hadad
king of Syria has sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover from this
disease?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Elisha said to him, Go, say to him,
Thou wilt certainly recover. But Jehovah has shewn me that he shall
certainly die.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And he settled his countenance
stedfastly, until he was ashamed; and the man of God wept.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Hazael said, Why does my lord weep?
And he said, Because I know the evil that thou wilt do to the children
of Israel: their strongholds wilt thou set on fire, and their young men
wilt thou kill with the sword, and wilt dash in pieces their children,
and rip up their women with child.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Hazael said, But what, is thy servant
a dog, that he should do this great thing? And Elisha said, Jehovah has
shewn me that thou wilt be king over Syria.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he departed from Elisha, and came to
his master, who said to him, What did Elisha say to thee? And he said,
He told me \[that\] thou wouldest certainly recover.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And it came to pass the next day, that he
took the coverlet and dipped \[it\] in water, and spread it over his
face, so that he died; and Hazael reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And in the fifth year of Joram the son of
Ahab, king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the
son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, began to reign.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> He was thirty-two years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And he walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for the daughter of Ahab was his wife;
and he did evil in the sight of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> But Jehovah would not destroy Judah, for
David his servant's sake, as he had promised him to give him always a
lamp for his sons.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> In his days Edom revolted from under the
hand of Judah, and they set a king over themselves.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And Joram went over to Zair, and all the
chariots with him; and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites who
had surrounded him, and the captains of the chariots; and the people
fled into their tents.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> But the Edomites revolted from under the
hand of Judah unto this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And the rest of the acts of Joram and all
that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Judah?

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And Joram slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David; and Ahaziah his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> In the twelfth year of Joram the son of
Ahab, king of Israel, Ahaziah the son of Jehoram, king of Judah, began
to reign.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem; and his mother's
name was Athaliah, the daughter of Omri king of Israel.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he walked in the way of the house of
Ahab, and did evil in the sight of Jehovah, like the house of Ahab; for
he was the son-in-law of the house of Ahab.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to
the war against Hazael the king of Syria at Ramoth-Gilead; and the
Syrians wounded Joram.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And king Joram returned to be healed in
Jizreel of the wounds that the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he
fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram, king
of Judah, went down to see Joram the son of Ahab at Jizreel, for he was
sick.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Elisha the prophet called one of the
sons of the prophets, and said to him, Gird up thy loins, and take this
vial of oil in thy hand, and go to Ramoth-Gilead.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And when thou art come thither, look out
there Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi, and go in, and make
him rise up from among his brethren, and bring him to an inner chamber;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> then take the vial of oil, and pour it on
his head and say, Thus saith Jehovah: I have anointed thee king over
Israel; and open the door, and flee, and tarry not.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the young man, the young prophet, went
to Ramoth-Gilead.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And when he came, behold, the captains of
the host were sitting. And he said, I have an errand to thee, captain.
And Jehu said, To which of all of us? And he said, To thee, captain.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And he rose up and went into the house; and
he poured the oil on his head, and said to him, Thus saith Jehovah the
God of Israel: I have anointed thee king over the people of Jehovah,
over Israel.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy
master; and I will avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the
blood of all the servants of Jehovah at the hand of Jezebel.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the whole house of Ahab shall perish,
and I will cut off from Ahab every male, and him that is shut up and
left in Israel.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And I will make the house of Ahab as the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and as the house of Baasha the son
of Ahijah.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the
plot of Jizreel, and none shall bury her. And he opened the door and
fled.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And Jehu came forth to the servants of
his lord. And one said to him, Is all well? why came this madman to
thee? And he said to them, Ye know the man, and his mind.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And they said, It is false! tell us now.
And he said, Thus and thus spoke he to me saying, Thus saith Jehovah: I
have anointed thee king over Israel.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Then they hasted and took every man his
garment, and put it under him on the very stairs, and blew with
trumpets, and said, Jehu is king!

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat, son of
Nimshi, conspired against Joram. (Now Joram kept Ramoth-Gilead, he and
all Israel, because of Hazael king of Syria;

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and king Joram had returned to be healed
in Jizreel of the wounds that the Syrians had given him, when he fought
against Hazael king of Syria.) And Jehu said, If it be your will, let
not a fugitive escape out of the city to go to tell \[it\] in Jizreel.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And Jehu rode in a chariot and went to
Jizreel; for Joram lay there. And Ahaziah king of Judah had come down to
see Joram.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And the watchman stood on the tower in
Jizreel, and saw Jehu's company as he came, and said, I see a company.
And Joram said, Take a horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say,
Is it peace?

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> So there went one on horseback to meet
him; and he said, Thus saith the king: Is it peace? And Jehu said, What
hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me. And the watchman told
saying, The messenger came to them, and he does not return.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And he sent out a second on horseback;
and he came to them and said, Thus saith the king: Is it peace? And Jehu
said, What hast thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And the watchman told saying, He came to
them, and does not return. And the driving is like the driving of Jehu
the son of Nimshi; for he drives furiously.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Then Joram said, Make ready! And they
made ready his chariot. And Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of
Judah went out, each in his chariot; and they went out to meet Jehu, and
met him in the plot of Naboth the Jizreelite.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And it came to pass when Joram saw Jehu,
that he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he said, What peace, so long as the
fornications of thy mother Jezebel and her sorceries are so many?

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Then Joram turned his hand, and fled, and
said to Ahaziah, Treachery, Ahaziah!

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And Jehu took his bow in his hand, and
smote Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow went out through his
heart; and he sank down in his chariot.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And he said to Bidkar his captain, Take
him up \[and\] cast him in the plot of the field of Naboth the
Jizreelite. For remember how, when I and thou rode together after Ahab
his father, that Jehovah laid this burden upon him:

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Certainly I have seen yesterday the blood
of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, saith Jehovah; and I will requite
thee in this plot, saith Jehovah. And now, take \[and\] cast him into
the plot, according to the word of Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> When Ahaziah king of Judah saw \[that\],
he fled by the way of the garden-house. And Jehu followed after him, and
said, Smite him also in his chariot. It was on the ascent of Gur, which
is by Jibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And his servants carried him in a chariot
to Jerusalem, and buried him in his sepulchre with his fathers in the
city of David.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> (And in the eleventh year of Joram the
son of Ahab had Ahaziah begun to reign over Judah.)

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And Jehu came to Jizreel; and Jezebel
heard of it, and she put paint to her eyes, and decked her head, and
looked out at the window.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And when Jehu came in at the gate, she
said, Is it peace, Zimri, murderer of his master?

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And he lifted up his face to the window,
and said, Who is on my side? who? And two or three chamberlains looked
out to him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he said, Throw her down! And they
threw her down; and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on
the horses; and he trampled on her.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And he came in, and ate and drank; and he
said, Go, look, I pray you, after this cursed \[woman\], and bury her;
for she is a king's daughter.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And they went to bury her; but they found
no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of the hands.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And they came back and told him. And he
said, This is the word of Jehovah, which he spoke through his servant
Elijah the Tishbite saying, In the plot of Jizreel shall dogs eat the
flesh of Jezebel;

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> and the carcase of Jezebel shall be as
dung upon the open field in the plot of Jizreel, so that they shall not
say, This is Jezebel.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And
Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, to the princes of Jizreel, to
the elders, and to Ahab's guardians, saying,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And now, when this letter comes to you,
seeing your master's sons are with you, and there are with you chariots,
and horses, and a fortified city, and armour,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> look out the best and worthiest of your
master's sons, and set him on his father's throne, and fight for your
master's house.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And they were exceedingly afraid, and
said, Behold, the two kings stood not before him; and how shall we
stand?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And he that was over the house, and he
that was over the city, and the elders, and the guardians sent to Jehu,
saying, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shalt bid us; we
will not make any one king; do what is good in thy sight.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And he wrote a letter the second time to
them saying, If ye are mine, and will hearken to my voice, take the
heads of the men your master's sons, and come to me to Jizreel to-morrow
at this time. Now the king's sons, seventy persons, were with the great
men of the city, who brought them up.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And it came to pass when the letter came
to them, that they took the king's sons, and slaughtered seventy
persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent them to him to
Jizreel.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And a messenger came and told him saying,
They have brought the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Lay them in
two heaps at the entrance of the gate until the morning.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And it came to pass in the morning that
he went out; and he stood, and said to all the people, Ye are righteous!
behold, I conspired against my master and killed him; but who smote all
these?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Know now that nothing shall fall to the
earth of the word of Jehovah, which Jehovah spoke concerning the house
of Ahab; for Jehovah has done that which he said through his servant
Elijah.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Jehu slew all that remained of the
house of Ahab in Jizreel, and all his great men, and his acquaintances,
and his priests, until he left him none remaining.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And he rose up and departed, and came
to Samaria. And as he was at the shepherds' meeting-place on the way,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Jehu found the brethren of Ahaziah king
of Judah, and said, Who are ye? And they said, We are the brethren of
Ahaziah; and have come down to salute the children of the king, and the
children of the queen.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And he said, Take them alive! And they
took them alive, and slew them at the well of the meeting-place,
forty-two men; and he left not one of them remaining.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And he departed thence, and found
Jehonadab the son of Rechab \[coming\] to meet him; and he greeted him,
and said to him, Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And
Jehonadab said, It is. -- If it be, give \[me\] thy hand. -- And he gave
\[him\] his hand; and \[Jehu\] took him up to him into the chariot,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and said, Come with me, and see my zeal
for Jehovah. So they made him ride in his chariot.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And he came to Samaria, and smote all
that remained to Ahab in Samaria, until he had destroyed him, according
to the word of Jehovah which he spoke to Elijah.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Jehu gathered all the people
together, and said to them, Ahab served Baal a little: Jehu will serve
him much.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And now call me all the prophets of
Baal, all his servants, and all his priests: let none be wanting; for I
have a great sacrifice \[to do\] to Baal; whoever shall be wanting shall
not live. But Jehu did it in subtilty, in order that he might bring
destruction upon the servants of Baal.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And Jehu said, Hallow a solemn assembly
for Baal. And they proclaimed \[it\].

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jehu sent into all Israel; and all
the servants of Baal came, so that there was not a man left that came
not: and they entered into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was
full from one end to the other.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And he said to him that was over the
wardrobe, Bring forth vestments for all the servants of Baal. And he
brought them forth vestments.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jehu and Jehonadab the son of
Rechab entered into the house of Baal, and said to the servants of Baal,
Search, and see that there be here with you none of the servants of
Jehovah, but the servants of Baal only.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And they entered in to offer sacrifices
and burnt-offerings. Now Jehu appointed eighty men without, and said, He
that allows any of the men to escape that I have brought into your
hands, his life shall be for the life of him.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And it came to pass as soon as they had
ended offering up the burnt-offering, that Jehu said to the couriers and
to the captains, Go in, slay them; let none come forth. And they smote
them with the edge of the sword; and the couriers and the captains cast
\[them\] there. And they went to the city of the house of Baal,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> and brought forth the columns out of
the house of Baal, and burned them;

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> and they broke down the column of Baal,
and broke down the house of Baal, and made it a draught-house to this
day.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Thus Jehu extirpated Baal out of
Israel.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Only, the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin, from them Jehu departed not: \[from\] the
golden calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Jehovah said to Jehu, Because thou
hast executed well that which is right in my sight, \[and\] hast done
unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in my heart, thy
children of the fourth \[generation\] shall sit on the throne of Israel.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> But Jehu took no heed to walk in the
law of Jehovah the God of Israel with all his heart; he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> In those days Jehovah began to cut
Israel short; and Hazael smote them in all the borders of Israel;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> from the Jordan eastward, all the land
of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from
Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, both Gilead and Bashan.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And the rest of the acts of Jehu, and
all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And Jehu slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in Samaria: and Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Now the time that Jehu reigned over
Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah
saw that her son was dead, she rose up and destroyed all the royal seed.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> But Jehosheba, the daughter of king
Joram, the sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah and stole
him from among the king's sons that were slain, \[and hid\] him and his
nurse in the bedchamber; and they hid him from Athaliah, so that he was
not slain.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And he was with her hid in the house of
Jehovah six years. And Athaliah reigned over the land.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And in the seventh year Jehoiada sent and
fetched the captains of the hundreds, of the bodyguard and the couriers,
and brought them to him into the house of Jehovah, and made a covenant
with them, and took an oath of them in the house of Jehovah, and shewed
them the king's son.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And he commanded them saying, This is the
thing which ye shall do: a third part of you, that come in on the
sabbath, shall be keepers of the watch of the king's house;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and a third part shall be at the gate of
Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the couriers; and ye shall keep
the watch of the house for a defence.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And the two parts of you, all those that
go forth on the sabbath, even they shall keep the watch of the house of
Jehovah about the king.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And ye shall encompass the king round
about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and he that comes within
the ranks shall be put to death; and ye shall be with the king when he
goes out and when he comes in.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the captains of the hundreds did
according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded; and they took every
man his men, those that were to come in on the sabbath, with them that
were to go forth on the sabbath, and they came to Jehoiada the priest.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And the priest gave to the captains of
the hundreds king David's spears and shields which were in the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And the couriers stood by the king
round about, every man with his weapons in his hand, from the right side
of the house to the left side of the house, toward the altar and the
house.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he brought forth the king's son,
and put the crown upon him, and \[gave him\] the testimony; and they
made him king, and anointed him; and they clapped their hands, and said,
Long live the king!

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And Athaliah heard the noise of the
couriers \[and\] of the people; and she came to the people into the
house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And she looked, and behold, the king
stood on the dais, according to the custom, and the princes and the
trumpeters were by the king; and all the people of the land rejoiced,
and blew with trumpets. And Athaliah rent her garments and cried,
Conspiracy! Conspiracy!

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And Jehoiada the priest commanded the
captains of the hundreds that were set over the host, and said to them,
Lead her forth without the ranks; and whosoever follows her, slay with
the sword; for the priest said, Let her not be put to death in the house
of Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And they made way for her, and she went
by the way by which the horses entered the king's house, and there was
she put to death.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And Jehoiada made a covenant between
Jehovah and the king and the people, that they should be the people of
Jehovah; and between the king and the people.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Then all the people of the land went
into the house of Baal, and broke it down: his altars and his images
they broke in pieces completely, and slew Mattan the priest of Baal
before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And he took the captains of the
hundreds, and the bodyguard, and the couriers, and all the people of the
land; and they brought down the king from the house of Jehovah, and came
by the way through the gate of the couriers into the king's house. And
he sat upon the throne of the kings.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And all the people of the land
rejoiced, and the city was quiet; and they had slain Athaliah with the
sword \[beside\] the king's house.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Jehoash was seven years old when he
began to reign.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> In the seventh year of Jehu, Jehoash
began to reign; and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Zibiah of Beer-sheba.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And Jehoash did what was right in the
sight of Jehovah, all the days wherein Jehoiada the priest instructed
him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Only, the high places were not removed:
the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And Jehoash said to the priests, All the
money of the hallowed things that is brought into the house of Jehovah,
the money of every one that passes \[the account\], the money at which
every man is valued, \[and\] all the money that comes into any man's
heart to bring into the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> let the priests take it, every man of his
acquaintance; and let them repair the breaches of the house, wherever
any breach is found.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And it was \[so that\] in the
twenty-third year of king Jehoash, the priests had not repaired the
breaches of the house.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then king Jehoash called for Jehoiada the
priest, and the priests, and said to them, Why have ye not repaired the
breaches of the house? And now receive no money of your acquaintances,
but give it for the breaches of the house.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the priests consented to receive no
money of the people, and that they should only repair the breaches of
the house.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and
bored a hole in the lid, and set it beside the altar, on the right side
as one comes into the house of Jehovah; and the priests that kept the
door put into it all the money brought into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And it came to pass when they saw that
there was much money in the chest, that the king's scribe and the high
priest came up, and they tied up and counted the money that was found in
the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And they gave the money, weighed out
into the hands of them that did the work, who were appointed over the
house of Jehovah; and they laid it out to the carpenters and builders
that wrought upon the house of Jehovah,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> and to masons, and hewers of stone, and
to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the breaches of the house of
Jehovah, and for all that had to be laid out on the house for repairs.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> However there were not made for the
house of Jehovah basons of silver, knives, bowls, trumpets, nor any
utensil of gold or utensil of silver, of the money that was brought
\[into\] the house of Jehovah;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> but they gave that to the workmen, and
repaired the house of Jehovah with it.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they did not reckon with the men
into whose hand they gave the money to be bestowed on workmen; for they
dealt faithfully.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The money of trespass-offerings, and
the money of sin-offerings, was not brought into the house of Jehovah:
it was for the priests.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and
fought against Gath, and took it. And Hazael set his face to go up
against Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And Jehoash king of Judah took all the
hallowed things that Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah, his fathers,
kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the
gold found in the treasures of the house of Jehovah and in the king's
house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria; and he went away from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And the rest of the acts of Joash, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And his servants rose up and made a
conspiracy, and smote Joash in the house of Millo, at the descent of
Silla.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And Jozachar the son of Shimeath and
Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him and he died; and
they buried him with his fathers in the city of David. And Amaziah his
son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In the three-and-twentieth year of Joash
the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to
reign over Israel in Samaria, for seventeen years.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And he did evil in the sight of Jehovah,
and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to
sin; he departed not from them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And the anger of Jehovah was kindled
against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of
Syria, and into the hand of Ben-Hadad the son of Hazael, all those days.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> (And Jehoahaz besought Jehovah, and
Jehovah hearkened to him; for he saw the oppression of Israel, because
the king of Syria oppressed them.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jehovah gave Israel a saviour, so
that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians; and the children
of Israel dwelt in their tents as before.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Nevertheless they departed not from the
sins of the house of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin: they walked
therein; and there remained also the Asherah in Samaria.)

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> For he had left of the people to Jehoahaz
but fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for the
king of Syria had destroyed them, and had made them like the dust by
threshing.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and
all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in Samaria; and Joash his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> In the thirty-seventh year of Joash
king of Judah began Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz to reign over Israel in
Samaria, for sixteen years.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah; he departed not from any of the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin: he walked therein.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And the rest of the acts of Joash, and
all that he did, and his might with which he fought against Amaziah king
of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And Joash slept with his fathers, and
Jeroboam sat upon his throne; and Joash was buried in Samaria with the
kings of Israel.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And Elisha fell sick of his sickness in
which he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down to him, and wept
over his face, and said, My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and
the horsemen thereof!

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Elisha said to him, Take bow and
arrows. And he took a bow and arrows.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he said to the king of Israel, Put
thy hand upon the bow. And he put his hand \[upon it\]; and Elisha put
his hands upon the king's hands,

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> and said, Open the window eastward. And
he opened \[it\]. And Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, An
arrow of Jehovah's deliverance, even an arrow of deliverance from the
Syrians; and thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou hast
consumed \[them\].

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And he said, Take the arrows. And he
took \[them\]. And he said to the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground.
And he smote thrice, and stayed.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And the man of God was wroth with him,
and said, Thou shouldest have smitten five or six times; then wouldest
thou have smitten the Syrians till thou hadst consumed \[them\]; whereas
now thou shalt smite Syria but thrice.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And Elisha died, and they buried him.
And the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the
year.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And it came to pass as they were
burying a man, that behold, they saw the band, and they cast the man
into the sepulchre of Elisha; and the man went \[down\], and touched the
bones of Elisha, and he revived, and stood upon his feet.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And Hazael king of Syria oppressed
Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And Jehovah was gracious to them, and
had compassion on them, and had respect to them, because of his covenant
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and he would not destroy them, neither
did he cast them from his presence up to that time.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And Hazael king of Syria died, and
Ben-Hadad his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took
again out of the hand of Ben-Hadad the son of Hazael the cities which he
had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father in the war. Three times
did Joash beat him, and recovered the cities of Israel.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> In the second year of Joash son of
Jehoahaz, king of Israel, began Amaziah the son of Joash, king of Judah,
to reign.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And he did what was right in the sight of
Jehovah, yet not like David his father: he did according to all that
Joash his father had done.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Only, the high places were not removed:
the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And it came to pass when the kingdom was
established in his hand, that he slew his servants who had smitten the
king his father.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But the children of those that smote
\[him\] he did not put to death; according to that which is written in
the book of the law of Moses, wherein Jehovah commanded saying, The
fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the
children be put to death for the fathers; but every man shall be put to
death for his own sin.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> He smote of Edom in the valley of salt
ten thousand, and took Sela in the war, and called the name of it
Joktheel to this day.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash
the son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us
look one another in the face.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And Jehoash king of Israel sent to
Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thorn-bush that is in Lebanon sent to
the cedar that is in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son as
wife; and there passed by the wild beast that is in Lebanon, and trode
down the thorn-bush.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thy
heart has lifted thee up: boast thyself, and abide at home; for why
shouldest thou contend with misfortune, that thou shouldest fall, thou,
and Judah with thee?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> But Amaziah would not hear. And Jehoash
king of Israel went up; and they looked one another in the face, he and
Amaziah king of Judah, at Beth-shemesh, which is in Judah.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And Judah was routed before Israel; and
they fled every man to his tent.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah
king of Judah, the son of Jehoash son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and
came to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of
Ephraim to the corner-gate, four hundred cubits.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he took all the gold and the
silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of Jehovah, and
in the treasures of the king's house, and hostages, and returned to
Samaria.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the rest of the acts of Jehoash,
what he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of
Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel?

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And Jehoash slept with his fathers, and
was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And Amaziah the son of Joash king of
Judah lived after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel,
fifteen years.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the rest of the acts of Amaziah,
are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Judah?

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And they made a conspiracy against him
in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish; and they sent after him to
Lachish, and slew him there.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And they brought him on horses, and he
was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers, in the city of David.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And all the people of Judah took
Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king instead of his
father Amaziah.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> It was he that built Elath, and
restored it to Judah, after the king slept with his fathers.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the
son of Joash, king of Judah, Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel,
began to reign in Samaria, for forty-one years.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah: he departed not from any of the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> He restored the border of Israel from
the entrance of Hamath as far as the sea of the plain, according to the
word of Jehovah the God of Israel, which he had spoken through his
servant Jonah the prophet, the son of Amittai, who was of Gath-Hepher.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> For Jehovah saw that the affliction of
Israel was very bitter; and that there was not any shut up, nor any
left, nor any helper for Israel.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Jehovah had not said that he would
blot out the name of Israel from under the heavens; and he saved them by
the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam,
and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered
for Israel that \[which had belonged\] to Judah in Damascus and in
Hamath, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel?

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And Jeroboam slept with his fathers,
with the kings of Israel; and Zechariah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam
king of Israel, Azariah son of Amaziah, king of Judah, began to reign.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> He was sixteen years old when he began to
reign; and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem; and his mother's
name was Jecholiah of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And he did what was right in the sight of
Jehovah, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Only, the high places were not removed:
the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And Jehovah smote the king, so that he
was a leper to the day of his death, and dwelt in a separate house. And
Jotham the king's son was over the house, judging the people of the
land.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the rest of the acts of Azariah, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And Azariah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him with his fathers in the city of David; and Jotham his
son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king
of Judah, Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria,
six months.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And he did evil in the sight of Jehovah,
according as his fathers had done: he departed not from the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired
against him, and smote him before the people, and slew him, and reigned
in his stead.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And the rest of the acts of Zechariah,
behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> This was the word of Jehovah which he
spoke to Jehu saying, Thy sons shall sit upon the throne of Israel unto
the fourth \[generation\]. And so it came to pass.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Shallum the son of Jabesh began to
reign in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah; and he reigned a
full month in Samaria.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Menahem the son of Gadi went up
from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in
Samaria, and slew him, and reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And the rest of the acts of Shallum,
and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book
of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all
that were therein, and its territory from Tirzah, because they did not
open \[to him\]; and he smote \[it\]: all the women in it that were with
child he ripped up.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah
king of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi began to reign over Israel, for
ten years, in Samaria.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah: he departed not, all his days, from the sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Pul the king of Assyria came against
the land; and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his
hand might be with him to establish the kingdom in his hand.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Menahem exacted the money of
Israel, of all those who were wealthy, of each man fifty shekels of
silver, to give to the king of Assyria. And the king of Assyria turned
back, and stayed not there in the land.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And the rest of the acts of Menahem,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Menahem slept with his fathers; and
Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of
Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in
Samaria, for two years.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his
captain, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the
fortress of the king's house, with Argob and Arieh, and with him fifty
men of the Gileadites; and he slew him, and reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And the rest of the acts of Pekahiah,
and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> In the fifty-second year of Azariah
king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in
Samaria, for twenty years.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah: he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> In the days of Pekah king of Israel,
Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria came and took Ijon, and
Abel-Beth-Maachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and
Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and carried them captive to Assyria.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And Hoshea the son of Elah made a
conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him and slew
him; and he reigned in his stead, in the twentieth year of Jotham the
son of Uzziah.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And the rest of the acts of Pekah, and
all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> In the second year of Pekah the son of
Remaliah, king of Israel, Jotham the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, began
to reign.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Jerusha, the daughter of Zadok.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And he did what was right in the sight
of Jehovah: he did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Only, the high places were not removed:
the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. It
was he who built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And the rest of the acts of Jotham, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> In those days Jehovah began to send
against Judah Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And Jotham slept with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Ahaz
his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son
of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham, king of Judah, began to reign.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Ahaz was twenty years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And he did not what
was right in the sight of Jehovah his God, like David his father,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> but walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, and even caused his son to pass through the fire, according to
the abominations of the nations that Jehovah had dispossessed from
before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And he sacrificed and burned incense on
the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Then Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah
son of Remaliah, the king of Israel, came up to Jerusalem to battle; and
they besieged Ahaz, but were unable to conquer him.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> At that time Rezin king of Syria
recovered Elath to Syria, and drove the Jews from Elath; and the Syrians
came to Elath, and dwelt there to this day.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And Ahaz sent messengers to
Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant and thy son:
come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of
the hand of the king of Israel, who have risen up against me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Ahaz took the silver and the gold
that was found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the
king's house, and sent it \[as\] a present to the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And the king of Assyria hearkened to him;
and the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and
carried it captive to Kir, and put Rezin to death.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet
Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria; and he saw the altar that was at
Damascus, and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the form of the altar,
and the pattern of it, according to all its workmanship.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And Urijah the priest built an altar
according to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus; thus Urijah the
priest made \[it\], against king Ahaz came from Damascus.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And when the king came from Damascus,
the king saw the altar; and the king approached to the altar, and
offered upon it.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And he burned his burnt-offering and
his oblation, and poured out his drink-offering, and sprinkled the blood
of his peace-offering upon the altar.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And the brazen altar which was before
Jehovah, he brought forward from the forefront of the house, from
between \[his\] altar and the house of Jehovah, and put it by the side
of \[his\] altar on the north.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the
priest saying, Upon the great altar burn the morning burnt-offering, and
the evening oblation, and the king's burnt-offering, and his oblation,
and the burnt-offering of all the people of the land, and their
oblation, and their drink-offerings; and sprinkle upon it all the blood
of the burnt-offerings, and all the blood of the sacrifices; and the
brazen altar shall be for me to inquire \[by\].

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Urijah the priest did according to
all that king Ahaz had commanded.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And king Ahaz cut off the panels of the
bases, and removed the lavers from off them; and took down the sea from
off the brazen oxen that were under it, and put it upon a stone
pavement.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And the covered way of the sabbath that
they had built in the house, and the king's entry outside, he turned
from the house of Jehovah on account of the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And the rest of the acts of Ahaz, what
he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Judah?

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the city of David; and Hezekiah his son
reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of
Judah, Hoshea the son of Elah began to reign in Samaria over Israel, for
nine years.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he did evil in the sight of Jehovah,
but not as the kings of Israel that had been before him.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Against him came up Shalmaneser king of
Assyria, and Hoshea became his servant, and tendered him presents.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> But the king of Assyria found conspiracy
in Hoshea; for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and sent up
no present to the king of Assyria as \[he had done\] from year to year.
And the king of Assyria shut him up and bound him in prison.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the king of Assyria overran the whole
land, and went up against Samaria, and besieged it three years.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of
Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria, and placed
them in Halah and by the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of
the Medes.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And so it was, because the children of
Israel had sinned against Jehovah their God, who had brought them up out
of the land of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and
had feared other gods;

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> and they walked in the statutes of the
nations that Jehovah had dispossessed from before the children of
Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which they had made.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And the children of Israel did secretly
against Jehovah their God things that were not right; and they built
them high places in all their cities, from the watchmen's tower to the
fortified city.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And they set them up columns and
Asherahs on every high hill and under every green tree;

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> and there they burned incense on all
the high places, as did the nations that Jehovah had carried away from
before them, and they wrought wicked things to provoke Jehovah to anger;

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> and they served idols, as to which
Jehovah had said to them, Ye shall not do this thing.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Jehovah testified against Israel
and against Judah, by all the prophets, all the seers, saying, Turn from
your evil ways, and keep my commandments, my statutes, according to all
the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you through
my servants the prophets.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> But they would not hear, and hardened
their necks, like to the neck of their fathers, who did not believe in
Jehovah their God.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And they rejected his statutes, and his
covenant which he had made with their fathers, and his testimonies which
he had testified unto them; and they followed vanity and became vain,
and \[went\] after the nations that were round about them, concerning
whom Jehovah had charged them that they should not do like them.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And they forsook all the commandments
of Jehovah their God, and made them molten images, two calves, and made
an Asherah, and worshipped all the host of the heavens, and served Baal;

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> and they caused their sons and their
daughters to pass through the fire, and used divination and
enchantments, and sold themselves to do evil in the sight of Jehovah, to
provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Therefore Jehovah was very angry with
Israel, and removed them out of his sight: there remained but the tribe
of Judah only.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Also Judah kept not the commandments of
Jehovah their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they had
made.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> And Jehovah rejected all the seed of
Israel; and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of
spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> For Israel had rent \[the kingdom\]
from the house of David; and they had made Jeroboam the son of Nebat
king; and Jeroboam violently turned Israel from following Jehovah, and
made them sin a great sin.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And the children of Israel walked in
all the sins of Jeroboam which he did; they did not depart from them:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> until Jehovah had removed Israel out of
his sight, as he had said through all his servants the prophets; and
Israel was carried away out of their own land to Assyria, unto this day.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> And the king of Assyria brought
\[people\] from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Avva, and from
Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and made them dwell in the cities of
Samaria instead of the children of Israel; and they possessed Samaria,
and dwelt in its cities.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And so it was, at the beginning of
their dwelling there, that they feared not Jehovah; and Jehovah sent
lions among them, which killed \[some\] of them.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And they spoke to the king of Assyria
saying, The nations that thou hast removed and made to dwell in the
cities of Samaria know not the manner of the god of the land; therefore
he has sent lions among them, and behold, they slay them, because they
know not the manner of the god of the land.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> And the king of Assyria commanded
saying, Carry thither one of the priests whom ye have brought away from
thence; and let them go and abide there, and let him teach them the
manner of the god of the land.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Then one of the priests whom they had
carried away from Samaria came and abode in Bethel, and taught them how
they should fear Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> And every nation made gods of their
own, and put them in the houses of the high places that the Samaritans
had made, every nation in their cities in which they dwelt.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> And the people of Babylon made
Succoth-benoth, and the people of Cuth made Nergal, and the people of
Hamath made Ashima,

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> and the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak,
and the Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelech and
Anammelech the gods of Sepharvaim.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> So they feared Jehovah, and made to
themselves from all classes of them priests of the high places, who
offered \[sacrifices\] for them in the houses of the high places.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> They feared Jehovah, and served their
own gods after the manner of the nations, whence they had been carried
away.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> To this day they do after their former
customs: they fear not Jehovah, neither do they after their statutes or
after their ordinances, nor after the law and commandment that Jehovah
commanded the sons of Jacob, whom he named Israel.

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> And Jehovah had made a covenant with
them, and charged them saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow
down yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them;

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> but Jehovah alone, who brought you up
out of the land of Egypt with great power and a stretched-out arm, him
shall ye fear, and him shall ye worship, and to him shall ye do
sacrifice.

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> And the statutes and the ordinances and
the law, and the commandment which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to
do for evermore; and ye shall not fear other gods.

<span id="an_17:38">17:38</span> And ye shall not forget the covenant
that I have made with you, neither shall ye fear other gods;

<span id="an_17:39">17:39</span> but ye shall fear Jehovah your God, and
he shall deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.

<span id="an_17:40">17:40</span> And they did not hearken, but did after
their former customs.

<span id="an_17:41">17:41</span> And these nations feared Jehovah, and
served their graven images, both their children and their children's
children: as did their fathers, so do they, unto this day.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And it came to pass in the third year of
Hoshea the son of Elah, king of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz,
king of Judah, began to reign.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> He was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Abi, daughter of Zechariah.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And he did what was right in the sight of
Jehovah, according to all that David his father had done.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> He removed the high places, and broke the
columns, and cut down the Asherahs, and broke in pieces the serpent of
brass that Moses had made; for to those days the children of Israel
burned incense to it: and he called it Nehushtan.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> He trusted in Jehovah the God of Israel;
so that after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor
\[among any\] that were before him.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And he clave to Jehovah, and did not turn
aside from following him, but kept his commandments, which Jehovah
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Jehovah was with him; he prospered
whithersoever he went forth. And he rebelled against the king of
Assyria, and served him not.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> He smote the Philistines unto Gazah and
its borders, from the watchmen's tower to the fortified city.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And it came to pass in the fourth year of
king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea the son of Elah,
king of Israel, \[that\] Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against
Samaria and besieged it.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And at the end of three years they took
it; in the sixth year of Hezekiah, that is, the ninth year of Hoshea
king of Israel, Samaria was taken.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And the king of Assyria carried away
Israel to Assyria, and settled them in Halah and by the Habor, the river
of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes;

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> because they hearkened not to the voice
of Jehovah their God, but transgressed his covenant, all that Moses the
servant of Jehovah commanded; and they would not hear nor do it.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And in the fourteenth year of king
Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified
cities of Judah, and took them.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the
king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, I have sinned; retire from me: I
will bear what thou layest upon me. And the king of Assyria laid upon
Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty
talents of gold.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Hezekiah gave all the silver that
was found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the king's
house.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> At that time Hezekiah stripped the
doors of the temple of Jehovah, and the posts that Hezekiah king of
Judah had overlaid, and gave them to the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and
Rabsaris and Rab-shakeh from Lachish, with a strong force, against king
Hezekiah, to Jerusalem. And they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when
they were come up, they came and stood by the aqueduct of the upper
pool, which is on the highway of the fuller's field.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And they called to the king. Then came
forth to them Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, who was over the household,
and Shebnah the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph, the chronicler.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And Rab-shakeh said to them, Say now to
Hezekiah, Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: What confidence
is this wherein thou trustest?

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Thou sayest -- but it is a word of the
lips -- There is counsel and strength for war. Now on whom dost thou
rely, that thou hast revolted against me?

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Now behold, thou reliest upon the staff
of that broken reed, upon Egypt, on which if a man lean, it goes into
his hand and pierces it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that rely
upon him.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And if ye say to me, We rely upon
Jehovah our God: is it not he whose high places and whose altars
Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship
before this altar in Jerusalem?

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And now, engage, I pray thee, with my
master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if
thou canst set the riders upon them.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> How then wilt thou turn away the face
of one captain of the least of my master's servants? And thou reliest
upon Egypt for chariots and for horsemen!

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Am I now come up without Jehovah
against this place to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up against this
land and destroy it.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, and
Shebnah and Joah said to Rab-shakeh, Speak, we pray thee, to thy
servants in Syriac, for we understand it, and talk not with us in the
Jewish \[language\] in the ears of the people that are on the wall.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Rab-shakeh said to them, Is it to
thy master and to thee that my master sent me to speak these words? Is
it not to the men that sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung
and drink their own urine with you?

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And Rab-shakeh stood and cried with a
loud voice in the Jewish \[language\], and spoke and said, Hear the word
of the great king, the king of Assyria!

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Thus says the king: Let not Hezekiah
deceive you; for he will not be able to deliver you out of the
\[king's\] hand.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Neither let Hezekiah make you rely upon
Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will certainly deliver us, and this city shall
not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Hearken not to Hezekiah; for thus says
the king of Assyria: Make peace with me, and come out to me; and eat
every one of his vine and every one of his fig-tree, and drink every one
the waters of his own cistern;

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> until I come and take you away to a
land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and
vineyards, a land of olive-trees and of honey, that ye may live and not
die; and hearken not to Hezekiah, when he persuades you, saying, Jehovah
will deliver us.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Have any of the gods of the nations
delivered at all his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Where are the gods of Hamath and of
Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah? and have they
delivered Samaria out of my hand?

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> Which are they among all the gods of
the countries, who have delivered their country out of my hand, that
Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> But the people were silent and answered
him not a word; for the king's command was, saying, Answer him not.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> And Eliakim the son of Hilkijah, who
was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of
Asaph, the chronicler, came to Hezekiah with their garments rent, and
told him the words of Rab-shakeh.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came to pass when king Hezekiah
heard \[it\], that he rent his garments, and covered himself with
sackcloth, and went into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And he sent Eliakim, who was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered
with sackcloth, to the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah:
This day is a day of trouble and of rebuke and of reviling; for the
children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> It may be Jehovah thy God will hear all
the words of Rab-shakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to
reproach the living God; and will rebuke the words which Jehovah thy God
has heard. Therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that is left.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the servants of king Hezekiah came to
Isaiah.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye
say to your master: Thus saith Jehovah: Be not afraid of the words that
thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have
blasphemed me.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Behold, I will put a spirit into him, and
he shall hear tidings, and shall return to his own land; and I will make
him to fall by the sword in his own land.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And Rab-shakeh returned, and found the
king of Assyria warring against Libnah; for he had heard that he had
departed from Lachish.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he heard say of Tirhakah king of
Ethiopia, Behold, he has come forth to make war with thee. And he sent
messengers again to Hezekiah, saying,

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of
Judah saying: Let not thy God, upon whom thou reliest, deceive thee,
saying, Jerusalem shall not be delivered into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Behold, thou hast heard what the kings
of Assyria have done to all countries, destroying them utterly; and
shalt thou be delivered?

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Have the gods of the nations which my
fathers have destroyed delivered them: Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and
the children of Eden that were in Thelassar?

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Where is the king of Hamath, and the
king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and
Ivvah?

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Hezekiah received the letter from
the hand of the messengers, and read it; and Hezekiah went up into the
house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah and
said, Jehovah, God of Israel, who sittest \[between\] the cherubim,
thou, the Same, thou alone art the God of all the kingdoms of the earth:
thou hast made the heavens and the earth.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Incline thine ear, Jehovah, and hear;
open, Jehovah, thine eyes, and see; and hear the words of Sennacherib,
who hath sent him to reproach the living God.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> Of a truth, Jehovah, the kings of
Assyria have laid waste the nations and their lands,

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and have cast their gods into the fire;
for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone;
therefore have they destroyed them.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And now, Jehovah our God, I beseech
thee, save us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may
know that thou, Jehovah, art God, thou only.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to
Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel: That which thou
hast prayed to me concerning Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> This is the word that Jehovah has
spoken against him: The virgin-daughter of Zion despiseth thee, laugheth
thee to scorn; The daughter of Jerusalem shaketh her head at thee.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Whom hast thou reproached and
blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted the voice? Against the
Holy one of Israel hast thou lifted up thine eyes on high.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> By thy messengers thou hast reproached
the Lord, and hast said, With the multitude of my chariots have I come
up To the height of the mountain, to the recesses of Lebanon, And I will
cut down its tall cedars, the choice of its cypresses; And I will enter
into its furthest lodging-place, \[into\] the forest of its fruitful
field.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> I have digged, and have drunk strange
waters, And with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the streams of
Matsor.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Hast thou not heard long ago that I
have done it? And that from ancient days I formed it? Now have I brought
it to pass, that thou shouldest lay waste fortified cities \[into\]
ruinous heaps.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And their inhabitants were powerless,
They were dismayed and put to shame; They were \[as\] the growing grass,
and \[as\] the green herb, \[As\] the grass on the housetops, and grain
blighted before it be grown up.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> But I know thine abode, and thy going
out, and thy coming in, And thy raging against me.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> Because thy raging against me and thine
arrogance is come up into mine ears, I will put my ring in thy nose, and
my bridle in thy lips, And I will make thee go back by the way by which
thou camest.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And this \[shall be\] the sign unto
thee: They shall eat this year such as groweth of itself, And in the
second year that which springeth of the same; But in the third year sow
ye and reap, And plant vineyards and eat the fruit thereof.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And the remnant that is escaped of the
house of Judah Shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward;

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
remnant, And out of mount Zion they that escape: The zeal of Jehovah
\[of hosts\] shall do this.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Therefore thus saith Jehovah concerning
the king of Assyria: He shall not come into this city, Nor shoot an
arrow there, Nor come before it with shield, Nor cast a bank against it.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> By the way that he came, by the same
shall he return, And shall not come into this city, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And I will defend this city, to save
it, For mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And it came to pass that night, that an
angel of Jehovah went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a
hundred and eighty-five thousand. And when they arose early in the
morning, behold, they were all dead bodies.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> And Sennacherib king of Assyria
departed, and went and returned, and abode at Nineveh.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And it came to pass, as he was
worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and
Sharezer \[his sons\] smote him with the sword; and they escaped into
the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> In those days Hezekiah was sick unto
death. And the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz came to him and said to
him, Thus saith Jehovah: Set thy house in order; for thou shalt die, and
not live.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he turned his face to the wall, and
prayed to Jehovah saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Ah! Jehovah, remember, I beseech thee,
how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and
have done what is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept much.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And it came to pass before Isaiah had
gone out into the middle city that the word of Jehovah came to him
saying,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Return, and tell Hezekiah the captain of
my people, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of David thy father: I have heard
thy prayer, I have seen thy tears; behold, I will heal thee: on the
third day thou shalt go up to the house of Jehovah;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> and I will add to thy days fifteen years;
and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of
Assyria, and I will defend this city for mine own sake, and for my
servant David's sake.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And Isaiah said, Take a cake of figs. And
they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, What \[shall
be\] the sign that Jehovah will heal me, and that I shall go up into the
house of Jehovah the third day?

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Isaiah said, This \[shall be\] the
sign to thee from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do the thing that he hath
spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back ten degrees?

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Hezekiah said, It is a light thing
for the shadow to go down ten degrees: no, but let the shadow return
backward ten degrees.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Isaiah the prophet cried to
Jehovah, and he brought the shadow back on the degrees by which it had
gone down on the dial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> At that time Berodach-Baladan, the son
of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent a letter and a present to Hezekiah,
for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And Hezekiah hearkened to them, and
shewed them all his treasure-house, the silver and the gold, and the
spices and the fine oil, and all the house of his armour, and all that
was found among his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in
all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not shew them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Then came the prophet Isaiah to king
Hezekiah and said to him, What said these men? and from whence came they
to thee? And Hezekiah said, They came from a far country, from Babylon.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And he said, What have they seen in thy
house? And Hezekiah said, All that is in my house have they seen: there
is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewn them.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the
word of Jehovah:

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Behold, days come that all that is in
thy house, and what thy fathers have laid up until this day, shall be
carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And of thy sons that shall issue from
thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be
chamberlains in the palace of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is
the word of Jehovah which thou hast spoken. And he said, Is it not so?
if only there shall be peace and truth in my days!

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And the rest of the acts of Hezekiah,
and all his might, and how he made the pool and the aqueduct, and
brought the water into the city, are they not written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And Hezekiah slept with his fathers;
and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Manasseh was twelve years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Hephzibah.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And he did evil in the sight of Jehovah,
like the abominations of the nations that Jehovah had dispossessed from
before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And he built again the high places that
Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he reared up altars to Baal and
made an Asherah, as did Ahab king of Israel; and worshipped all the host
of heaven, and served them.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And he built altars in the house of
Jehovah, of which Jehovah had said, In Jerusalem will I put my name.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And he built altars to all the host of
heaven in both courts of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he caused his son to pass through the
fire, and used magic and divination, and appointed necromancers and
soothsayers: he wrought evil beyond measure in the sight of Jehovah, to
provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And he set the graven image of the
Asherah that he had made, in the house of which Jehovah had said to
David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I
have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name for
ever;

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> neither will I any more cause the foot of
Israel to wander away from the land that I gave their fathers; if they
will only take heed to do according to all that I have commanded them,
and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> But they would not hearken, and Manasseh
led them astray to do more evil than the nations that Jehovah had
destroyed from before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And Jehovah spoke by his servants the
prophets saying,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Because Manasseh king of Judah hath
done these abominations, and hath done wickedly above all that the
Amorites did, who were before him, and hath made Judah also to sin with
his idols;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> therefore thus saith Jehovah the God of
Israel: Behold, I will bring evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that
whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And I will stretch over Jerusalem the
line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, and I will wipe
Jerusalem as one wipeth a pan, wiping it and turning it upside down.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And I will forsake the remnant of mine
inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies; and they
shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies;

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> because they have done evil in my
sight, and have provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came
forth out of Egypt even to this day.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And Manasseh shed very much innocent
blood, till he had filled Jerusalem \[with it\] from one end to another;
beside his sin with which he made Judah to sin, in doing evil in the
sight of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the rest of the acts of Manasseh,
and all that he did, and his sin which he sinned, are they not written
in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And Manasseh slept with his fathers,
and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza;
and Amon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Amon was twenty-two years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem; and his mother's
name was Meshullemeth, daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, as Manasseh his father had done;

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> and he walked in all the way that his
father had walked in, and served the idols that his father had served,
and worshipped them;

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> and he forsook Jehovah the God of his
fathers, and walked not in the way of Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And the servants of Amon conspired
against him, and slew the king in his own house.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> But the people of the land smote all
them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land
made Josiah his son king in his stead.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And the rest of the acts of Amon, what
he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Judah?

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And he was buried in his sepulchre in
the garden of Uzza; and Josiah his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Josiah was eight years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem; and his mother's
name was Jedidah, daughter of Adaiah of Bozcath.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And he did what was right in the sight of
Jehovah, and walked in all the way of David his father, and turned not
aside to the right hand nor to the left.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And it came to pass in the eighteenth
year of king Josiah, \[that\] the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah,
son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Go up to Hilkijah the high priest, that
he may sum up the money which is brought into the house of Jehovah,
which the doorkeepers have gathered of the people,

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> and let them give it into the hand of
them that do the work, that have the oversight of the house of Jehovah;
and let them give it to those that do the work in the house of Jehovah,
to repair the breaches of the house,

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> to the carpenters and the builders and
the masons, and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But no reckoning was made with them of
the money that was given into their hand, because they dealt faithfully.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And Hilkijah the high priest said to
Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of
Jehovah. And Hilkijah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And Shaphan the scribe came to the king,
and brought the king word again and said, Thy servants have emptied out
the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the
hand of them that do the work, that have the oversight of the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And Shaphan the scribe informed the
king saying, Hilkijah the priest has given me a book. And Shaphan read
it before the king.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And it came to pass when the king heard
the words of the book of the law, that he rent his garments.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And the king commanded Hilkijah the
priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Micaiah,
and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king, saying,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Go, inquire of Jehovah for me, and for
the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book which
is found; for great is the wrath of Jehovah that is kindled against us,
because our fathers have not hearkened to the words of this book, to do
according to all that is written \[there\] for us.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And Hilkijah the priest, and Ahikam,
and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asaiah, went to Huldah the prophetess, the
wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, son of Harhas, keeper of the
wardrobe: now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter \[of the
town\]; and they spoke with her.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> And she said to them, Thus saith
Jehovah the God of Israel: Tell the man that sent you to me,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Behold, I will
bring evil upon this place and upon the inhabitants thereof, all the
words of the book that the king of Judah hath read.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have
burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with
all the work of their hands, therefore my fury is kindled against this
place, and shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> But to the king of Judah, who sent you
to inquire of Jehovah, thus shall ye say to him: Thus saith Jehovah the
God of Israel touching the words which thou hast heard:

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Because thy heart was tender, and thou
didst humble thyself before Jehovah, when thou heardest what I spoke
against this place and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should
become a desolation and a curse, and didst rend thy garments and weep
before me, I also have heard \[thee\], saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Therefore, behold, I will gather thee
unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace; and
thine eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place.
And they brought the king word again.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And the king sent, and they gathered to
him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And the king went up into the house of
Jehovah, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem
with him, and the priests and the prophets, and all the people, both
small and great; and he read in their ears all the words of the book of
the covenant which had been found in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And the king stood on the dais, and made
a covenant before Jehovah, to walk after Jehovah, and to keep his
commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all \[his\]
heart, and with all \[his\] soul, to establish the words of this
covenant that are written in this book. And all the people stood to the
covenant.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And the king commanded Hilkijah the high
priest, and the priests of the second order, and the doorkeepers, to
bring forth out of the temple of Jehovah all the vessels that had been
made for Baal, and for the Asherah, and for all the host of the heavens;
and he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of Kidron, and
carried the ashes of them to Bethel.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And he abolished the idolatrous priests,
whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense on the high places
in the cities of Judah, and the environs of Jerusalem; and them that
burned incense to Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the
constellations, and to all the host of heaven.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And he brought out the Asherah from the
house of Jehovah, outside Jerusalem, to the torrent of Kidron, and
burned it at the torrent of Kidron, and stamped it small to powder, and
cast the powder upon the graves of the children of the people.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And he broke down the houses of the
sodomites, which were in the house of Jehovah, where the women wove
tents for the Asherah.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And he brought all the priests out of the
cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had
burned incense, from Geba even to Beer-sheba; and he broke down the high
places of the gates, those at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the
governor of the city, \[and\] those on the left hand of any \[going in\]
at the gate of the city.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Nevertheless the priests of the high
places came not up to the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem, but they ate of
the unleavened bread among their brethren.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And he defiled Topheth, which is in the
valley of the sons of Hinnom, that no man might cause his son or his
daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And he abolished the horses that the
kings of Judah had appointed to the sun at the entrance of the house of
Jehovah, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, which was in
the suburbs, and burned the chariots of the sun, with fire.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And the king broke down the altars that
were on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah
had made, and the altars that Manasseh had made in the two courts of the
house of Jehovah, and he shattered them, \[removing them\] from thence,
and cast the powder of them into the torrent of Kidron.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And the high places that were before
Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption,
which Solomon the king of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the abomination
of the Zidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of the Moabites, and
for Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon, did the king
defile.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And he broke in pieces the columns, and
cut down the Asherahs, and filled their place with the bones of men.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Moreover the altar that was at Bethel,
the high place that Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin,
had made, both that altar and the high place he broke down; and burned
the high place, stamped it small to powder, and burned the Asherah.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Josiah turned himself, and saw the
sepulchres that were there on the mount; and he sent and took the bones
out of the sepulchres, and burned \[them\] upon the altar, and defiled
it, according to the word of Jehovah, that the man of God had
proclaimed, who proclaimed these things.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Then he said, What tombstone is that
which I see? And the men of the city told him, It is the sepulchre of
the man of God who came from Judah and proclaimed these things which
thou hast done against the altar of Bethel.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And he said, Let him alone; let no man
move his bones. And they saved his bones, with the bones of the prophet
that came out of Samaria.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And all the houses also of the high
places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had
made to provoke \[Jehovah\] to anger, Josiah removed, and did to them
according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he sacrificed upon the altars all
the priests of the high places that were there, and burned men's bones
upon them. And he returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And the king commanded all the people
saying, Hold the passover to Jehovah your God, as it is written in this
book of the covenant.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> For there was not holden such a
passover from the days of the judges that judged Israel, nor in all the
days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah;

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> but in the eighteenth year of king
Josiah was this passover holden to Jehovah in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Moreover the necromancers and the
soothsayers, and the teraphim and the idols, and all the abominations
that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, Josiah took away,
that he might perform the words of the law which were written in the
book that Hilkijah the priest had found in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And before him there had been no king
like him that turned to Jehovah with all his heart and with all his soul
and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither after
him arose there his like.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> But Jehovah turned not from the
fierceness of his great wrath, wherewith his anger was kindled against
Judah, because of all the provocations with which Manasseh had provoked
him.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> And Jehovah said, I will remove Judah
also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and will reject this
city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, My
name shall be there.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And the rest of the acts of Josiah, and
all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> In his days Pharaoh-Nechoh king of
Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates; and
king Josiah went against him; but \[Nechoh\] slew him at Megiddo, when
he had seen him.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And his servants carried him in a
chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him
in his own sepulchre. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son
of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him king in his father's stead.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem; and
his mother's name was Hamutal, daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, according to all that his fathers had done.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> And Pharaoh-Nechoh had him bound at
Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and
laid a tribute upon the land of a hundred talents of silver and a talent
of gold.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And Pharaoh-Nechoh made Eliakim the son
of Josiah king instead of Josiah his father, and changed his name to
Jehoiakim. And he took Jehoahaz; and he came to Egypt, and died there.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the
gold to Pharaoh; but he laid a proportional tax on the land to give the
money according to the command of Pharaoh: he exacted the silver and the
gold of the people of the land, of every one according to his
estimation, to give it to Pharaoh-Nechoh.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and
his mother's name was Zebuddah, daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, according to all that his fathers had done.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim was his servant three years; then he
turned and rebelled against him.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Jehovah sent against him the bands of
the Chaldeans, and the bands of the Syrians, and the bands of the
Moabites, and the bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against
Judah to destroy it, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke
through his servants the prophets.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Verily, at the commandment of Jehovah it
came to pass against Judah, that they should be removed out of his
sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he had done;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> and also \[because of\] the innocent
blood that he had shed; for he had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood,
and Jehovah would not pardon.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,
and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Jehoiakim slept with his fathers, and
Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And the king of Egypt came not again any
more out of his land, for the king of Babylon had taken all that
belonged to the king of Egypt, from the torrent of Egypt to the river
Euphrates.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Nehushta, daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And he did evil in the sight of Jehovah,
according to all that his father had done.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> At that time the servants of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against Jerusalem, and the city
was besieged.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came
against the city, while his servants were besieging it.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And Jehoiachin king of Judah went out
to the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his
princes, and his chamberlains; and the king of Babylon took him in the
eighth year of his reign.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And he brought out thence all the
treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's
house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold that Solomon king of
Israel had made in the temple of Jehovah, as Jehovah had said.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And he carried away all Jerusalem, and
all the princes, and all the mighty men of valour, ten thousand
captives, and all the craftsmen and smiths: none remained but the
poorest sort of the people of the land.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And he carried away Jehoiachin to
Babylon, and the king's mother, and the king's wives, and his
chamberlains, and the mighty of the land, he led into captivity from
Jerusalem to Babylon;

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> and all the men of valour, seven
thousand, and the craftsmen and smiths a thousand, all strong men apt
for war, and the king of Babylon brought them captive to Babylon.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah
his uncle king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when
he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his
mother's name was Hamutal, daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And he did evil in the sight of
Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> For, because the anger of Jehovah was
against Jerusalem and against Judah, until he had cast them out from his
presence, Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And it came to pass in the ninth year of
his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth of the month, \[that\]
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built turrets against it
round about.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And the city was besieged until the
eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> On the ninth of the \[fourth\] month the
famine prevailed in the city, and there was no bread for the people of
the land.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And the city was broken into; and all the
men of war \[fled\] by night, by the way of the gate between the two
walls, which \[leads\] to the king's garden (now the Chaldeans were by
the city round about); and they went the way toward the plain.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And the army of the Chaldeans pursued
after the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho; and all his
army was scattered from him.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And they took the king, and brought him
up to the king of Babylon unto Riblah; and they pronounced judgment upon
him,

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> and slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah
before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him with
chains of brass, and carried him to Babylon.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And in the fifth month, on the seventh of
the month, which was in the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar, king
of Babylon, Nebuzar-adan, captain of the body-guard, servant of the king
of Babylon, came unto Jerusalem;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> and he burned the house of Jehovah, and
the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; and every great
\[man's\] house he burned with fire.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And all the army of the Chaldeans that
were with the captain of the body-guard broke down the walls of
Jerusalem round about.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard carried away captive the rest of the people that were left in
the city, and the deserters that had deserted to the king of Babylon,
and the rest of the multitude.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> But the captain of the body-guard left
of the poor of the land for vinedressers and husbandmen.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And the brazen pillars that were in the
house of Jehovah, and the bases, and the brazen sea that was in the
house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke in pieces, and carried the brass
thereof to Babylon.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> The cauldrons also and the shovels and
the knives and the cups, and all the vessels of copper wherewith they
ministered, they took away.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And the censers and the bowls, that
which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver, the
captain of the body-guard took away.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> The two pillars, the one sea, and the
bases which Solomon had made for the house of Jehovah: for the brass of
all these vessels there was no weight.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> The height of one pillar was eighteen
cubits, and the capital upon it was brass, and the height of the capital
three cubits; and the network and the pomegranates, upon the capital
round about, all of brass: and similarly for the second pillar with the
network.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And the captain of the body-guard took
Seraiah the high priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three
doorkeepers.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And out of the city he took a
chamberlain that was set over the men of war, and five men of them that
were in the king's presence, who were found in the city, and the scribe
of the captain of the host, who enrolled the people of the land; and
sixty men of the people of the land that were found in the city.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
body-guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah;

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> and the king of Babylon smote them and
put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was
carried away captive out of his land.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And \[as for\] the people that remained
in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left
behind, over them he appointed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of
Shaphan.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And all the captains of the forces,
they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had appointed
Gedaliah, and they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, namely, Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of
Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of a Maachathite, they
and their men.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And Gedaliah swore unto them and to
their men, and said to them, Fear not to be servants of the Chaldeans:
dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well
with you.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And it came to pass in the seventh
month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the
royal seed, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, that he
died, and the Jews and the Chaldeans that were with him at Mizpah.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And all the people, both small and
great, and the captains of the forces, arose and came to Egypt; for they
were afraid of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> And it came to pass in the
thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the
twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh of the month, \[that\]
Evil-Merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign,
lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison;

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> and he spoke kindly to him, and set his
seat above the seat of the kings that were with him in Babylon.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And he changed his prison garments; and
he ate bread before him continually all the days of his life;

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> and his allowance was a continual
allowance given him by the king, every day a portion, all the days of
his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles](ch1.md)
