[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mat)  [Next](luk.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Mark

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus
Christ, Son of God;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> as it is written in \[Isaiah\] the prophet,
Behold, \*I\* send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy
way.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare the way of \[the\] Lord, make his paths straight.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> There came John baptising in the
wilderness, and preaching \[the\] baptism of repentance for remission of
sins.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And there went out to him all the district
of Judaea, and all they of Jerusalem, and were baptised by him in the
river Jordan, confessing their sins.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And John was clothed in camel's hair, and a
leathern girdle about his loins, and ate locusts and wild honey.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he preached, saying, There comes he
that is mightier than I after me, the thong of whose sandals I am not
fit to stoop down and unloose.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> \*I\* indeed have baptised you with water,
but \*he\* shall baptise you with \[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And it came to pass in those days \[that\]
Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptised by John at the
Jordan.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And straightway going up from the water,
he saw the heavens parting asunder, and the Spirit, as a dove,
descending upon him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And there came a voice out of the
heavens: \*Thou\* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And immediately the Spirit drives him out
into the wilderness.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And he was in the wilderness forty days
tempted by Satan, and was with the wild beasts; and the angels
ministered to him.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But after John was delivered up, Jesus
came into Galilee preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> and saying, The time is fulfilled and the
kingdom of God has drawn nigh; repent and believe in the glad tidings.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw
Simon, and Andrew, \[Simon's\] brother, casting out a net in the sea,
for they were fishers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Jesus said to them, Come after me,
and I will make you become fishers of men;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and straightway leaving their trawl-nets
they followed him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And going on thence a little, he saw
James the \[son\] of Zebedee, and John his brother, and these \[were\]
in the ship repairing the trawl-nets;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and straightway he called them; and
leaving their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, they
went away after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they go into Capernaum. And
straightway on the sabbath he entered into the synagogue and taught.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And they were astonished at his doctrine,
for he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And there was in their synagogue a man
\[possessed\] by an unclean spirit, and he cried out

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> saying, Eh! what have we to do with thee,
Jesus, Nazarene? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art,
the holy one of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy
peace and come out of him.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And the unclean spirit, having torn him,
and uttered a cry with a loud voice, came out of him.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And all were amazed, so that they
questioned together among themselves, saying, What is this? what new
doctrine is this? for with authority he commands even the unclean
spirits, and they obey him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And his fame went out straightway into
the whole region of Galilee around.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And straightway going out of the
synagogue, they came with James and John into the house of Simon and
Andrew.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> And the mother-in-law of Simon lay in a
fever. And straightway they speak to him about her.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And he went up to \[her\] and raised her
up, having taken her by the hand, and straightway the fever left her,
and she served them.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> But evening being come, when the sun had
gone down, they brought to him all that were suffering, and those
possessed by demons;

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> and the whole city was gathered together
at the door.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And he healed many suffering from various
diseases; and he cast out many demons, and did not suffer the demons to
speak because they knew him.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And rising in the morning long before
day, he went out and went away into a desert place, and there prayed.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Simon and those with him went after
him:

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> and having found him, they say to him,
All seek thee.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And he says to them, Let us go elsewhere
into the neighbouring country towns, that I may preach there also, for
for this purpose am I come forth.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And he was preaching in their synagogues
in the whole of Galilee, and casting out demons.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And there comes to him a leper,
beseeching him, and falling on his knees to him, and saying to him, If
thou wilt thou canst cleanse me.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> But Jesus, moved with compassion, having
stretched out his hand, touched him, and says to him, I will, be thou
cleansed.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And as he spoke straightway the leprosy
left him, and he was cleansed.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And having sharply charged him, he
straightway sent him away,

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> and says to him, See thou say nothing to
any one, but go, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing
what Moses ordained, for a testimony to them.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> But he, having gone forth, began to
proclaim \[it\] much, and to spread the matter abroad, so that he could
no longer enter openly into the city, but was without in desert places,
and they came to him from every side.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And he entered again into Capernaum after
\[several\] days, and it was reported that he was at \[the\] house;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and straightway many were gathered
together, so that there was no longer any room, not even at the door;
and he spoke the word to them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And there come to him \[men\] bringing a
paralytic, borne by four;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and, not being able to get near to him on
account of the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was, and having
dug \[it\] up they let down the couch on which the paralytic lay.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But Jesus, seeing their faith, says to the
paralytic, Child, thy sins are forgiven \[thee\].

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But certain of the scribes were there
sitting, and reasoning in their hearts,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Why does this \[man\] thus speak? he
blasphemes. Who is able to forgive sins except God alone?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And straightway Jesus, knowing in his
spirit that they are reasoning thus within themselves, said to them, Why
reason ye these things in your hearts?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Which is easier, to say to the paralytic,
\[Thy\] sins are forgiven \[thee\]; or to say, Arise, and take up thy
couch and walk?

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man
has power on earth to forgive sins, he says to the paralytic,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> To thee I say, Arise, take up thy couch
and go to thine house.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And he rose up straightway, and, having
taken up his couch, went out before \[them\] all, so that all were
amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it thus.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went out again by the sea, and all
the crowd came to him, and he taught them.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And passing by, he saw Levi the \[son\]
of Alphaeus sitting at the tax-office, and says to him, Follow me. And
he rose up and followed him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And it came to pass as he lay at table in
his house, that many tax-gatherers and sinners lay at table with Jesus
and his disciples; for they were many, and they followed him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the scribes and the Pharisees, seeing
him eating with sinners and tax-gatherers, said to his disciples, Why
\[is it\] that he eats and drinks with tax-gatherers and sinners?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And Jesus having heard \[it\] says to
them, They that are strong have not need of a physician, but those who
are ill. I have not come to call righteous \[men\], but sinners.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the disciples of John and the
Pharisees were fasting; and they come and say to him, Why do the
disciples of John and \[the disciples\] of the Pharisees fast, but thy
disciples fast not?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jesus said to them, Can the sons of
the bride-chamber fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as
they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But days will come when the bridegroom
shall have been taken away from them, and then shall they fast in that
day.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> No one sews a patch of new cloth on an
old garment: otherwise its new filling-up takes from the old \[stuff\],
and there is a worse rent.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And no one puts new wine into old skins;
otherwise the wine bursts the skins, and the wine is poured out, and the
skins will be destroyed; but new wine is to be put into new skins.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass that he went on the
sabbath through the cornfields; and his disciples began to walk on,
plucking the ears.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the Pharisees said to him, Behold,
why do they on the sabbath what is not lawful?

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And \*he\* said to them, Have ye never
read what David did when he had need and hungered, \*he\* and those with
him,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> how he entered into the house of God, in
\[the section of\] Abiathar \[the\] high priest, and ate the shew-bread,
which it is not lawful unless for the priests to eat, and gave even to
those that were with him?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he said to them, The sabbath was made
on account of man, not man on account of the sabbath;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> so that the Son of man is lord of the
sabbath also.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he entered again into the synagogue;
and there was there a man having his hand dried up.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And they watched him if he would heal him
on the sabbath, that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he says to the man who had his hand
dried up, Rise up \[and come\] into the midst.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he says to them, Is it lawful on the
sabbath to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill? But they were
silent.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And looking round upon them with anger,
distressed at the hardening of their heart, he says to the man, Stretch
out thy hand. And he stretched \[it\] out, and his hand was restored.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the Pharisees going out straightway
with the Herodians took counsel against him, how they might destroy him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to
the sea; and a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from
Judaea,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> and from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea and
beyond the Jordan; and they of around Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude,
having heard what things he did, came to him.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he spoke to his disciples, in order
that a little ship should wait upon him on account of the crowd, that
they might not press upon him.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For he healed many, so that they beset
him that they might touch him, as many as had plagues.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the unclean spirits, when they beheld
him, fell down before him, and cried saying, \*Thou\* art the Son of
God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he rebuked them much, that they might
not make him manifest.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he goes up into the mountain, and
calls whom he himself would, and they went to him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he appointed twelve that they might
be with him, and that he might send them to preach,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and to have power \[to heal diseases,
and\] to cast out demons.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And he gave to Simon the surname of
Peter;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> and James the \[son\] of Zebedee, and
John the brother of James, and he gave them the surname of Boanerges,
that is, Sons of thunder;

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew,
and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the \[son\] of Alphaeus, and
Thaddaeus, and Simon the Cananaean,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> and Judas Iscariote, who also delivered
him up. And they come to \[the\] house.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And again a crowd comes together, so that
they cannot even eat bread.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And his relatives having heard \[of it\]
went out to lay hold on him, for they said, He is out of his mind.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the scribes who had come down from
Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, and, By the prince of the demons he
casts out demons.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And having called them to \[him\], he
said to them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And if a kingdom has become divided
against itself, that kingdom cannot subsist.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And if a house has become divided against
itself, that house cannot subsist.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And if Satan rise up against himself, and
is divided, he cannot subsist, but has an end.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> But no one can, having entered into his
house, plunder the goods of the strong \[man\] unless he first bind the
strong \[man\], and then he will plunder his house.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Verily I say unto you, that all sins
shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and all the injurious speeches
\[with\] which they may speak injuriously;

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> but whosoever shall speak injuriously
against the Holy Spirit, to eternity has no forgiveness; but lies under
the guilt of an everlasting sin;

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> -- because they said, He has an unclean
spirit.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And his brethren and his mother come, and
standing without sent to him calling him.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And a crowd sat around him. And they said
to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren seek thee without.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And he answered them, saying, Who is my
mother or my brethren?

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And looking around in a circuit at those
that were sitting around him, he says, Behold my mother and my brethren:

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> for whosoever shall do the will of God,
\*he\* is my brother, and sister, and mother.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And again he began to teach by the sea. And
a great crowd was gathered together to him, so that going on board ship
he sat in the sea, and all the crowd were close to the sea on the land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he taught them many things in parables.
And he said to them in his doctrine,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Hearken: Behold, the sower went forth to
sow.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And it came to pass as he sowed, one fell
by the wayside, and the birds came and devoured it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And another fell on the rocky ground, where
it had not much earth, and immediately it sprung up out \[of the
ground\] because it had no depth of earth;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and when the sun arose it was burnt up, and
because of its not having any root, it withered.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And another fell among the thorns, and the
thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And another fell into the good ground, and
yielded fruit, growing up and increasing; and bore, one thirty, and one
sixty, and one a hundred.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said, He that has ears to hear, let
him hear.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And when he was alone, those about him
with the twelve asked him \[as to\] the parables.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he said to them, To you is given \[to
know\] the mystery of the kingdom of God; but to them who are without,
all things are done in parables,

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> that beholding they may behold and not
see, and hearing they may hear and not understand, lest it may be, they
should be converted and they should be forgiven.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he says to them, Do ye not know this
parable? and how will ye be acquainted with all the parables?

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> The sower sows the word:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and these are they by the wayside where
the word is sown, and when they hear, immediately Satan comes and takes
away the word that was sown in them.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And these are they in like manner who are
sown upon the rocky places, who when they hear the word, immediately
receive it with joy,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> and they have no root in themselves, but
are for a time: then, tribulation arising, or persecution on account of
the word, immediately they are offended.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And others are they who are sown among
the thorns: these are they who have heard the word,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and the cares of life, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, entering in,
choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And these are they who have been sown on
the good ground, such as hear the word and receive it, and bear fruit;
one thirty, and one sixty, and one a hundred \[fold\].

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he said to them, Does the lamp come
that it should be put under the bushel or under the couch? \[Is it\] not
that it should be set upon the lamp-stand?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For there is nothing hidden which shall
not be made manifest; nor does any secret thing take place, but that it
should come to light.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> If any one have ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he said to them, Take heed what ye
hear; with what measure ye mete, it shall be meted to you; and there
shall be \[more\] added to you.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For whosoever has, to him shall be given;
and he who has not, even what he has shall be taken from him.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he said, Thus is the kingdom of God,
as if a man should cast the seed upon the earth,

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> and should sleep and rise up night and
day, and the seed should sprout and grow, he does not know how.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> The earth bears fruit of itself, first
\[the\] blade, then an ear, then full corn in the ear.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But when the fruit is produced,
immediately he sends the sickle, for the harvest is come.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And he said, How should we liken the
kingdom of God, or with what comparison should we compare it?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> As to a grain of mustard \[seed\], which,
when it is sown upon the earth, is less than all seeds which are upon
the earth,

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and when it has been sown, mounts up and
becomes greater than all herbs, and produces great branches, so that the
birds of heaven can roost under its shadow.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with many such parables he spoke the
word to them, as they were able to hear,

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> but without a parable spoke he not to
them; and in private he explained all things to his disciples.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And on that day, when evening was come,
he says to them, Let us go over to the other side:

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> and having sent away the crowd, they take
him with \[them\], as he was, in the ship. But other ships also were
with him.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And there comes a violent gust of wind,
and the waves beat into the ship, so that it already filled.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And \*he\* was in the stern sleeping on
the cushion. And they awake him up and say to him, Teacher, dost thou
not care that we are perishing?

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And awaking up he rebuked the wind, and
said to the sea, Silence; be mute. And the wind fell, and there was a
great calm.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And he said to them, Why are ye \[thus\]
fearful? how \[is it\] ye have not faith?

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And they feared \[with\] great fear, and
said one to another, Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea
obey him?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And they came to the other side of the sea,
to the country of the Gadarenes.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And immediately on his going out of the
ship there met him out of the tombs a man possessed by an unclean
spirit,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> who had his dwelling in the tombs; and no
one was able to bind him, not even with chains;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> because he had been often bound with
fetters and chains, and the chains had been torn asunder by him, and the
fetters were shattered; and no one was able to subdue him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And continually night and day, in the tombs
and in the mountains, he was crying and cutting himself with stones.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But seeing Jesus from afar off, he ran and
did him homage,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and crying with a loud voice he says, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure thee
by God, torment me not.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For he said to him, Come forth, unclean
spirit, out of the man.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And he asked him, What is thy name? And he
says to him, Legion is my name, because we are many.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And he besought him much that he would
not send them away out of the country.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Now there was there just at the mountain
a great herd of swine feeding;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and they besought him, saying, Send us
into the swine that we may enter into them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And Jesus \[immediately\] allowed them.
And the unclean spirits going out entered into the swine, and the herd
rushed down the steep slope, into the sea (about two thousand), and were
choked in the sea.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And those that were feeding them fled and
reported it in the city and in the country. And they went out to see
what it was that had taken place.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And they come to Jesus, and they see the
possessed of demons sitting \[and\] clothed and sensible, \[him\] that
had had the legion: and they were afraid.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And they that had seen \[it\] related to
them how it had happened to the \[man\] possessed by demons, and
concerning the swine.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And they began to beg him to depart from
their coasts.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And as he went on board ship, the man
that had been possessed by demons besought him that he might be with
him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And he suffered him not, but says to him,
Go to thine home to thine own people, and tell them how great things the
Lord has done for thee, and has had mercy on thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And he went away and began to proclaim in
the Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him; and all wondered.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Jesus having passed over in the ship
again to the other side, a great crowd gathered to him; and he was by
the sea.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And \[behold\] there comes one of the
rulers of the synagogue, by name Jairus, and seeing him, falls down at
his feet;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> and he besought him much, saying, My
little daughter is at extremity; \[I pray\] that thou shouldest come and
lay thy hands upon her so that she may be healed, and may live.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And he went with him, and a large crowd
followed him and pressed on him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And a certain woman who had had a flux of
blood twelve years,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> and had suffered much under many
physicians, and had spent everything she had and had found no advantage
from it, but had rather got worse,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> having heard concerning Jesus, came in
the crowd behind and touched his clothes;

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> for she said, If I shall touch but his
clothes I shall be healed.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And immediately her fountain of blood was
dried up, and she knew in her body that she was cured from the scourge.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And immediately Jesus, knowing in himself
the power that had gone out of him, turning round in the crowd said, Who
has touched my clothes?

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And his disciples said to him, Thou seest
the crowd pressing on thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And he looked round about to see her who
had done this.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But the woman, frightened and trembling,
knowing what had taken place in her, came and fell down before him, and
told him all the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith
has healed thee; go in peace, and be well of thy scourge.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> While he was yet speaking, they come from
the ruler of the synagogue's \[house\], saying, Thy daughter has died,
why troublest thou the teacher any further?

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> But Jesus \[immediately\], having heard
the word spoken, says to the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not; only
believe.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And he suffered no one to accompany him
save Peter and James, and John the brother of James.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And he comes to the house of the ruler of
the synagogue, and sees the tumult, and people weeping and wailing
greatly.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> And entering in he says to them, Why do
ye make a tumult and weep? the child has not died, but sleeps.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And they derided him. But he, having put
\[them\] all out, takes with \[him\] the father of the child, and the
mother, and those that were with him, and enters in where the child was
lying.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And having laid hold of the hand of the
child, he says to her, Talitha koumi, which is, interpreted, Damsel, I
say to thee, Arise.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And immediately the damsel arose and
walked, for she was twelve years old. And they were astonished with
great astonishment.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> And he charged them much that no one
should know this; and he desired that \[something\] should be given her
to eat.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And he went out thence and came to his own
country, and his disciples follow him.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And when sabbath was come he began to teach
in the synagogue, and many hearing were amazed, saying, Whence \[has\]
this \[man\] these things? and what \[is\] the wisdom that is given to
him, and such works of power are done by his hands?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary,
and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? and are not his
sisters here with us? And they were offended in him.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not
despised save in his own country, and among \[his\] kinsmen, and in his
own house.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And he could not do any work of power
there, save that laying his hands on a few infirm persons he healed
\[them\].

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And he wondered because of their unbelief.
And he went round the villages in a circuit, teaching.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he calls the twelve to \[him\]; and he
began to send them out two \[and\] two, and gave to them power over the
unclean spirits;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and he commanded them that they should take
nothing for the way, save a staff only; no scrip, no bread, no money in
their belt;

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> but be shod with sandals, and put not on
two body-coats.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he said to them, Wheresoever ye shall
enter into a house, there remain till ye shall go thence.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And whatsoever place shall not receive
you nor hear you, departing thence, shake off the dust which is under
your feet for a testimony to them.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they went forth and preached that
they should repent;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and they cast out many demons, and
anointed with oil many infirm, and healed them.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And Herod the king heard \[of him\] (for
his name had become public), and said, John the baptist is risen from
among \[the\] dead, and on this account works of power are wrought by
him.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And others said, It is Elias; and others
said, It is a prophet, as one of the prophets.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> But Herod when he heard \[it\] said, John
whom \*I\* beheaded, he it is; \*he\* is risen \[from among the dead\].

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For the same Herod had sent and seized
John, and had bound him in prison on account of Herodias, the wife of
Philip his brother, because he had married her.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> For John said to Herod, It is not lawful
for thee to have the wife of thy brother.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> But Herodias kept it \[in her mind\]
against him, and wished to kill him, and could not:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> for Herod feared John knowing that he was
a just and holy man, and kept him safe; and having heard him, did many
things, and heard him gladly.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And a holiday being come, when Herod, on
his birthday, made a supper to his grandees, and to the chiliarchs, and
the chief \[men\] of Galilee;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> and the daughter of the same Herodias
having come in, and danced, pleased Herod and those that were with
\[him\] at table; and the king said to the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever
thou wilt and I will give it thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he swore to her, Whatsoever thou
shalt ask me I will give thee, to half of my kingdom.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And she went out, and said to her mother,
What should I ask? And she said, The head of John the baptist.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And immediately going in with haste to
the king, she asked saying, I desire that thou give me directly upon a
dish the head of John the baptist.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And the king, \[while\] made very sorry,
on account of the oaths and those lying at table with \[him\] would not
break his word with her.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And immediately the king, having sent one
of the guard, ordered his head to be brought. And he went out and
beheaded him in the prison,

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> and brought his head upon a dish, and
gave it to the damsel, and the damsel gave it to her mother.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And his disciples having heard \[it\],
came and took up his body, and laid it in a tomb.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the apostles are gathered together to
Jesus. And they related to him all things, \[both\] what they had done
and what they had taught.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And he said to them, Come ye yourselves
apart into a desert place and rest a little. For those coming and those
going were many, and they had not leisure even to eat.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And they went away apart into a desert
place by ship.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And many saw them going, and recognised
them, and ran together there on foot, out of all the cities, and got
\[there\] before them.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And on leaving \[the ship\] \[Jesus\] saw
a great crowd, and he was moved with compassion for them, because they
were as sheep not having a shepherd. And he began to teach them many
things.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And when it was already late in the day,
his disciples coming to him say, The place is desert, and it is already
late in the day;

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> send them away that they may go into the
country and villages around, and buy themselves bread, for they have not
anything they can eat.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> And he answering said to them, Give
\*ye\* them to eat. And they say to him, Shall we go and buy two hundred
denarii worth of bread and give them to eat?

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And he says to them, How many loaves have
ye? Go \[and\] see. And when they knew they say, Five, and two fishes.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he ordered them to make them all sit
down by companies on the green grass.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And they sat down in ranks by hundreds
and by fifties.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And having taken the five loaves and the
two fishes, looking up to heaven, he blessed, and broke the loaves, and
gave \[them\] to his disciples that they might set \[them\] before them.
And the two fishes he divided among all.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And they all ate and were satisfied.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> And they took up of fragments the
fillings of twelve hand-baskets, and of the fishes.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> And those that ate of the loaves were
five thousand men.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And immediately he compelled his
disciples to go on board ship, and to go on before to the other side to
Bethsaida, while \*he\* sends the crowd away.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And, having dismissed them, he departed
into the mountain to pray.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> And when evening was come, the ship was
in the midst of the sea, and \*he\* alone upon the land.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> And seeing them labouring in rowing, for
the wind was contrary to them, about the fourth watch of the night he
comes to them walking on the sea, and would have passed them by.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> But they, seeing him walking on the sea,
thought that it was an apparition, and cried out.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> For all saw him and were troubled. And
immediately he spoke with them, and says to them, Be of good courage: it
is \*I\*; be not afraid.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> And he went up to them into the ship, and
the wind fell. And they were exceedingly beyond measure astonished in
themselves and wondered;

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> for they understood not through the
loaves: for their heart was hardened.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> And having passed over, they came to the
land of Gennesaret and made the shore.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> And on their coming out of the ship,
immediately recognising him,

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> they ran through that whole country
around, and began to carry about those that were ill on couches, where
they heard that he was.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> And wherever he entered into villages, or
cities, or the country, they laid the sick in the market-places, and
besought him that they might touch if it were only the hem of his
garment; and as many as touched him were healed.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the Pharisees and some of the scribes,
coming from Jerusalem, are gathered together to him,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> and seeing some of his disciples eat bread
with defiled, that is, unwashed, hands,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> (for the Pharisees and all the Jews, unless
they wash their hands diligently, do not eat, holding what has been
delivered by the ancients;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> and \[on coming\] from the market-place,
unless they are washed, they do not eat; and there are many other things
which they have received to hold, the washing of cups and vessels, and
brazen utensils, and couches),

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> then the Pharisees and the scribes ask him,
Why do thy disciples not walk according to what has been delivered by
the ancients, but eat the bread with defiled hands?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But he answering said to them, Well did
Esaias prophesy concerning you hypocrites, as it is written, This people
honour me with their lips, but their heart is far away from me.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But in vain do they worship me, teaching
\[as their\] teachings commandments of men.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> \[For\], leaving the commandment of God, ye
hold what is delivered by men \[to keep\] -- washings of vessels and
cups, and many other such like things ye do.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And he said to them, Well do ye set aside
the commandment of God, that ye may observe what is delivered by
yourselves \[to keep\].

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Moses said, Honour thy father and thy
mother; and, he who speaks ill of father or mother, let him surely die.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But \*ye\* say, If a man say to his
father or his mother, \[It is\] corban (that is, gift), whatsoever thou
mightest have profit from me by ...

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And ye no longer suffer him to do
anything for his father or his mother;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> making void the word of God by your
traditional teaching which ye have delivered; and many such like things
ye do.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And having called again the crowd, he
said to them, Hear me, all \[of you\], and understand:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> There is nothing from outside a man
entering into him which can defile him; but the things which go out from
him, those it is which defile the man.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> If any one have ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And when he went indoors from the crowd,
his disciples asked him concerning the parable.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And he says to them, Are \*ye\* also thus
unintelligent? Do ye not perceive that all that is outside entering into
the man cannot defile him,

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> because it does not enter into his heart
but into his belly, and goes out into the draught, purging all meats?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And he said, That which goes forth out of
the man, that defiles the man.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For from within, out of the heart of men,
go forth evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> thefts, covetousness, wickednesses,
deceit, licentiousness, a wicked eye, injurious language, haughtiness,
folly;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> all these wicked things go forth from
within and defile the man.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And he rose up and went away thence into
the borders of Tyre and Sidon; and having entered into a house he would
not have any one know \[it\], and he could not be hid.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> But immediately a woman, whose little
daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell at
his feet

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> (and the woman was a Greek, Syrophenician
by race), and asked him that he would cast the demon out of her
daughter.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But \[Jesus\] said to her, Suffer the
children to be first filled; for it is not right to take the children's
bread and cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But she answered and says to him, Yea,
Lord; for even the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And he said to her, Because of this word,
go thy way, the demon is gone out of thy daughter.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And having gone away to her house she
found the demon gone out, and her daughter lying on the bed.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And again having left the borders of Tyre
and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the
coasts of Decapolis.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And they bring to him a deaf \[man\] who
could not speak right, and they beseech him that he might lay his hand
on him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And having taken him away from the crowd
apart, he put his fingers to his ears; and having spit, he touched his
tongue;

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> and looking up to heaven he groaned, and
says to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And immediately his ears were opened, and
the band of his tongue was loosed and he spoke right.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And he charged them that they should
speak to no one \[of it\]. But so much the more \*he\* charged them, so
much the more abundantly \*they\* proclaimed it;

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> and they were astonished above measure,
saying, He does all things well; he makes both the deaf to hear, and the
speechless to speak.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> In those days, there being again a great
crowd, and they having nothing that they could eat, having called his
disciples to \[him\], he says to them,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I have compassion on the crowd, because
they have stayed with me already three days and they have not anything
they can eat,

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> and if I should dismiss them to their home
fasting, they will faint on the way; for some of them are come from far.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And his disciples answered him, Whence
shall one be able to satisfy these with bread here in a desert place?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he asked them, How many loaves have ye?
And they said, Seven.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he commanded the crowd to sit down on
the ground. And having taken the seven loaves, he gave thanks, and broke
\[them\] and gave \[them\] to his disciples, that they might set
\[them\] before \[them\]; and they set \[them\] before the crowd.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And they had a few small fishes, and having
blessed them, he desired these also to be set before \[them\].

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And they ate and were satisfied. And they
took up of fragments that remained seven baskets.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And they \[that had eaten\] were about four
thousand; and he sent them away.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And immediately going on board ship with
his disciples, he came into the parts of Dalmanutha.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the Pharisees went out and began to
dispute against him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And groaning in his spirit, he says, Why
does this generation seek a sign? Verily I say unto you, A sign shall in
no wise be given to this generation.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And he left them, and going again on
board ship, went away to the other side.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they forgot to take bread, and save
one loaf, they had not \[any\] with them in the ship.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he charged them, saying, Take heed,
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and \[of\] the leaven of Herod.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And they reasoned with one another,
\[saying\], It is because we have no bread.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And Jesus knowing \[it\], says to them,
Why reason ye because ye have no bread? Do ye not yet perceive nor
understand? Have ye your heart \[yet\] hardened?

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears,
hear ye not? and do ye not remember?

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> When I broke the five loaves for the five
thousand, how many hand-baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say
to him, Twelve.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And when the seven for the four thousand,
the filling of how many baskets of fragments took ye up? And they said,
Seven.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he said to them, How do ye not yet
understand?

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And he comes to Bethsaida; and they bring
him a blind man, and beseech him that he might touch him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And taking hold of the hand of the blind
man he led him forth out of the village, and having spit upon his eyes,
he laid his hands upon him, and asked him if he beheld anything.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And having looked up, he said, I behold
men, for I see \[them\], as trees, walking.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Then he laid his hands again upon his
eyes, and he saw distinctly, and was restored and saw all things
clearly.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he sent him to his house, saying,
Neither enter into the village, nor tell \[it\] to any one in the
village.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Jesus went forth and his disciples,
into the villages of Caesarea-Philippi. And by the way he asked his
disciples, saying unto them, Who do men say that I am?

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And they answered him, saying, John the
baptist; and others, Elias; but others, One of the prophets.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he asked them, But \*ye\*, who do ye
say that I am? And Peter answering says to him, \*Thou\* art the Christ.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And he charged them straitly, in order
that they should tell no man about him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he began to teach them that the Son
of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and of the
chief priests and of the scribes, and be killed, and after three days
rise \[again\].

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he spoke the thing openly. And Peter,
taking him to \[him\], began to rebuke him.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> But he, turning round and seeing his
disciples, rebuked Peter, saying, Get away behind me, Satan, for thy
mind is not on the things that are of God, but on the things that are of
men.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And having called the crowd with his
disciples, he said to them, Whoever desires to come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whosoever shall desire to save his
life shall lose it, but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and
the gospel's shall save it.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> For what shall it profit a man if he gain
the whole world and suffer the loss of his soul?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> for what should a man give in exchange
for his soul?

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and
of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall the
Son of man also be ashamed when he shall come in the glory of his Father
with the holy angels.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he said to them, Verily I say unto you,
There are some of those standing here that shall not taste death until
they shall have seen the kingdom of God come in power.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And after six days Jesus takes with \[him\]
Peter and James and John, and takes them up on a high mountain by
themselves apart. And he was transfigured before them:

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and his garments became shining, exceeding
white \[as snow\], such as fuller on earth could not whiten \[them\].

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And there appeared to them Elias with
Moses, and they were talking with Jesus.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And Peter answering says to Jesus, Rabbi,
it is good that we should be here; and let us make three tabernacles,
for thee one, and for Moses one, and for Elias one.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For he knew not what he should say, for
they were filled with fear.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And there came a cloud overshadowing them,
and there came a voice out of the cloud, \*This\* is my beloved Son:
hear him.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And suddenly having looked around, they no
longer saw any one, but Jesus alone with themselves.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And as they descended from the mountain, he
charged them that they should relate to no one what they had seen,
unless when the Son of man should be risen from among \[the\] dead.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they kept that saying, questioning
among themselves, what rising from among \[the\] dead was.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And they asked him saying, Why do the
scribes say that Elias must first have come?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he answering said to them, Elias
indeed, having first come, restores all things; and how is it written of
the Son of man that he must suffer much, and be set at nought:

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> but I say unto you that Elias also is
come, and they have done to him whatever they would, as it is written of
him.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And when he came to the disciples he saw
a great crowd around them, and scribes disputing against them.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And immediately all the crowd seeing him
were amazed, and running to \[him\], saluted him.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And he asked them, What do ye question
with them about?

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And one out of the crowd answered him,
Teacher, I brought to thee my son, who has a dumb spirit;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and wheresoever it seizes him it tears
him, and he foams and gnashes his teeth, and he is withering away. And I
spoke to thy disciples, that they might cast him out, and they could
not.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> But he answering them says, O unbelieving
generation! how long shall I be with you? how long shall I bear with
you? bring him to me.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And they brought him to him. And seeing
him the spirit immediately tore him; and falling upon the earth he
rolled foaming.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he asked his father, How long a time
is it that it has been like this with him? And he said, From childhood;

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> and often it has cast him both into fire
and into waters that it might destroy him: but if thou couldst \[do\]
anything, be moved with pity on us, and help us.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Jesus said to him, The 'if thou
couldst' is \[if thou couldst\] believe: all things are possible to him
that believes.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And immediately the father of the young
child crying out said \[with tears\], I believe, help mine unbelief.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But Jesus, seeing that \[the\] crowd was
running up together, rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him, Thou
dumb and deaf spirit, \*I\* command thee, come out of him, and enter no
more into him.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And having cried out and torn \[him\]
much, he came out; and he became as if dead, so that the most said, He
is dead.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Jesus, having taken hold of him by
the hand, lifted him up, and he arose.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when he was entered into the house,
his disciples asked him privately, Wherefore could not \*we\* cast him
out?

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And he said to them, This kind can go out
by nothing but by prayer and fasting.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And going forth from thence they went
through Galilee; and he would not that any one knew it;

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> for he taught his disciples and said to
them, The Son of man is delivered into men's hands, and they shall kill
him; and having been killed, after three days he shall rise again.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But they understood not the saying, and
feared to ask him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he came to Capernaum, and being in
the house, he asked them, Of what were ye reasoning by the way?

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And they remained silent, for by the way
they had been reasoning with one another who \[was\] greatest.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And sitting down he called the twelve;
and he says to them, If any one would be first, he shall be last of all,
and minister of all.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And taking a little child he set it in
their midst, and having taken it in his arms he said to them,

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Whosoever shall receive one of such
little children in my name, receives me; and whosoever shall receive me,
does not receive me, but him who sent me.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And John answered him saying, Teacher, we
saw some one casting out demons in thy name, who does not follow us, and
we forbad him, because he does not follow us.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> But Jesus said, Forbid him not; for there
is no one who shall do a miracle in my name, and be able soon \[after\]
to speak ill of me;

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> for he who is not against us is for us.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> For whosoever shall give you a cup of
water to drink in \[my\] name, because ye are Christ's, verily I say
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And whosoever shall be a snare to one of
the little ones who believe \[in me\], it were better for him if a
millstone were hung about his neck, and he cast into the sea.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And if thy hand serve as a snare to thee,
cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having
thy two hands to go away into hell, into the fire unquenchable;

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> \[where their worm dies not, and the fire
is not quenched\].

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> And if thy foot serve as a snare to thee,
cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life lame, than having
thy two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire unquenchable;

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> \[where their worm dies not, and the fire
is not quenched\].

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And if thine eye serve as a snare to
thee, cast it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of
God with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the hell
of fire,

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> where their worm dies not, and the fire
is not quenched.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> For every one shall be salted with fire,
and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> Salt \[is\] good, but if the salt is
become saltless, wherewith will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves,
and be at peace with one another.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And rising up thence he comes into the
coasts of Judaea, and the other side of the Jordan. And again crowds
come together to him, and, as he was accustomed, again he taught them.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And Pharisees coming to \[him\] asked
him, Is it lawful for a man to put away \[his\] wife? (tempting him).

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> But he answering said to them, What did
Moses command you?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And they said, Moses allowed to write a
bill of divorce, and to put away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And Jesus answering said to them, In view
of your hard-heartedness he wrote this commandment for you;

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> but from \[the\] beginning of \[the\]
creation God made them male and female.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> For this cause a man shall leave his
father and mother and shall be united to his wife,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> and the two shall be one flesh: so that
they are no longer two but one flesh.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> What therefore God has joined together,
let not man separate.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And again in the house the disciples
asked him concerning this.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he says to them, Whosoever shall
put away his wife and shall marry another, commits adultery against her.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And if a woman put away her husband and
shall marry another, she commits adultery.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And they brought little children to him
that he might touch them. But the disciples rebuked those that brought
\[them\].

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Jesus seeing \[it\], was indignant,
and said to them, Suffer the little children to come to me; forbid them
not; for of such is the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, shall in no wise enter
into it.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And having taken them in his arms,
having laid his hands on them, he blessed them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And as he went forth into the way, a
person ran up to \[him\], and kneeling to him asked him, Good Teacher,
what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But Jesus said to him, Why callest thou
me good? no one is good but one, \[that is\] God.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Thou knowest the commandments: Do not
commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness,
Do not defraud, Honour thy father and mother.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And he answering said to him, Teacher,
all these things have I kept from my youth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And Jesus looking upon him loved him,
and said to him, One thing lackest thou: go, sell whatever thou hast and
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come,
follow me, \[taking up the cross\].

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> But he, sad at the word, went away
grieved, for he had large possessions.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus looking around says to his
disciples, How difficultly shall they that have riches enter into the
kingdom of God!

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the disciples were amazed at his
words. And Jesus again answering says to them, Children, how difficult
it is that those who trust in riches should enter into the kingdom of
God!

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And they were exceedingly astonished,
saying to one another, And who can be saved?

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But Jesus looking on them says, With
men it is impossible, but not with God; for all things are possible with
God.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Peter began to say to him, Behold,
\*we\* have left all things and have followed thee.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Jesus answering said, Verily I say to
you, There is no one who has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, \[or wife\], or children, or lands, for my sake and
for the sake of the gospel,

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> that shall not receive a hundredfold
now in this time: houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the coming age life
eternal.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> But many first shall be last, and the
last first.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And they were in the way going up to
Jerusalem, and Jesus was going on before them; and they were amazed, and
were afraid as they followed. And taking the twelve again to \[him\], he
began to tell them what was going to happen to him:

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of man shall be delivered up to the chief priests and to the
scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him up
to the nations:

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> and they shall mock him, and shall
scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him; and after
three days he shall rise again.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And there come to him James and John,
the sons of Zebedee, saying \[to him\], Teacher, we would that
whatsoever we may ask thee, thou wouldst do it for us.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And he said to them, What would ye that
I should do for you?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> And they said to him, Give to us that
we may sit, one on thy right hand, and one on thy left hand, in thy
glory.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And Jesus said to them, Ye do not know
what ye ask. Are ye able to drink the cup which \*I\* drink, or be
baptised with the baptism that \*I\* am baptised with?

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And they said to him, We are able. And
Jesus said to them, The cup that \*I\* drink ye will drink and with the
baptism that \*I\* am baptised with ye will be baptised,

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> but to sit on my right hand or on my
left is not mine to give, but for those for whom it is prepared.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And the ten having heard \[of it\],
began to be indignant about James and John.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> But Jesus having called them to
\[him\], says to them, Ye know that those who are esteemed to rule over
the nations exercise lordship over them; and their great men exercise
authority over them;

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> but it is not thus among you; but
whosoever would be great among you, shall be your minister;

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> and whosoever would be first of you
shall be bondman of all.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> For also the Son of man did not come to
be ministered to, but to minister, and give his life a ransom for many.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> And they come to Jericho, and as he was
going out from Jericho, and his disciples and a large crowd, the son of
Timaeus, Bartimaeus, the blind \[man\], sat by the wayside begging.

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> And having heard that it was Jesus the
Nazaraean, he began to cry out and to say, O Son of David, Jesus, have
mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And many rebuked him, that he might be
silent; but he cried so much the more, Son of David, have mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:49">10:49</span> And Jesus, standing still, desired him
to be called. And they call the blind \[man\], saying to him, Be of good
courage, rise up, he calls thee.

<span id="an_10:50">10:50</span> And, throwing away his garment, he
started up and came to Jesus.

<span id="an_10:51">10:51</span> And Jesus answering says to him, What
wilt thou that I shall do to thee? And the blind \[man\] said to him,
Rabboni, that I may see.

<span id="an_10:52">10:52</span> And Jesus said to him, Go, thy faith
has healed thee. And he saw immediately, and followed him in the way.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when they draw near to Jerusalem, to
Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sends two of his
disciples,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> and says to them, Go into the village
which is over against you, and immediately on entering into it ye will
find a colt tied, upon which no \[child\] of man has ever sat: loose it
and lead it \[here\].

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And if any one say to you, Why do ye
this? say, The Lord has need of it; and straightway he sends it hither.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they departed, and found a colt bound
to the door without at the crossway, and they loose him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And some of those who stood there said to
them, What are ye doing, loosing the colt?

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And they said to them as Jesus had
commanded. And they let them \[do it\].

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And they led the colt to Jesus, and cast
their clothes upon it, and he sat on it;

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and many strewed their clothes on the
way, and others cut down branches from the trees \[and went on strewing
them on the way\].

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And those going on before and those
following cried out, Hosanna! blessed \[be\] he that comes in \[the\]
Lord's name.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Blessed \[be\] the coming kingdom of
our father David. Hosanna in the highest!

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he entered into Jerusalem and into
the temple; and having looked round on all things, the hour being
already late, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And on the morrow, when they were gone
out of Bethany, he hungered.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And seeing from afar off a fig-tree
which had leaves, he came, if perhaps he might find something on it. And
having come up to it he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the
time of figs.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And answering he said to it, Let no one
eat fruit of thee any more for ever. And his disciples heard \[it\].

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And they come to Jerusalem, and
entering into the temple, he began to cast out those who sold and who
bought in the temple, and he overthrew the tables of the moneychangers
and the seats of the dove-sellers,

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and suffered not that any one should
carry any package through the temple.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And he taught saying to them, Is it not
written, My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations?
but \*ye\* have made it a den of robbers.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the chief priests and the scribes
heard \[it\], and they sought how they might destroy him; for they
feared him, because all the crowd were astonished at his doctrine.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And when it was evening he went forth
without the city.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And passing by early in the morning
they saw the fig-tree dried up from the roots.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Peter, remembering \[what Jesus had
said\], says to him, Rabbi, see, the fig-tree which thou cursedst is
dried up.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Jesus answering says to them, Have
faith in God.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Verily I say to you, that whosoever
shall say to this mountain, Be thou taken away and cast into the sea,
and shall not doubt in his heart, but believe that what he says takes
place, whatever he shall say shall come to pass for him.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For this reason I say to you, All
things whatsoever ye pray for and ask, believe that ye receive it, and
it shall come to pass for you.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And when ye stand praying, forgive if
ye have anything against any one, that your Father also who is in the
heavens may forgive you your offences.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> But if \*ye\* do not forgive, neither
will your Father who is in the heavens forgive your offences.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And they come again to Jerusalem. And
as he walked about in the temple, the chief priests and the scribes and
the elders come to him,

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and they say to him, By what authority
doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority, that thou
shouldest do these things?

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Jesus answering said to them, \*I\*
also will ask you one thing, and answer me, and I will tell you by what
authority I do these things:

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The baptism of John, was it of heaven,
or of men? answer me.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we should say, Of heaven, he will say, Why \[then\] have ye
not believed him?

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> but should we say, Of men -- they
feared the people; for all held of John that he was truly a prophet.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And they answering say to Jesus, We do
not know. And Jesus \[answering\] says to them, Neither do \*I\* tell
you by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And he began to say to them in parables,
A man planted a vineyard, and made a fence round \[it\] and dug a
wine-vat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and left the
country.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he sent a bondman to the husbandmen
at the season, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of
the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But they took him, and beat \[him\], and
sent \[him\] away empty.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And again he sent to them another
bondman; and \[at\] him they \[threw stones, and\] struck \[him\] on the
head, and sent \[him\] away with insult.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And \[again\] he sent another, and him
they killed; and many others, beating some and killing some.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Having yet therefore one beloved son, he
sent also him to them the last, saying, They will have respect for my
son.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But those husbandmen said to one another,
This is the heir: come, let us kill him and the inheritance will be
ours.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And they took him and killed him, and
cast him forth out of the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> What therefore shall the lord of the
vineyard do? He will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the
vineyard to others.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Have ye not even read this scripture,
The stone which they that builded rejected, this has become the
corner-stone:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> this is of \[the\] Lord, and it is
wonderful in our eyes?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And they sought to lay hold of him, and
they feared the crowd; for they knew that he had spoken the parable of
them. And they left him and went away.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And they send to him certain of the
Pharisees and of the Herodians, that they might catch him in speaking.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And they come and say to him, Teacher,
we know that thou art true, and carest not for any one; for thou
regardest not men's person, but teachest the way of God with truth: Is
it lawful to give tribute to Caesar or not?

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Should we give, or should we not give?
But he knowing their hypocrisy said unto them, Why tempt ye me? Bring me
a denarius that I may see \[it\].

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And they brought \[it\]. And he says to
them, Whose \[is\] this image and superscription? And they said to him,
Caesar's.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And Jesus answering said to them, Pay
what is Caesar's to Caesar, and what is God's to God. And they wondered
at him.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> And Sadducees come to him, that say
there is no resurrection; and they demanded of him saying,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if any
one's brother die, and leave a wife behind, and leave no children, that
his brother shall take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> There were seven brethren; and the
first took a wife, and dying did not leave seed;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> and the second took her and died, and
neither did he leave seed; and the third likewise.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the seven \[took her and\] did not
leave seed. Last of all the woman also died.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> In the resurrection, when they shall
rise again, of which of them shall she be wife, for the seven had her as
wife?

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And Jesus answering said to them, Do
not ye therefore err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God?

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For when they rise from among \[the\]
dead they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as angels
\[who are\] in the heavens.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> But concerning the dead that they rise,
have ye not read in the book of Moses, in \[the section of\] the bush,
how God spoke to him, saying, \*I\* \[am\] the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> He is not the God of \[the\] dead, but
of \[the\] living. \*Ye\* therefore greatly err.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And one of the scribes who had come up,
and had heard them reasoning together, perceiving that he had answered
them well, demanded of him, Which is \[the\] first commandment of all?

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And Jesus answered him, \[The\] first
commandment of all \[is\], Hear, Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord;

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> and thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thine
understanding, and with all thy strength. This is \[the\] first
commandment.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And a second like it \[is\] this: Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is not another commandment
greater than these.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And the scribe said to him, Right,
teacher; thou hast spoken according to \[the\] truth. For he is one, and
there is none other besides him;

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> and to love him with all the heart, and
with all the intelligence, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love one's neighbour as one's self, is more than all
the burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And Jesus, seeing that he had answered
intelligently, said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.
And no one dared question him any more.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And Jesus answering said \[as he was\]
teaching in the temple, How do the scribes say that the Christ is son of
David?

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> \[for\] David himself said \[speaking\]
in the Holy Spirit, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my right hand until
I put thine enemies \[as\] footstool of thy feet.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> David himself \[therefore\] calls him
Lord, and whence is he his son? And the mass of the people heard him
gladly.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And he said to them in his doctrine,
Beware of the scribes, who like to walk about in long robes, and
salutations in the marketplaces,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> and first seats in the synagogues, and
first places at suppers;

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> who devour the houses of widows, and as
a pretext make long prayers. These shall receive a severer judgment.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And Jesus, having sat down opposite the
treasury, saw how the crowd was casting money into the treasury; and
many rich cast in much.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> And a poor widow came and cast in two
mites, which is a farthing.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And having called his disciples to
\[him\] he said to them, Verily I say unto you, This poor widow has cast
in more than all who have cast into the treasury:

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> for all have cast in of that which they
had in abundance, but she of her destitution has cast in all that she
had, the whole of her living.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And as he was going out of the temple,
one of his disciples says to him, Teacher, see what stones and what
buildings!

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Jesus answering said to him, Seest
thou these great buildings? not a stone shall be left upon a stone,
which shall not be thrown down.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And as he sat on the mount of Olives
opposite the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him
privately,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Tell us, when shall these things be, and
what is the sign when all these things are going to be fulfilled?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jesus answering them began to say,
Take heed lest any one mislead you.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For many shall come in my name, saying,
It is \*I\*, and shall mislead many.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> But when ye shall hear of wars and
rumours of wars, be not disturbed, for \[this\] must happen, but the end
is not yet.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For nation shall rise up against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be earthquakes in
\[different\] places, and there shall be famines and troubles: these
things \[are the\] beginnings of throes.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But \*ye\*, take heed to yourselves, for
they shall deliver you up to sanhedrims and to synagogues: ye shall be
beaten and brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony
to them;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and the gospel must first be preached
to all the nations.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> But when they shall lead you away to
deliver you up, be not careful beforehand as to what ye shall say, \[nor
prepare your discourse\]: but whatsoever shall be given you in that
hour, that speak; for \*ye\* are not the speakers, but the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> But brother shall deliver up brother to
death, and father child; and children shall rise up against parents, and
cause them to be put to death.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And ye will be hated of all on account
of my name; but he that has endured to the end, \*he\* shall be saved.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But when ye shall see the abomination
of desolation standing where it should not, (he that reads let him
consider \[it\],) then let those in Judaea flee to the mountains;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> and him that is upon the housetop not
come down into the house, nor enter \[into it\] to take away anything
out of his house;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and him that is in the field not return
back to take his garment.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> But woe to those that are with child
and to those that give suck in those days!

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And pray that it may not be in winter
time;

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> for those days shall be distress such
as there has not been the like since \[the\] beginning of creation which
God created, until now, and never shall be;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> and if \[the\] Lord had not cut short
those days, no flesh should have been saved; but on account of the elect
whom he has chosen, he has cut short those days.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And then if any one say to you, Lo,
here \[is\] the Christ, or Lo, there, believe \[it\] not.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> For false Christs and false prophets
will arise, and give signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the
elect.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But do \*ye\* take heed: behold, I have
told you all things beforehand.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> But in those days, after that distress,
the sun shall be darkened and the moon shall not give its light;

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> and the stars of heaven shall be
falling down, and the powers which are in the heavens shall be shaken;

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> and then shall they see the Son of man
coming in clouds with great power and glory;

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> and then shall he send his angels and
shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from end of earth
to end of heaven.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> But learn the parable from the
fig-tree: when its branch already becomes tender and puts forth the
leaves, ye know that the summer is near.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Thus also \*ye\*, when ye see these
things happening, know that it is near, at the doors.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Verily I say unto you, This generation
shall in no wise pass away, till all these things take place.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> The heaven and the earth shall pass
away, but my words shall in no wise pass away.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> But of that day or of that hour no one
knows, neither the angels who are in heaven, nor the Son, but the
Father.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Take heed, watch and pray, for ye do
not know when the time is:

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> \[it is\] as a man gone out of the
country, having left his house and given to his bondmen the authority,
and to each one his work, and commanded the doorkeeper that he should
watch.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Watch therefore, for ye do not know
when the master of the house comes: evening, or midnight, or cock-crow,
or morning;

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> lest coming suddenly he find you
sleeping.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But what I say to you, I say to all,
Watch.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now the passover and the \[feast of\]
unleavened bread was after two days. And the chief priests and the
scribes were seeking how they might seize him by subtlety and kill him.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For they said, Not in the feast, lest
perhaps there be a tumult of the people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And when he was in Bethany, in the house
of Simon the leper, as he lay at table, there came a woman having an
alabaster flask of ointment of pure nard, very costly; and having broken
the alabaster flask, she poured it out upon his head.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And there were some indignant in
themselves, and saying, Why has this waste been made of the ointment?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> for this ointment could have been sold
for more than three hundred denarii and given to the poor. And they
spoke very angrily at her.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But Jesus said, Let her alone; why do ye
trouble her? she has wrought a good work as to me;

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> for ye have the poor always with you, and
whenever ye would ye can do them good; but me ye have not always.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> What \*she\* could she has done. She has
beforehand anointed my body for the burial.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And verily I say unto you, Wheresoever
these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, what this
\[woman\] has done shall be also spoken of for a memorial of her.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And Judas Iscariote, one of the twelve,
went away to the chief priests that he might deliver him up to them;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> and they, when they heard it, rejoiced,
and promised him to give money. And he sought how he could opportunely
deliver him up.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the first day of unleavened bread,
when they slew the passover, his disciples say to him, Where wilt thou
that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And he sends two of his disciples, and
says to them, Go into the city, and a man shall meet you carrying a
pitcher of water; follow him.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And wheresoever he enters, say to the
master of the house, The Teacher says, Where is my guest-chamber where I
may eat the passover with my disciples?

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> and \*he\* will shew you a large upper
room furnished ready. There make ready for us.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And his disciples went away and came
into the city, and found as he had said to them; and they made ready the
passover.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And when evening was come, he comes
with the twelve.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And as they lay at table and were
eating, Jesus said, Verily I say to you, One of you shall deliver me up;
he who is eating with me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And they began to be grieved, and to
say to him, one by one, Is it \*I\*? \[and another, Is it \*I\*?\]

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But he answered and said to them, One
of the twelve, he who dips with me in the dish.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> The Son of man goes indeed as it is
written concerning him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is
delivered up; \[it were\] good for that man if he had not been born.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And as they were eating, Jesus, having
taken bread, when he had blessed, broke \[it\], and gave \[it\] to them,
and said, Take \[this\]: this is my body.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And having taken \[the\] cup, when he
had given thanks, he gave \[it\] to them, and they all drank out of it.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And he said to them, This is my blood,
that of the \[new\] covenant, that shed for many.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Verily I say to you, I will no more
drink at all of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it
new in the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And having sung a hymn, they went out
to the mount of Olives.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Jesus says to them, All ye shall be
offended, for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep
shall be scattered abroad.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> But after I am risen, I will go before
you into Galilee.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But Peter said to him, Even if all
should be offended, yet not \*I\*.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And Jesus says to him, Verily I say to
thee, that thou to-day, in this night, before \[the\] cock shall crow
twice, thou shalt thrice deny me.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But he said \[so much\] exceedingly the
more, If I should have to die with thee, I will in no wise deny thee.
And likewise said they all too.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And they come to a place of which the
name \[is\] Gethsemane, and he says to his disciples, Sit here while I
shall pray.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And he takes with him Peter and James
and John, and he began to be amazed and oppressed in spirit.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And he says to them, My soul is full of
grief even unto death; abide here and watch.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And, going forward a little, he fell
upon the earth; and he prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might
pass away from him.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And he said, Abba, Father, all things
are possible to thee: take away this cup from me; but not what \*I\*
will, but what \*thou\* \[wilt\].

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he comes and finds them sleeping.
And he says to Peter, Simon, dost thou sleep? Hast thou not been able to
watch one hour?

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation. The spirit indeed \[is\] willing, but the flesh weak.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And going away, he prayed again, saying
the same thing.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And returning, he found them again
sleeping, for their eyes were heavy; and they knew not what they should
answer him.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And he comes the third time and says to
them, Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough; the hour is come;
behold, the Son of man is delivered up into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Arise, let us go; behold, he that
delivers me up has drawn nigh.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And immediately, while he was yet
speaking, Judas comes up, \[being\] one of the twelve, and with him a
great crowd, with swords and sticks, from the chief priests and the
scribes and the elders.

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> Now he that delivered him up had given
them a sign between them, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he;
seize him, and lead \[him\] away safely.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And being come, straightway coming up
to him, he says, Rabbi, Rabbi; and he covered him with kisses.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And they laid their hands upon him and
seized him.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> But a certain one of those who stood
by, having drawn his sword, struck the bondman of the high priest, and
took off his ear.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And Jesus answering said to them, Are
ye come out as against a robber, with swords and sticks to take me?

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> I was daily with you teaching in the
temple, and ye did not seize me; but \[it is\] that the scriptures may
be fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> And all left him and fled.

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> And a certain young man followed him
with a linen cloth cast about his naked \[body\]; and \[the young men\]
seize him;

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> but he, leaving the linen cloth behind
\[him\], fled from them naked.

<span id="an_14:53">14:53</span> And they led away Jesus to the high
priest. And there come together to him all the chief priests and the
elders and the scribes.

<span id="an_14:54">14:54</span> And Peter followed him at a distance,
till \[he was\] within the court of the high priest's palace; and he was
sitting with the officers and warming himself in the light \[of the
fire\].

<span id="an_14:55">14:55</span> And the chief priests and the whole
sanhedrim sought testimony against Jesus to cause him to be put to
death, and did not find \[any\].

<span id="an_14:56">14:56</span> For many bore false witness against
him, and their testimony did not agree.

<span id="an_14:57">14:57</span> And certain persons rose up and bore
false witness against him, saying,

<span id="an_14:58">14:58</span> \*We\* heard him saying, \*I\* will
destroy this temple which is made with hands, and in the course of three
days I will build another not made with hands.

<span id="an_14:59">14:59</span> And neither thus did their testimony
agree.

<span id="an_14:60">14:60</span> And the high priest, rising up before
them all, asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? What do these
testify against thee?

<span id="an_14:61">14:61</span> But he was silent, and answered
nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and says to him, \*Thou\* art
the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?

<span id="an_14:62">14:62</span> And Jesus said, \*I\* am, and ye shall
see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power, and coming with
the clouds of heaven.

<span id="an_14:63">14:63</span> And the high priest, having rent his
clothes, says, What need have we any more of witnesses?

<span id="an_14:64">14:64</span> Ye have heard the blasphemy; what think
ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

<span id="an_14:65">14:65</span> And some began to spit upon him, and
cover up his face, and buffet him, and say to him, Prophesy; and the
officers struck him with the palms of their hands.

<span id="an_14:66">14:66</span> And Peter being below in the
palace-court, there comes one of the maids of the high priest,

<span id="an_14:67">14:67</span> and seeing Peter warming himself,
having looked at him, says, And \*thou\* wast with the Nazarene, Jesus.

<span id="an_14:68">14:68</span> But he denied, saying, I know not nor
understand what thou sayest. And he went out into the vestibule; and a
cock crew.

<span id="an_14:69">14:69</span> And the maid, seeing him, again began
to say to those that stood by, This is \[one\] of them.

<span id="an_14:70">14:70</span> And he again denied. And again, after a
little, those that stood by said to Peter, Truly thou art \[one\] of
them, for also thou art a Galilean.

<span id="an_14:71">14:71</span> But he began to curse and to swear, I
know not this man of whom ye speak.

<span id="an_14:72">14:72</span> And the second time a cock crew. And
Peter remembered the word that Jesus said to him, Before \[the\] cock
crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice; and when he thought thereon he
wept.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And immediately in the morning the chief
priests, having taken counsel with the elders and scribes and the whole
sanhedrim, bound Jesus and carried \[him\] away, and delivered \[him\]
up to Pilate.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Pilate asked him, Art \*thou\* the
King of the Jews? And he answered and said to him, \*Thou\* sayest.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And the chief priests accused him
urgently.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Pilate asked him again, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? See of how many things they bear witness against
thee.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But Jesus still answered nothing, so that
Pilate marvelled.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> But at \[the\] feast he released to them
one prisoner, whomsoever they begged \[of him\].

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Now there was the \[person\] named
Barabbas bound with those who had made insurrection with \[him\],
\[and\] that had committed murder in the insurrection.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the crowd crying out began to beg
\[that he would do\] to them as he had always done.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> But Pilate answered them saying, Will ye
that I release to you the King of the Jews?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> for he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him up through envy.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But the chief priests stirred up the
crowd that he might rather release Barabbas to them.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Pilate answering said to them
again, What will ye then that I do \[to him\] whom ye call King of the
Jews?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And they cried out again, Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Pilate said to them, What evil then
has he done? But they cried out the more urgently, Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And Pilate, desirous of contenting the
crowd, released to them Barabbas, and delivered up Jesus, when he had
scourged him, that he might be crucified.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And the soldiers led him away into the
court which is \[called the\] praetorium, and they call together the
whole band.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And they clothe him with purple, and
bind round on him a crown of thorns which they had plaited.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And they began to salute him, Hail,
King of the Jews!

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And they struck his head with a reed,
and spat on him, and, bending the knee, did him homage.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And when they had mocked him, they took
the purple off him, and put his own clothes on him; and they lead him
out that they may crucify him.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And they compel to go \[with them\] a
certain passer-by, Simon, a Cyrenian, coming from the field, the father
of Alexander and Rufus, that he might carry his cross.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And they bring him to the place
\[called\] Golgotha, which, being interpreted, is Place of a skull.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they offered him wine \[to drink\]
medicated with myrrh; but he did not take \[it\].

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And having crucified him, they part his
clothes amongst \[themselves\], casting lots on them, what each one
should take.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And it was the third hour, and they
crucified him.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And the superscription of what he was
accused of was written up: The King of the Jews.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And with him they crucify two robbers,
one on his right hand, and one on his left.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> \[And the scripture was fulfilled which
says, And he was reckoned with the lawless.\]

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And they that passed by reviled him,
shaking their heads, and saying, Aha, thou that destroyest the temple
and buildest it in three days,

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> save thyself, and descend from the
cross.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> In like manner the chief priests also,
with the scribes, mocking with one another, said, He saved others;
himself he cannot save.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Let the Christ the King of Israel
descend now from the cross, that we may see and may believe. And they
that were crucified with him reproached him.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And when \[the\] sixth hour was come,
there came darkness over the whole land until \[the\] ninth hour;

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> and at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with
a loud voice, \[saying\], Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being
interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And some of those who stood by, when
they heard \[it\], said, Behold, he calls for Elias.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And one, running and filling a sponge
with vinegar, fixed it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let
alone, let us see if Elias comes to take him down.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Jesus, having uttered a loud cry,
expired.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And the veil of the temple was rent in
two from the top to the bottom.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And the centurion who stood by over
against him, when he saw that he had expired having thus cried out,
said, Truly this man was Son of God.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And there were women also looking on
from afar off, among whom were both Mary of Magdala, and Mary the mother
of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> who also, when he was in Galilee,
followed him and ministered to him; and many others who came up with him
to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> And when it was already evening, since
it was \[the\] preparation, that is, \[the day\] before a sabbath,

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> Joseph of Arimathaea, an honourable
councillor, who also himself was awaiting the kingdom of God, coming,
emboldened himself and went in to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> And Pilate wondered if he were already
dead; and having called to \[him\] the centurion, he inquired of him if
he had long died.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> And when he knew from the centurion, he
granted the body to Joseph.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> And having bought fine linen, \[and\]
having taken him down, he swathed him in the fine linen, and laid him in
a sepulchre which was cut out of rock, and rolled a stone to the door of
the sepulchre.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> And Mary of Magdala and Mary the
\[mother\] of Joses saw where he was put.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the sabbath being \[now\] past, Mary
of Magdala, and Mary the \[mother\] of James, and Salome, bought
aromatic spices that they might come and embalm him.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And very early on the first \[day\] of
the week they come to the sepulchre, the sun having risen.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And they said to one another, Who shall
roll us away the stone out of the door of the sepulchre?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And when they looked, they see that the
stone has been rolled \[away\], for it was very great.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And entering into the sepulchre, they saw
a young man sitting on the right, clothed in a white robe, and they were
amazed and alarmed;

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> but he says to them, Be not alarmed. Ye
seek Jesus, the Nazarene, the crucified one. He is risen, he is not
here; behold the place where they had put him.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But go, tell his disciples and Peter, he
goes before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him, as he said to you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And they went out, and fled from the
sepulchre. And trembling and excessive amazement possessed them, and
they said nothing to any one, for they were afraid.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Now when he had risen very early, the
first \[day\] of the week, he appeared first to Mary of Magdala, out of
whom he had cast seven demons.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> \*She\* went and brought word to those
that had been with him, \[who were\] grieving and weeping.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And when these heard that he was alive
and had been seen of her, they disbelieved \[it\].

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And after these things he was
manifested in another form to two of them as they walked, going into the
country;

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> and \*they\* went and brought word to
the rest; neither did they believe them.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Afterwards as they lay at table he was
manifested to the eleven, and reproached \[them with\] their unbelief
and hardness of heart, because they had not believed those who had seen
him risen.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And he said to them, Go into all the
world, and preach the glad tidings to all the creation.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> He that believes and is baptised shall
be saved, and he that disbelieves shall be condemned.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And these signs shall follow those that
have believed: in my name they shall cast out demons; they shall speak
with new tongues;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> they shall take up serpents; and if
they should drink any deadly thing it shall not injure them; they shall
lay hands upon the infirm, and they shall be well.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The Lord therefore, after he had spoken
to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And they, going forth, preached
everywhere, the Lord working with \[them\], and confirming the word by
the signs following upon \[it\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke](luk.md)
