[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mic)  [Next](hab.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Nahum

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden of Nineveh. The book of the
vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> A jealous and avenging ùGod is Jehovah: an
avenger is Jehovah, and full of fury: Jehovah taketh vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserveth \[wrath\] for his enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Jehovah is slow to anger, and great in
power, and doth not at all clear \[the guilty\]: Jehovah, -- his way is
in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his
feet.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and
drieth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower
of Lebanon languisheth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The mountains quake before him, and the
hills melt, and the earth is upheaved at his presence, and the world,
and all that dwell therein.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Who shall stand before his indignation? and
who shall abide in the fierceness of his anger? His fury is poured out
like fire, and the rocks are broken asunder by him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Jehovah is good, a stronghold in the day of
trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But with an overrunning flood he will make
a full end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What do ye imagine against Jehovah? He will
make a full end: trouble shall not rise up the second time.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Though they be tangled together \[as\]
thorns, and be as drenched from their drink, they shall be devoured as
dry stubble, completely.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Out of thee is gone forth one that
imagineth evil against Jehovah, a wicked counsellor.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Thus saith Jehovah: Though they be
complete in number, and many as they be, even so shall they be cut down,
and he shall pass away; and though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict
thee no more.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And now will I break his yoke from off
thee, and will burst thy bonds asunder.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Jehovah hath given commandment
concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of
thy god will I cut off the graven image, and the molten image: I will
prepare thy grave; for thou art vile.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Behold upon the mountains the feet of him
that bringeth glad tidings, that publisheth peace! Celebrate thy feasts,
Judah, perform thy vows: for the wicked one shall no more pass through
thee; he is utterly cut off.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> He that dasheth in pieces is come up
against thy face: keep the fortress, watch the way, make \[thy\] loins
strong, fortify \[thy\] power mightily.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For Jehovah hath brought again the glory of
Jacob, as the glory of Israel; for the wasters have wasted them, and
marred their vine-branches.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The shield of his mighty men is made red,
the valiant men are in scarlet: the chariots \[glitter\] with the sheen
of steel, in the day of his preparation, and the spears are brandished.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The chariots rush madly in the streets,
they justle one against another in the broad ways: the appearance of
them is like torches, they run like lightnings.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> He bethinketh him of his nobles: they
stumble in their march; they make haste to the wall thereof, and the
shelter is prepared.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The gates of the rivers are opened, and the
palace melteth away.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And it is decreed: she shall be uncovered,
she shall be led away, and her maids shall moan as with the voice of
doves, drumming upon their breasts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Nineveh hath been like a pool of water,
since the day she existed, yet they flee away. ... Stand! Stand! But
none looketh back.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Plunder the silver, plunder the gold; for
there is no end of the splendid store of all precious vessels.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> She is empty, and void, and waste; and
the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and writhing pain is in
all loins, and all their faces grow pale.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Where is \[now\] the den of the lions,
and the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion, the lioness,
\[and\] the lion's whelp walked, and none made them afraid?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The lion tore in pieces enough for his
whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey,
and his dens with ravin.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Behold, I am against thee, saith Jehovah
of hosts: and I will burn her chariots into smoke; and the sword shall
devour thy young lions, and I will cut off thy prey from the earth; and
the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Woe to the bloody city! It is all full of
lies \[and\] violence; the prey departeth not.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The crack of the whip, and the noise of the
rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing horses, and of the bounding
chariots!

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The horseman springing up, and the glitter
of the sword, and the flash of the spear, and a multitude of slain, and
a mass of carcases, and no end of corpses: they stumble over their
corpses.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> -- Because of the multitude of the
fornications of the well-favoured harlot, mistress of sorceries, that
selleth nations through her fornications, and families through her
sorceries,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> behold, I am against thee, saith Jehovah of
hosts; and I will uncover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will shew the
nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And I will cast abominable filth upon thee,
and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazing stock.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And it shall come to pass, \[that\] all
they that see thee shall flee from thee, and shall say, Nineveh is laid
waste! Who will bemoan her? whence shall I seek comforters for thee?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Art thou better than No-Amon, that was
situate among the rivers, \[that had\] the waters round about her, whose
rampart was the sea, \[and\] of the sea was her wall?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ethiopia was her strength, and Egypt, and
it was infinite; Phut and the Libyans were her helpers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> She too was carried away, she went into
captivity: her infants also were dashed in pieces, at the top of all the
streets; and they cast lots for her honourable men, and all her great
men were bound with chains.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be
hid; thou also shalt seek a refuge from the enemy.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All thy strongholds are \[like\]
fig-trees with the first-ripe figs: if they be shaken, they even fall
into the mouth of the eater.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Behold, thy people in the midst of thee
are \[as\] women: the gates of thy land are set wide open unto thine
enemies; the fire devoureth thy bars.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Draw thee water for the siege, strengthen
thy fortresses; go into the clay, and tread the mortar, make strong the
brick-kiln.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> There shall the fire devour thee; the
sword shall cut thee off; it shall devour thee like the cankerworm. Make
thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself many as the locust.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Thou hast multiplied thy merchants more
than the stars of the heavens; the cankerworm spreadeth himself out and
flieth away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Thy chosen men are as the locusts, and
thy captains as swarms of grasshoppers, which camp in the hedges in the
cold day: when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is not
known where they are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria;
thy nobles lie still; thy people are scattered upon the mountains, and
no man gathereth them.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> There is no healing of thy breach; thy
wound is grievous; all that hear the report of thee clap the hands over
thee; for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk](hab.md)
