[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lev)  [Next](deu.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Numbers

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the
wilderness of Sinai in the tent of meeting, on the first of the second
month, in the second year after their departure from the land of Egypt,
saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Take the sum of the whole assembly of the
children of Israel, after their families, according to their fathers'
houses, by the number of the names, every male, according to their
polls;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> from twenty years and upward, all that go
forth to military service in Israel: ye shall number them according to
their hosts, thou and Aaron.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And with you there shall be a man for every
tribe, a man who is the head of his father's house.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And these are the names of the men that
shall stand with you: for Reuben, Elizur the son of Shedeur;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> for Simeon, Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> for Judah, Nahshon the son of Amminadab;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> for Issachar, Nethaneel the son of Zuar;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for Zebulun, Eliab the son of Helon;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> for the children of Joseph: for Ephraim,
Elishama the son of Ammihud; for Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> for Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gideoni;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> for Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> for Asher, Pagiel the son of Ocran;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> for Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deuel;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> for Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These were those summoned of the
assembly, princes of the tribes of their fathers, the heads of the
thousands of Israel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Moses and Aaron took these men who
are expressed by their names,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and gathered the whole assembly together
on the first of the second month. And they declared their pedigrees
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, by the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, according to their
polls.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> As Jehovah had commanded Moses, so he
numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the sons of Reuben, Israel's eldest
son, their generations, after their families, according to their
fathers' houses, by the number of the names, according to their polls,
every male from twenty years old and upward, all that went forth to
military service:

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Reuben, were forty-six thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Of the sons of Simeon: their generations,
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, those that
were numbered of them, by the number of the names, according to their
polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all that went forth
to military service:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Simeon, were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Of the sons of Gad: their generations,
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, by the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that went forth to
military service:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Gad, were forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Of the sons of Judah: their generations,
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, by the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that went forth to
military service:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Judah, were seventy-four thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Of the sons of Issachar: their
generations, after their families, according to their fathers' houses,
by the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
went forth to military service:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Issachar, were fifty-four thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Of the sons of Zebulun: their
generations, after their families, according to their fathers' houses,
by the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
went forth to military service:

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Zebulun, were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Of the sons of Joseph: of the children of
Ephraim: their generations, after their families, according to their
fathers' houses, by the number of the names, from twenty years old and
upward, all that went forth to military service:

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> Of the children of Manasseh: their
generations, after their families, according to their fathers' houses,
by the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
went forth to military service:

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Manasseh, were thirty-two thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Of the sons of Benjamin: their
generations, after their families, according to their fathers' houses,
by the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
went forth to military service:

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Benjamin, were thirty-five thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Of the sons of Dan: their generations,
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, by the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that went forth to
military service:

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Dan, were sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Of the sons of Asher: their generations,
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, by the number
of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that went forth to
military service:

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Asher, were forty-one thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> Of the sons of Naphtali: their
generations, after their families, according to their fathers' houses,
by the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that
went forth to military service:

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> those that were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Naphtali, were fifty-three thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> These are those that were numbered, whom
Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, the twelve men:
each one was for the house of his fathers.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> And all those that were numbered of the
children of Israel, according to their fathers' houses, from twenty
years old and upward, all that went forth to military service in Israel,

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> all they that were numbered were six
hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> But the Levites after the tribe of their
fathers were not numbered among them.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> For Jehovah had spoken to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Only thou shalt not number the tribe of
Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> But thou, appoint the Levites over the
tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over all
things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all its
vessels; and they shall serve it, and round about the tabernacle shall
they encamp;

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> and when the tabernacle setteth forward,
the Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle encampeth, the
Levites shall set it up; and the stranger that cometh near shall be put
to death.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> And the children of Israel shall encamp
every man in his camp, and every man by his own standard, according to
their hosts;

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> but the Levites shall encamp round about
the tabernacle of testimony, that there come not wrath upon the assembly
of the children of Israel; and the Levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony.

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> And the children of Israel did so;
according to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, so did they.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The children of Israel shall encamp every
one by his standard, with the ensign of their father's house; round
about the tent of meeting, afar off, opposite to it shall they encamp.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And \[for\] those encamping eastward toward
the sun-rising \[there shall be\] the standard of the camp of Judah
according to their hosts; and the prince of the sons of Judah shall be
Nahshon the son of Amminadab;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and his host, even those that were numbered
of them, were seventy-four thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And those that encamp next unto him shall
be the tribe of Issachar; and the prince of the sons of Issachar shall
be Nethaneel the son of Zuar;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and his host, even those that were numbered
thereof, fifty-four thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> \[With them shall be\] the tribe of
Zebulun; and the prince of the sons of Zebulun shall be Eliab the son of
Helon;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and his host, even those that were numbered
thereof, fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> All that were numbered of the camp of Judah
were a hundred and eighty-six thousand four hundred, according to their
hosts. They shall set forth first.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The standard of the camp of Reuben shall
be southward according to their hosts; and the prince of the sons of
Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur;

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered thereof, forty-six thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And those that encamp by him shall be the
tribe of Simeon; and the prince of the sons of Simeon shall be Shelumiel
the son of Zurishaddai;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And \[with them shall be\] the tribe of
Gad; and the prince of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of
Reuel;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> All that were numbered of the camp of
Reuben were a hundred and fifty-one thousand four hundred and fifty,
according to their hosts. And they shall set forth second.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the tent of meeting shall set forth,
the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps; as they encamp, so
shall they set forth, every man in his place, according to their
standards.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The standard of the camp of Ephraim
according to their hosts shall be westward; and the prince of the sons
of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, forty thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And by him shall be the tribe of
Manasseh; and the prince of the sons of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the
son of Pedahzur;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, thirty-two thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And \[with them shall be\] the tribe of
Benjamin; and the prince of the sons of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son
of Gideoni;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, thirty-five thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> All that were numbered of the camp of
Ephraim were a hundred and eight thousand one hundred, according to
their hosts. And they shall set forth third.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> The standard of the camp of Dan shall be
northward according to their hosts; and the prince of the sons of Dan
shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai;

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And those that encamp by him shall be the
tribe of Asher; and the prince of the sons of Asher shall be Pagiel the
son of Ocran;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, forty-one thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> And \[with them shall be\] the tribe of
Naphtali; and the prince of the sons of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son
of Enan;

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> and his host, even those that were
numbered of them, fifty-three thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> All that were numbered of the camp of Dan
were a hundred and fifty-seven thousand six hundred. They shall set
forth last according to their standards.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> These are those that were numbered of the
children of Israel, according to their fathers' houses: all those that
were numbered of the camps, according to their hosts, were six hundred
and three thousand five hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> But the Levites were not numbered among
the children of Israel; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And the children of Israel did according
to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses: so they encamped according to
their standards, and so they journeyed, every one according to their
families, according to their fathers' houses.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And these are the generations of Aaron and
Moses in the day that Jehovah spoke with Moses on mount Sinai.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Aaron: Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> These are the names of the sons of Aaron,
the anointed priests, who were consecrated to exercise the priesthood.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Nadab and Abihu died before Jehovah
when they offered strange fire before Jehovah in the wilderness of
Sinai, and they had no sons; and Eleazar and Ithamar exercised the
priesthood in the presence of Aaron their father.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present
them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> and they shall keep his charge, and the
charge of the whole assembly, before the tent of meeting, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And they shall keep all the utensils of the
tent of meeting, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the
service of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And thou shalt give the Levites to Aaron
and to his sons: they are wholly given to him out of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And Aaron and his sons shalt thou appoint
that they may attend to their priest's office; and the stranger that
cometh near shall be put to death.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And I, behold, I have taken the Levites
from among the children of Israel instead of every firstborn that
breaketh open the womb among the children of Israel, and the Levites
shall be mine;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> for every firstborn is mine. On the day
that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I hallowed unto me
all the firstborn in Israel, both of man and beast; mine shall they be:
I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the
wilderness of Sinai, saying,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Number the sons of Levi according to
their fathers' houses, after their families; every male from a month old
and upward shalt thou number them.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Moses numbered them, according to the
commandment of Jehovah, -- as he had been commanded.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And these are the sons of Levi by their
names: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Gershon according to their families: Libni and Shimei.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And the sons of Kohath according to their
families: Amram and Izhar, Hebron and Uzziel.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And the sons of Merari according to their
families: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites
according to their fathers' houses.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Of Gershon, the family of the Libnites,
and the family of the Shimites: these are the families of the
Gershonites.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Those that were numbered of them,
according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward,
those that were numbered of them were seven thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The families of the Gershonites encamped
behind the tabernacle westward.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And the prince of the father's house of
the Gershonites was Eliasaph the son of Lael.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And the charge of the sons of Gershon in
the tent of meeting was: the tabernacle and the tent, its covering, and
the curtain of the entrance to the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And the hangings of the court, and the
curtain of the entrance to the court, which surrounds the tabernacle and
the altar, and the cords thereof for all its service.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And of Kohath, the family of the
Amramites, and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the
Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these are the families of
the Kohathites.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> According to the number of all the males,
from a month old and upward, there were eight thousand six hundred, who
kept the charge of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> The families of the sons of Kohath
encamped on the side of the tabernacle southward.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> And the prince of the father's house of
the families of the Kohathites was Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> And their charge was the ark, and the
table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the utensils of the
sanctuary with which they ministered, and the curtain, and all that
belongs to its service.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And the prince of princes of the Levites
was Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest: he had the oversight of them
that kept the charge of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites,
and the family of the Mushites: these are the families of Merari.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And those that were numbered of them,
according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward,
were six thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> And the prince of the father's house of
the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail. They encamped on
the side of the tabernacle northward.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> And the charge of the sons of Merari
consisted in the oversight of the boards of the tabernacle, and its
bars, and its pillars, and its bases, and all its furniture, and all
that belongs to its service,

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> and the pillars of the court round about,
and their bases, and their pegs, and their cords.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> And those who encamped before the
tabernacle eastward, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrising,
were Moses, and Aaron and his sons, who kept the charge of the sanctuary
for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh
near shall be put to death.

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> All that were numbered of the Levites,
whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of Jehovah, according
to their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were
twenty-two thousand.

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Number all the
first-born males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward,
and take the number of their names.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I
am Jehovah) instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel;
and the cattle of the Levites, instead of all the firstlings among the
cattle of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> And Moses numbered, as Jehovah had
commanded him, all the firstborn among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> And all the firstborn males, by the
number of the names, from a month old and upward, according to their
numbering, were twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> Take the Levites instead of all the
firstborn among the children of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites
instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall be mine: I am Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> And for those that are to be ransomed,
the two hundred and seventy-three of the firstborn of the children of
Israel, which are in excess over the Levites,

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> thou shalt take five shekels apiece by
the poll, according to the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them,
-- twenty gerahs the shekel;

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> and thou shalt give the money unto Aaron
and unto his sons for those in excess among them who are to be ransomed.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> And Moses took the ransom-money from them
that were over and above those who were ransomed by the Levites;

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> of the firstborn of the children of
Israel he took the money, a thousand three hundred and sixty-five
\[shekels\], according to the shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> And Moses gave the money of them that
were ransomed to Aaron and to his sons, according to the commandment of
Jehovah, -- as Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from
among the sons of Levi, after their families, according to their
fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> from thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, all that enter into the service, to do the work in the
tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> This shall be the service of the sons of
Kohath in the tent of meeting: it is most holy.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron
and his sons shall go in, and they shall take down the veil of
separation and cover the ark of testimony with it;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and shall put thereon a covering of
badgers' skin, and shall spread over it a cloth wholly of blue, and
shall put its staves \[to it\].

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And upon the table of shewbread they shall
spread a cloth of blue; and put thereon the dishes, and the cups, and
the bowls, and goblets of the drink-offering; and the continual bread
shall be thereon.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And they shall spread upon them a cloth of
scarlet, and cover it with a covering of badgers' skin, and shall put
its staves \[to it\].

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And they shall take a cloth of blue, and
cover the candlestick of the light, and its lamps, and its snuffers, and
its snuff-trays, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they perform
its service;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> and they shall put it and all the
utensils thereof within a covering of badgers' skin, and shall put it
upon a pole.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And upon the golden altar they shall
spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of badgers' skin,
and shall put its staves \[to it\].

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And they shall take all the instruments
of service, wherewith they serve in the sanctuary, and put them in a
cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skin, and
shall put them upon a pole.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And they shall cleanse the altar of the
ashes, and spread a purple cloth thereon;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> and they shall put upon it all the
utensils thereof, wherewith they perform service about it: the firepans,
the forks, and the shovels, and the bowls, -- all the utensils of the
altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers' skin, and
put its staves \[to it\].

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And when Aaron and his sons have ended
covering the sanctuary, and all the utensils of the sanctuary, when the
camp setteth forward, then afterwards the sons of Kohath shall come to
carry it; but they shall not touch the holy things, lest they die. This
is what the sons of Kohath have to carry in the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
shall have the oversight of the oil for the light, and the fragrant
incense, and the continual oblation, and the anointing oil, -- the
oversight of the whole tabernacle, and of all that is therein, over the
sanctuary, and over its furniture.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Ye shall not cut off the families of the
Kohathites from among the Levites,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> but this shall ye do unto them, that they
may live, and not die, when they draw near unto the most holy things:
Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to his
service and to his burden;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> but they shall not go in and see for a
moment the holy things, lest they die.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon,
according to their fathers' houses, after their families.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> From thirty years old and upward to fifty
years old shalt thou number them; every one that cometh to labour in the
work, to perform the service in the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> This shall be the service of the families
of the Gershonites, in serving, and in carrying:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> they shall carry the curtains of the
tabernacle, and the tent of meeting, its covering, and the covering of
badgers' skin that is above upon it, and the curtain of the entrance to
the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> and the hangings of the court, and the
curtain of the entrance, of the gate of the court, which surroundeth the
tabernacle and the altar, and the cords thereof, and all the instruments
of their service; and all that is to be done for these things shall they
perform.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> At the commandment of Aaron and his sons
shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their
carrying, and in all their service; and ye shall appoint unto them in
charge all their carrying.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> This is the service of the families of
the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting, and their charge shall be
under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> The sons of Merari: after their families,
according to their fathers' houses shalt thou number them;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth into the
labour, to perform the service of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And this shall be the charge of their
burden, according to all their service in the tent of meeting: the
boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof,
and bases thereof,

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and the pillars of the court round about,
and their bases, and their pegs, and their cords, all their instruments,
according to all their service; and by name ye shall number to them the
materials which are their charge to carry.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> This is the service of the families of
the sons of Merari, according to all their service in the tent of
meeting, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And Moses and Aaron and the princes of
the assembly numbered the sons of the Kohathites after their families,
and according to their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, every one that entered into the labour, for service in
the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And those that were numbered of them
according to their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> These are they that were numbered of the
families of the Kohathites, every one that served in the tent of
meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of
Jehovah through Moses.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And those that were numbered of the sons
of Gershon, after their families, and according to their fathers'
houses,

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, every one that entered into the labour, for service in
the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> even those that were numbered of them,
after their families, according to their fathers' houses, were two
thousand six hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> These are they that were numbered of the
families of the sons of Gershon, all that served in the tent of meeting,
whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> And those that were numbered of the
families of the sons of Merari, after their families, according to their
fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, every one that entered into the labour, for service in
the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> even those that were numbered of them
according to their families, were three thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> These are they that were numbered of the
families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according
to the commandment of Jehovah through Moses.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> All those that were numbered of the
Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the princes of Israel numbered, after
their families and according to their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, every one that came to serve \[in\] the work of the
service, and \[in\] the work of carrying, in the tent of meeting,

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> even those that were numbered of them,
were eight thousand five hundred and eighty.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> According to the commandment of Jehovah
they were numbered by Moses, every one for his service, and for his
burden, and numbered by him, as Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Command the children of Israel, that they
put out of the camp every leper, and every one that hath an issue, and
whosoever is defiled by a dead person:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> both male and female shall ye put out;
outside the camp shall ye put them, that they defile not their camps, in
the midst whereof I dwell.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And the children of Israel did so, and put
them outside the camp: as Jehovah had said to Moses, so did the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, When a
man or woman shall commit any of all the sins of man to work
unfaithfulness against Jehovah, and that soul is guilty,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> then they shall confess their sin which
they have done; and he shall recompense his trespass according to the
principal thereof, and shall add unto it the fifth part thereof, and
give it unto him against whom he hath trespassed.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And if the man have no kinsman to
recompense the trespass unto, the trespass which is recompensed to
Jehovah shall be the priest's, besides the ram of the atonement,
wherewith an atonement is made for him.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And every heave-offering of all the holy
things of the children of Israel, which they present unto the priest,
shall be his.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And every man's hallowed things shall be
his: whatever any man giveth the priest shall be his.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them, If any man's wife go astray, and commit unfaithfulness
against him,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and a man lie with her carnally, and it
be hid from the eyes of her husband, and she be defiled in secret, and
there be no witness against her, and she have not been caught;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and the spirit of jealousy come upon him,
and he be jealous of his wife, and she have been defiled, -- or if the
spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she
have not been defiled,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> -- then shall the man bring his wife unto
the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her, a tenth part of an
ephah of barley-meal; he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense
thereon; for it is an oblation of jealousy, a memorial oblation,
bringing iniquity to remembrance.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And the priest shall bring her near, and
set her before Jehovah.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the priest shall take holy water in
an earthen vessel; and the priest shall take of the dust that is on the
floor of the tabernacle, and put it into the water.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And the priest shall set the woman before
Jehovah, and uncover the woman's head, and put the memorial oblation in
her hands, which is the jealousy offering; and in the hand of the priest
shall be the bitter water that bringeth the curse.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And the priest shall adjure her, and say
unto the woman, If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone
astray in uncleanness, in being with another instead of thy husband, be
free from this bitter water that bringeth the curse.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> But if thou hast gone astray to another
instead of thy husband, and hast been defiled, and a man other than thy
husband have lain with thee,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> -- then the priest shall adjure the woman
with the oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman:
Jehovah make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, when Jehovah
doth make thy thigh to shrink, and thy belly to swell;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> and this water that bringeth the curse
shall enter into thy bowels, to make the belly to swell, and the thigh
to shrink. And the woman shall say, Amen, amen.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And the priest shall write these curses
in a book, and shall blot them out with the bitter water,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> and he shall cause the woman to drink the
bitter water that bringeth the curse, that the water that bringeth the
curse may enter into her for bitterness.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And the priest shall take out of the
woman's hand the oblation of jealousy, and shall wave the oblation
before Jehovah, and shall present it at the altar.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And the priest shall take a handful of
the oblation as a memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar; and
afterwards he shall make the woman drink the water.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And when he hath made her to drink the
water, then it shall come to pass, if she have been defiled, and have
committed unfaithfulness against her husband, that the water that
bringeth the curse shall enter into her, for bitterness, and her belly
shall swell, and her thigh shall shrink; and the woman shall become a
curse among her people.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> But if the woman have not been defiled,
and be clean, then she shall be clear, and shall conceive seed.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> This is the law of jealousies, when a
wife goeth astray to another instead of her husband and is defiled,

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> or when the spirit of jealousy cometh
upon a man, and he is jealous as regards his wife; then shall he set the
woman before Jehovah, and the priest shall do to her according to all
this law.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Then shall the man be free from iniquity,
but that woman shall bear her iniquity.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them, If a man or a woman have vowed the special vow of a Nazarite,
to consecrate themselves to Jehovah;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> he shall separate himself from wine and
strong drink: he shall drink no vinegar of wine, nor vinegar of strong
drink, neither shall he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat grapes,
fresh or dried.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> All the days of his separation shall he eat
nothing that is made of the vine, from the seed-stones, even to the
skin.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> All the days of the vow of his separation
there shall no razor come upon his head; until the days be fulfilled,
that he hath consecrated himself to Jehovah, he shall be holy; he shall
let the locks of the hair of his head grow.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> All the days that he hath consecrated
himself to Jehovah, he shall come near no dead body.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> He shall not make himself unclean for his
father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister when they
die; for the consecration of his God is upon his head.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> All the days of his separation he is holy
to Jehovah.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And if any one die unexpectedly by him
suddenly, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration, then he
shall shave his head on the day of his cleansing; on the seventh day
shall he shave it.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And on the eighth day he shall bring two
turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, to the priest, at the entrance of
the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the priest shall offer one for a
sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, and make an atonement
for him, for that he sinned by the dead person; and he shall hallow his
head that same day.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And he shall \[again\] consecrate to
Jehovah the days of his separation, and shall bring a yearling lamb for
a trespass-offering. But the first days are forfeited, for his
consecration hath been defiled.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And this is the law of the Nazarite on
the day when the days of his consecration are fulfilled: he shall be
brought to the entrance of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And he shall present his offering to
Jehovah, one yearling he-lamb without blemish for a burnt-offering, and
one yearling ewe-lamb without blemish for a sin-offering, and one ram
without blemish for a peace-offering;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and a basket with unleavened bread, cakes
of fine flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil,
and their oblation, and their drink-offerings.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the priest shall present them before
Jehovah, and shall offer his sin-offering and his burnt-offering:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and he shall offer the ram, a sacrifice
of peace-offering to Jehovah, with the basket of unleavened bread; the
priest shall offer also his oblation and his drink-offering.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And the Nazarite shall shave the head of
his consecration at the entrance to the tent of meeting, and shall take
the hair of the head of his consecration, and put it on the fire which
is under the sacrifice of the peace-offering.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the priest shall take the boiled
shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one
unleavened wafer, and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazarite,
after he hath shaven \[the hair of\] his consecration.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And the priest shall wave them as
wave-offering before Jehovah; it is holy for the priest, with the breast
of the wave-offering and with the shoulder of the heave-offering; and
afterwards the Nazarite may drink wine.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> This is the law of the Nazarite who hath
vowed: his offering to Jehovah for his consecration, beside what his
hand is able to get; according to the vow which he vowed, so shall he
do, according to the law of his consecration.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons,
saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel: saying unto
them,

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee;

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Jehovah make his face shine upon thee,
and be gracious unto thee;

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Jehovah lift up his countenance upon
thee, and give thee peace.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And they shall put my name upon the
children of Israel; and I will bless them.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it came to pass on the day that Moses
had completed the setting up of the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and
hallowed it, and all the furniture thereof, and the altar and all its
utensils, and had anointed them, and hallowed them,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> that the princes of Israel, the heads of
their fathers' houses, the princes of the tribes, they that were over
them that had been numbered, offered;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and they brought their offering before
Jehovah, six covered waggons, and twelve oxen; a waggon for two princes,
and an ox for each; and they presented them before the tabernacle.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Take it of them, and they shall be for the
performance of the service of the tent of meeting, and thou shalt give
them unto the Levites, to each according to his service.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Moses took the waggons and the oxen,
and gave them to the Levites.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Two waggons and four oxen he gave to the
sons of Gershon, according to their service;

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> and four waggons and eight oxen he gave to
the sons of Merari, according to their service, -- under the hand of
Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none,
for the service of the sanctuary was upon them: they bore \[what they
carried\] upon the shoulder.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the princes presented the
dedication-gift of the altar on the day that it was anointed; and the
princes presented their offering before the altar.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, They shall
present their offering for the dedication of the altar, each prince on
his day.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And he that presented his offering the
first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And his offering was one silver dish of
the weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl, of
seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them
full of fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> On the second day offered Nethaneel the
son of Zuar, prince of Issachar;

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> he presented his offering; one silver
dish of the weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl
of seventy shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of
them full of fine flour, mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Nethaneel the son of Zuar.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> On the third day, the prince of the
children of Zebulun, Eliab the son of Helon:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> his offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> On the fourth day, the prince of the
children of Reuben, Elizur the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Elizur, the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> On the fifth day, the prince of the
children of Simeon, Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> On the sixth day, the prince of the
children of Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> On the seventh day, the prince of the
children of Ephraim, Elishama the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> On the eighth day, the prince of the
children of Manasseh, Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> On the ninth day, the prince of the
children of Benjamin, Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_7:61">7:61</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:62">7:62</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:63">7:63</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:64">7:64</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:65">7:65</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_7:66">7:66</span> On the tenth day, the prince of the
children of Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_7:67">7:67</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:68">7:68</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:69">7:69</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:70">7:70</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:71">7:71</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_7:72">7:72</span> On the eleventh day, the prince of the
children of Asher, Pagiel the son of Ocran.

<span id="an_7:73">7:73</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:74">7:74</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:75">7:75</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:76">7:76</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:77">7:77</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Pagiel the son of Ocran.

<span id="an_7:78">7:78</span> On the twelfth day, the prince of the
children of Naphtali, Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="an_7:79">7:79</span> His offering was one silver dish of the
weight of a hundred and thirty \[shekels\], one silver bowl of seventy
shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of
fine flour mingled with oil for an oblation;

<span id="an_7:80">7:80</span> one cup of ten \[shekels\] of gold, full
of incense;

<span id="an_7:81">7:81</span> one young bullock, one ram, one yearling
lamb, for a burnt-offering;

<span id="an_7:82">7:82</span> one buck of the goats for a sin-offering;

<span id="an_7:83">7:83</span> and for a sacrifice of peace-offering,
two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five yearling lambs. This was the
offering of Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="an_7:84">7:84</span> This was the dedication-gift of the
altar, on the day when it was anointed, from the princes of Israel:
twelve silver dishes, twelve silver bowls, twelve cups of gold:

<span id="an_7:85">7:85</span> each silver dish of a hundred and thirty
\[shekels\], and each bowl seventy: all the silver of the vessels was
two thousand four hundred \[shekels\] according to the shekel of the
sanctuary;

<span id="an_7:86">7:86</span> twelve golden cups full of incense, each
cup of ten \[shekels\], according to the shekel of the sanctuary: all
the gold of the cups, a hundred and twenty \[shekels\].

<span id="an_7:87">7:87</span> All the cattle for the burnt-offering
was: twelve bullocks, twelve rams, twelve yearling lambs and their
oblation; and twelve bucks of the goats for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_7:88">7:88</span> And all the cattle for the sacrifice of
the peace-offering was: twenty-four bullocks, sixty rams, sixty
he-goats, sixty yearling lambs. This was the dedication-gift of the
altar, after it had been anointed.

<span id="an_7:89">7:89</span> And when Moses went into the tent of
meeting to speak with Him, then he heard the voice speaking to him from
off the mercy-seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the
two cherubim; and he spoke to Him.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses saying,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Speak unto Aaron, and say unto him, When
thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against
the candlestick.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps
thereof over against the candlestick, as Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And this was the work of the candlestick:
\[it was\] of beaten gold; from its base to its flowers was it beaten
work; according to the form which Jehovah had shewn Moses, so had he
made the candlestick.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Take the Levites from among the children of
Israel, and cleanse them.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And thus shalt thou do unto them, to
cleanse them: sprinkle upon them water of purification from sin; and
they shall pass the razor over all their flesh, and shall wash their
garments, and make themselves clean.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And they shall take a young bullock and its
oblation of fine flour mingled with oil; and another young bullock shalt
thou take for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And thou shalt bring the Levites before the
tent of meeting; and thou shalt gather together the whole assembly of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And thou shalt bring the Levites before
Jehovah; and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the
Levites.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And Aaron shall offer the Levites as a
wave-offering before Jehovah from the children of Israel, and they shall
perform the service of Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And the Levites shall lay their hands
upon the heads of the bullocks, and thou shalt offer the one for a
sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, to Jehovah, to make
atonement for the Levites.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And thou shalt set the Levites before
Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them as a wave-offering to
Jehovah.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And thou shalt separate the Levites from
among the children of Israel, that the Levites may be mine.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And afterwards shall the Levites come in
to do the service of the tent of meeting. And thou shalt cleanse them,
and offer them as a wave-offering.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> For they are wholly given unto me from
among the children of Israel; instead of every one that breaketh open
the womb, instead of every firstborn among the children of Israel, have
I taken them unto me.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For all the firstborn among the children
of Israel are mine, both of man and beast; on the day that I smote every
firstborn in the land of Egypt, I hallowed them to myself.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And I have taken the Levites instead of
all the firstborn among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And I have given the Levites as a gift to
Aaron and to his sons, from among the children of Israel, to perform the
service of the children of Israel in the tent of meeting, and to make
atonement for the children of Israel; that there be no plague among the
children of Israel, when the children of Israel draw near to the
sanctuary.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Moses and Aaron, and all the assembly
of the children of Israel, did to the Levites according to all that
Jehovah had commanded Moses concerning the Levites: so did the children
of Israel to them.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the Levites purified themselves from
sin, and they washed their garments; and Aaron offered them as a
wave-offering before Jehovah; and Aaron made atonement for them to
cleanse them.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And afterwards the Levites came in to
perform their service in the tent of meeting before Aaron, and before
his sons; as Jehovah had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did
they to them.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> This is that which concerneth the
Levites: from twenty-five years old and upward shall he come to labour
in the work of the service of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And from fifty years old he shall retire
from the labour of the service, and shall serve no more;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> but he shall minister with his brethren
in the tent of meeting, and keep the charge, but he shall not serve
\[in\] the service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites with regard to
their charges.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the
wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after their
departure from the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Let the children of Israel also hold the
passover at its set time;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> on the fourteenth day in this month between
the two evenings, ye shall hold it at its set time; according to all the
rites of it, and according to all the ordinances thereof shall ye hold
it.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Moses spoke to the children of Israel,
that they should hold the passover.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And they held the passover in the first
\[month\] on the fourteenth day of the month, between the two evenings,
in the wilderness of Sinai: according to all that Jehovah had commanded
Moses, so did the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And there were men, who were unclean
through the dead body of a man, and could not hold the passover on that
day; and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And those men said to him, We are unclean
by reason of the dead body of a man: why are we kept back, that we may
not present the offering of Jehovah at its set time among the children
of Israel?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Moses said to them, Stay, and I will
hear what Jehovah commands concerning you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying, If any one of you or of your generations be unclean by reason of
a dead body or be on a journey afar off, yet he shall hold the passover
to Jehovah.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> In the second month, on the fourteenth
day, between the two evenings, shall they hold it; with unleavened bread
and bitter herbs shall they eat it.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> They shall leave none of it until the
morning, nor break a bone thereof: according to every ordinance of the
passover shall they hold it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But a man that is clean, and is not on a
journey, and forbeareth to hold the passover, that soul shall be cut off
from among his peoples; because he presented not the offering of Jehovah
at its set time: that man shall bear his sin.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And if a stranger shall sojourn among
you, and would hold the passover to Jehovah, according to the rite of
the passover, and according to the ordinance thereof, so shall he do. Ye
shall have one rite, both for the stranger and for him that is born in
the land.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And on the day that the tabernacle was
set up, the cloud covered the tabernacle of the tent of testimony; and
at even it was upon the tabernacle as the appearance of fire, until the
morning.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So it was continually: the cloud covered
it, and at night it was as the appearance of fire.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And when the cloud rose from the tent,
then the children of Israel journeyed; and at the place where the cloud
stood still, there the children of Israel encamped.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> According to the commandment of Jehovah
the children of Israel journeyed, and according to the commandment of
Jehovah they \[remained\] encamped; all the days that the cloud dwelt
upon the tabernacle they encamped.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And when the cloud was long upon the
tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of
Jehovah, and journeyed not.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And if it were so that the cloud was a
few days upon the tabernacle, according to the commandment of Jehovah
they encamped, and according to the commandment of Jehovah they
journeyed.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And if it were so that the cloud was
there from the evening until the morning, and that the cloud was taken
up in the morning, then they journeyed; or a day and a night, and the
cloud was taken up, they journeyed;

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> or two days, or a month, or many days,
when the cloud was long upon the tabernacle, dwelling upon it, the
children of Israel \[remained\] encamped, and journeyed not; but when it
was taken up, they journeyed.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> At the commandment of Jehovah they
encamped, and at the commandment of Jehovah they journeyed: they kept
the charge of Jehovah according to the commandment of Jehovah through
Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Make thee two trumpets of silver; of
beaten work shalt thou make them; and they shall serve for the calling
together of the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And when they shall blow with them, the
whole assembly shall gather to thee at the entrance of the tent of
meeting.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And if they blow with one, then the
princes, the heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather unto thee.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And when ye blow an alarm, the camps that
lie eastward shall set forward.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And when ye blow an alarm the second
time, the camps that lie southward shall set forward; they shall blow an
alarm on their setting forward.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when the congregation is to be
gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not blow an alarm:

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall
blow with the trumpets; and they shall be to you for an everlasting
statute throughout your generations.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And if ye go to war in your land against
the enemy that oppresseth you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the
trumpets; and ye shall be remembered before Jehovah your God, and ye
shall be saved from your enemies.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And in the day of your gladness, and in
your set feasts, and in your new moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets
over your burnt-offerings and over your sacrifices of peace-offering;
and they shall be to you for a memorial before your God: I am Jehovah
your God.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And it came to pass in the second year,
in the second month, on the twentieth of the month, that the cloud was
taken up from off the tabernacle of the testimony.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the children of Israel set forward
according to their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the
cloud stood still in the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And they first took their journey,
according to the commandment of Jehovah through Moses.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> The standard of the camp of the
children of Judah set forward first according to their hosts, and over
his host was Nahshon the son of Amminadab;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Issachar was Nethaneel the son of Zuar;

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the tabernacle was taken down; and
the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward bearing the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the standard of the camp of Reuben
set forward according to their hosts, and over his host was Elizur the
son of Shedeur;

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And the Kohathites set forward bearing
the sanctuary: and \[the others\] set up the tabernacle whilst they
came.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And the standard of the camp of the
children of Ephraim set forward according to their hosts, and over his
host was Elishama the son of Ammihud;

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur;

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And the standard of the camp of the
children of Dan set forward, the rear-guard of all the camps according
to their hosts, and over his host was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai;

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ocran;

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> and over the host of the tribe of the
children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> These were the settings forward of the
children of Israel according to their hosts: so did they set forward.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Moses said to Hobab, the son of
Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law, We are journeying to the
place of which Jehovah said, I will give it unto you: come with us, and
we will do thee good; for Jehovah has spoken good concerning Israel.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And he said to him, I will not go; but
to mine own land, and to my kindred will I go.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And he said, Leave me not, I pray thee,
because thou knowest where we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou
wilt be to us for eyes.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And it shall be, if thou come with us,
that whatever good Jehovah doeth unto us, so will we do to thee.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> And they set forward from the mountain
of Jehovah \[and went\] three days' journey; and the ark of the covenant
of Jehovah went before them in the three days' journey, to search out a
resting-place for them.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And the cloud of Jehovah was over them
by day when they set forward out of the camp.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And it came to pass when the ark set
forward, that Moses said, Rise up, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be
scattered; And let them that hate thee flee before thy face.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And when it rested, he said, Return,
Jehovah, unto the myriads of the thousands of Israel.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And it came to pass that when the people
murmured, it was evil in the ears of Jehovah; and Jehovah heard it, and
his anger was kindled, and the fire of Jehovah burned among them, and
consumed \[some\] in the extremity of the camp.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the people cried to Moses; and Moses
prayed to Jehovah -- and the fire abated.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And they called the name of that place
Taberah; because a fire of Jehovah burned among them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And the mixed multitude that was among
them lusted; and the children of Israel also wept again and said, Who
will give us flesh to eat?

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> We remember the fish that we ate in Egypt
for nothing; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the
onions, and the garlic;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> and now our soul is dried up: there is
nothing at all but the manna before our eyes.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And the manna was as coriander seed, and
its appearance as the appearance of bdellium.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The people went about, and gathered it,
and ground it with hand-mills, or beat it in mortars, and boiled it in
pots, and made cakes of it; and the taste of it was as the taste of
oil-cakes.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And when the dew fell upon the camp by
night, the manna fell upon it.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And Moses heard the people weep
throughout their families, every one at the entrance of his tent; and
the anger of Jehovah was kindled greatly; it was also evil in the eyes
of Moses.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Moses said to Jehovah, Why hast
thou done evil to thy servant, and why have I not found favour in thine
eyes, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Have I conceived all this people, have
I brought them forth, that thou sayest to me, Carry them in thy bosom,
as the nursing-father beareth the suckling, unto the land which thou
didst swear unto their fathers?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Whence should I have flesh to give unto
all this people? for they weep unto me, saying, Give us flesh that we
may eat!

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> I am not able to bear all this people
alone, for it is too heavy for me.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And if thou deal thus with me, slay me,
I pray thee, if I have found favour in thine eyes, that I may not behold
my wretchedness.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Gather unto
me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the
elders of the people, and their officers; and take them to the tent of
meeting, and they shall stand there with thee.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And I will come down and talk with thee
there; and I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and will put it
upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, and
thou shalt not bear it alone.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And unto the people shalt thou say,
Hallow yourselves for to-morrow, and ye shall eat flesh; for ye have
wept in the ears of Jehovah, saying, Who will give us flesh to eat? for
it was well with us in Egypt; and Jehovah will give you flesh, and ye
shall eat.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Not one day shall ye eat, nor two days,
nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> \[but\] for a whole month, until it
come out at your nostrils, and it become loathsome unto you; because
that ye have despised Jehovah who is among you, and have wept before
him, saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt?

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Moses said, The people in whose
midst I am are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou sayest, I will
give them flesh that they may eat a whole month.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Shall flocks and herds be slaughtered
for them, to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered
for them, to suffice them?

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Hath
Jehovah's hand become short? Now shalt thou see whether my word will
come to pass unto thee or not.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And Moses went out and told the people
the words of Jehovah; and he gathered the seventy men of the elders of
the people, and set them round about the tent.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And Jehovah came down in a cloud, and
spoke to him, and took of the Spirit that was upon him, and put it upon
the seventy men, the elders; and it came to pass, that when the Spirit
rested on them, they prophesied, but they did not repeat \[it\].

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And two men remained in the camp, the
name of the one, Eldad, and the name of the other, Medad; and the Spirit
rested upon them (and they were among them that were written, but they
had not gone out to the tent); and they prophesied in the camp.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And there ran a youth, and told Moses,
and said, Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And Joshua the son of Nun, the
attendant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lord
Moses, forbid them!

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> But Moses said to him, Enviest thou for
my sake? would that all Jehovah's people were prophets, \[and\] that
Jehovah would put his Spirit upon them!

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> And Moses withdrew into the camp, he
and the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And there went forth a wind from
Jehovah, and drove quails from the sea, and cast them about the camp,
about a day's journey on this side, and about a day's journey on the
other side, round about the camp, and about two cubits above the earth.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And the people rose up all that day,
and the whole night, and all the next day, and they gathered the quails:
he that gathered little gathered ten homers; and they spread them abroad
for themselves round about the camp.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> The flesh was yet between their teeth,
before it was chewed, when the wrath of Jehovah was kindled against the
people, and Jehovah smote the people with a very great plague.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> And they called the name of that place
Kibroth-hattaavah; because there they buried the people who lusted.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> From Kibroth-hattaavah the people
journeyed to Hazeroth; and they were at Hazeroth.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses
because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had taken; for he had taken a
Cushite as wife.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And they said, Has Jehovah indeed spoken
only to Moses? has he not spoken also to us? And Jehovah heard it.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But the man Moses was very meek, above
all men that were upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses, and
to Aaron, and to Miriam, Come out ye three unto the tent of meeting. And
they went out, they three.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And Jehovah came down in the pillar of
the cloud, and stood at the entrance of the tent, and called Aaron and
Miriam; and they both came forth.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And he said, Hear now my words: If there
be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a
vision, I will speak to him in a dream.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Not so my servant Moses: he is faithful
in all my house.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Mouth to mouth do I speak to him openly,
and not in riddles; and the form of Jehovah doth he behold. Why then
were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses?

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And the anger of Jehovah was kindled
against them, and he went away;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> and the cloud departed from off the
tent. And behold, Miriam was leprous as snow; and Aaron turned toward
Miriam, and behold, she was leprous.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Then Aaron said to Moses, Alas, my
lord, I beseech thee, lay not this sin upon us, wherein we have been
foolish, and have sinned!

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Let her not be as one stillborn, half
of whose flesh is consumed when he comes out of his mother's womb.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, O
ùGod, heal her, I beseech thee!

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, But had her
father anyways spat in her face, should she not be shamed seven days?
She shall be shut outside the camp seven days, and afterwards she shall
be received in \[again\].

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And Miriam was shut outside the camp
seven days; and the people did not journey till Miriam was received in
\[again\].

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And afterwards the people journeyed
from Hazeroth, and encamped in the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Send thou men, that they may search out
the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel. Ye shall
send a man of every tribe of his fathers, each a prince among them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses sent them from the wilderness
of Paran: according to the commandment of Jehovah, all of them heads of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And these are their names: for the tribe
of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur;

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> for the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son
of Hori;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> for the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of
Jephunneh;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> for the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son
of Joseph;

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> for the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea the son
of Nun;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son
of Raphu;

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> for the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the
son of Sodi;

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> for the tribe of Joseph, for the tribe
of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi;

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> for the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of
Gemalli;

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> for the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son
of Michael;

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> for the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the
son of Vophsi;

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> for the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of
Machi.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> These are the names of the men whom
Moses sent to search out the land. And Moses called Hoshea the son of
Nun, Jehoshua.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And Moses sent them to search out the
land of Canaan, and said to them, Go up this way by the south and go up
into the hill-country,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and ye shall see the land, what it is;
and the people that dwell in it, whether they are strong or weak, few or
many;

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> and what the land is that they dwell
in, whether it is good or bad; and what cities they are that they dwell
in, whether in camps, or in strongholds;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> and what the land is, whether it is fat
or lean, whether there are trees in it, or not. And take courage, and
bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the first
grapes.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And they went up, and searched out the
land from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, where one comes towards
Hamath.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And they went up by the south, and came
to Hebron; and Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were
there. Now Hebron had been built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And they came as far as the valley of
Eshcol, and cut down thence a branch with one bunch of grapes, and they
bore it between two upon a pole; and \[they brought\] of the
pomegranates, and of the figs.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> That place was called the valley of
Eshcol, because of the grapes which the children of Israel had cut down
there.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And they returned from searching out
the land after forty days.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And they came, and went to Moses and to
Aaron, and to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, to the
wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word to them, and to
the whole assembly; and shewed them the fruit of the land.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And they told him, and said, We came to
the land to which thou didst send us, and surely it floweth with milk
and honey; and this is the fruit of it.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Only, the people are strong that dwell
in the land, and the cities are walled, very great; moreover we saw the
children of Anak there.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Amalek dwells in the land of the south;
and the Hittites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwell in the
hill-country; and the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the side of
the Jordan.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> And Caleb stilled the people before
Moses, and said, Let us go up boldly and possess it, for we are well
able to do it.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> But the men that went up with him said,
We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than
we.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And they brought to the children of
Israel an evil report of the land which they had searched out, saying,
The land, which we have passed through to search it out, is a land that
eateth up its inhabitants; and all the people that we have seen in it
are men of great stature;

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> and there have we seen giants -- the
sons of Anak are of the giants -- and we were in our sight as
grasshoppers, and so we were also in their sight.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the whole assembly lifted up their
voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And all the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron; and the whole assembly said to them,
Would that we had died in the land of Egypt! or in this wilderness would
that we had died!

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And why is Jehovah bringing us to this
land that we may fall by the sword, that our wives and our little ones
may become a prey? Is it not better for us to return to Egypt?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And they said one to another, Let us make
a captain, and let us return to Egypt.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Then Moses and Aaron fell upon their
faces before the whole congregation of the assembly of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the
son of Jephunneh, of them that searched out the land, rent their
garments.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And they spoke to the whole assembly of
the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to
search it out, is a very, very good land.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> If Jehovah delight in us, he will bring
us into this land, and give it us, a land that flows with milk and
honey;

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> only rebel not against Jehovah; and fear
not the people of the land; for they shall be our food. Their defence is
departed from them, and Jehovah is with us: fear them not.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And the whole assembly said that they
should be stoned with stones. And the glory of Jehovah appeared in the
tent of meeting to all the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, How long
will this people despise me? and how long will they not believe me, for
all the signs which I have done among them?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> I will smite them with the pestilence,
and destroy them, and will make of thee a nation greater and mightier
than they.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Moses said to Jehovah, Then the
Egyptians will hear it; for in thy might thou broughtest up this people
from the midst of them;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and they will tell it to the
inhabitants of this land, \[who\] have heard that thou, Jehovah, art in
the midst of this people, that thou, Jehovah, lettest thyself be seen
eye to eye, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that thou goest
before them, in a pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by
night;

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> if thou now slayest this people as one
man, then the nations that have heard thy fame will speak, saying,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Because Jehovah was not able to bring
this people into the land that he had sworn unto them, he has therefore
slain them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And now, I beseech thee, let the power
of the Lord be great, according as thou hast spoken, saying,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Jehovah is slow to anger, and abundant
in goodness, forgiving iniquity and transgression, but by no means
clearing \[the guilty\], visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, upon the third and fourth \[generation\].

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of
this people according to the greatness of thy loving-kindness, and as
thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And Jehovah said, I have pardoned
according to thy word.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> But as surely as I live, all the earth
shall be filled with the glory of Jehovah!

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> for all those men who have seen my
glory, and my signs, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and
have tempted me these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice,

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> shall in no wise see the land which I
did swear unto their fathers: none of them that despised me shall see
it.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But my servant Caleb, because he hath
another spirit in him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into
the land whereinto he came; and his seed shall possess it.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> (Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites
dwell in the valley.) To-morrow turn you, and take your journey into the
wilderness, on the way to the Red sea.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to
Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> How long \[shall I bear\] with this
evil assembly, which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of
the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Say unto them, As surely as I live,
saith Jehovah, if I do not do unto you as ye have spoken in mine ears!

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> In this wilderness shall your carcases
fall; and all that were numbered of you, according to your whole number
from twenty years old and upwards, who have murmured against me,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> shall in no wise come into the land,
concerning which I have lifted up my hand to make you dwell in it; save
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But your little ones, of whom ye said
they should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the
land that ye have despised.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And as to you, your carcases shall fall
in this wilderness.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And your children shall wander in the
wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be
wasted in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> After the number of the days in which
ye have searched out the land, forty days, each day for a year shall ye
bear your iniquities forty years, and ye shall know mine estrangement
\[from you\].

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> I Jehovah have spoken; I will surely do
it unto all this evil assembly which have gathered together against me!
in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And the men whom Moses had sent to
search out the land, who returned, and made the whole assembly to murmur
against him, by bringing up an evil report upon the land,

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> even those men who had brought up an
evil report upon the land, died by a plague before Jehovah.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh, lived still of the men that had gone to search out
the land.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And Moses told all these sayings to all
the children of Israel; then the people mourned greatly.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And they rose up early in the morning,
and went up to the hill-top, saying, Here are we, and we will go up to
the place of which Jehovah has spoken; for we have sinned.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And Moses said, Why now do ye
transgress the commandment of Jehovah? but it shall not prosper!

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Go not up, for Jehovah is not among
you; that ye be not smitten before your enemies;

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> for the Amalekites and the Canaanites
are there before you, and ye shall fall by the sword; for as ye have
turned away from Jehovah, Jehovah will not be with you.

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> Yet they presumed to go up to the
hill-top; but the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and Moses, did not
depart from the midst of the camp.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And the Amalekites and the Canaanites
who dwelt on that hill, came down and smote them, and cut them to
pieces, as far as Hormah.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them, When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I
give unto you,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> and will make an offering by fire to
Jehovah, a burnt-offering or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow,
or as a voluntary offering, or in your set feasts, to make a sweet odour
to Jehovah, of the herd or of the flock,

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> then shall he that presenteth his
offering to Jehovah bring as oblation a tenth part of fine flour mingled
with a fourth part of a hin of oil;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> and of wine for a drink-offering shalt
thou offer the fourth part of a hin with the burnt-offering, or with the
sacrifice, for one lamb.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And for a ram thou shalt offer as
oblation two tenth parts of fine flour mingled with oil, a third part of
a hin,

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> and of wine for a drink-offering shalt
thou offer the third part of a hin; for a sweet odour to Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And when thou offerest a bullock for a
burnt-offering, or a sacrifice for the performance of a vow, or for a
peace-offering to Jehovah,

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> then shall they present with the bullock
as oblation three tenth parts of fine flour mingled with half a hin of
oil;

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> and of wine shalt thou present half a
hin, for a drink-offering, as an offering by fire, of a sweet odour to
Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Thus shall it be done for one ox, or
for one ram, or for a lamb, or for a kid;

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> according to the number that ye offer,
so shall ye do to every one according to their number.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And all that are born in the land shall
do these things thus, in presenting an offering by fire of a sweet odour
to Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And if a stranger sojourn with you, or
whoever be among you throughout your generations, and will offer an
offering by fire of a sweet odour to Jehovah, -- as ye do, so shall he
do.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> As to the congregation, there shall be
one statute for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an
everlasting statute throughout your generations: as ye are, so shall the
stranger be, before Jehovah.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> One law and one ordinance shall be for
you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them, When ye come into the land whither I bring you,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> then it shall be, when ye eat of the
bread of the land, that ye shall offer a heave-offering to Jehovah;

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> the first of your dough shall ye offer,
a cake, for a heave-offering; as the heave-offering of the
threshing-floor, so shall ye offer this.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Of the first of your dough ye shall
give to Jehovah a heave-offering throughout your generations.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And if ye sin inadvertently, and do not
all these commandments, which Jehovah hath spoken unto Moses,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> all that Jehovah hath commanded you
through Moses, from the day that Jehovah gave commandment, and
henceforward throughout your generations;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> then it shall be, if ought be committed
by inadvertence \[hid\] from the eyes of the assembly, that the whole
assembly shall offer one young bullock for a burnt-offering, for a sweet
odour to Jehovah, and its oblation and its drink-offering according to
the ordinance, and one buck of the goats for a sin-offering.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And the priest shall make atonement for
the whole assembly of the children of Israel, and it shall be forgiven
them; for it was a sin of inadvertence, and they have brought before
Jehovah their offering, as an offering by fire to Jehovah, and their
sin-offering for their \[sin of\] inadvertence;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> and it shall be forgiven the whole
assembly of the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth
among them; for with all the people there was \[a sin of\] inadvertence.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And if one soul sin through
inadvertence, then he shall present a yearling she-goat for a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And the priest shall make atonement for
the soul that hath done inadvertently, when he sinneth by inadvertence
before Jehovah, to make atonement for him; and it shall be forgiven him.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> For him that is born in the land among
the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them
-- there shall be one law for you, for him who doeth anything through
inadvertence.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> But the soul that doeth ought with a
high hand, whether born in the land, or a stranger, he reproacheth
Jehovah; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> For he hath despised the word of
Jehovah, and hath broken his commandment: that soul shall surely be cut
off; his iniquity is upon him.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And while the children of Israel were
in the wilderness they found a man gathering sticks on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And they that found him gathering
sticks brought him to Moses and Aaron, and to the whole assembly.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And they put him in custody, for it was
not declared what should be done to him.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, The man
shall certainly be put to death: the whole assembly shall stone him with
stones outside the camp.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And the whole assembly led him outside
the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died, as Jehovah had
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
bid them that they make them tassels on the corners of their garments,
throughout their generations, and that they attach to the tassel of the
corners a lace of blue;

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> and it shall be unto you for a tassel,
that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of Jehovah,
and do them; and that ye seek not after \[the lusts of\] your own heart
and your own eyes, after which ye go a whoring;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> that ye may remember and do all my
commandments, and be holy unto your God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> I am Jehovah your God, who brought you
out of the land of Egypt to be your God: I am Jehovah your God.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of
Kohath, the son of Levi, made bold, and \[with him\] Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, the sons of Reuben;

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> and they rose up against Moses, with two
hundred and fifty men of the children of Israel, princes of the
assembly, summoned to the council, men of renown;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and they gathered themselves together
against Moses and against Aaron, and said to them, It is enough; for all
the assembly, all of them are holy, and Jehovah is among them; and why
do ye lift up yourselves above the congregation of Jehovah?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> When Moses heard this, he fell on his
face.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And he spoke to Korah and to all his
band, saying, Even to-morrow will Jehovah make known who is his, and who
is holy; and he will cause him to come near to him; and him whom he has
chosen, him will he cause to come near to him.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> This do: take you censers, Korah, and all
his band,

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and put fire therein, and lay incense
thereon before Jehovah to-morrow; and it shall be that the man whom
Jehovah doth choose, he shall be holy. It is enough, ye sons of Levi!

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses said to Korah, Hear, I pray
you, ye sons of Levi!

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Is it too little for you, that the God of
Israel has separated you from the assembly of Israel, to bring you near
to himself to do the work of the tabernacle of Jehovah, and to stand
before the assembly to minister to them?

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> -- that he has brought thee near, and
all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee; and seek ye now the
priesthood also?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> For which cause thou and all thy band
are banded together against Jehovah; and Aaron, who is he that ye murmur
against him?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And Moses sent to call Dathan and
Abiram, the sons of Eliab; but they said, We will not come up!

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Is it a small thing that thou hast
brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in
the wilderness, that thou must make thyself altogether a ruler over us?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Moreover, thou hast not brought us into
a land flowing with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields
and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not come
up!

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Then Moses was very wroth, and said to
Jehovah, Have no regard to their oblation: not one ass have I taken from
them, neither have I hurt one of them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And Moses said to Korah, Be thou and
all thy band before Jehovah, thou, and they, and Aaron, to-morrow.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And take each his censer, and put
incense thereon, and present before Jehovah every man his censer, two
hundred and fifty censers; and thou, and Aaron, each his censer.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And they took each his censer, and put
fire on them, and laid incense thereon, and stood before the entrance to
the tent of meeting, as well as Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Korah gathered the whole assembly
against them to the entrance of the tent of meeting. And the glory of
Jehovah appeared to all the assembly.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to
Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Separate yourselves from the midst of
this assembly, and I will consume them in a moment.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And they fell on their faces, and said,
O ùGod, the God of the spirits of all flesh! shall \*one\* man sin, and
wilt thou be wroth with the whole assembly?

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Speak unto the assembly, saying, Get
you up from about the habitation of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Moses rose up and went to Dathan
and Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And he spoke to the assembly, saying,
Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch
nothing of theirs, lest ye perish in all their sins.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And they got up from the habitation of
Koran, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side. And Dathan and Abiram came
out, and stood in the entrance of their tents, and their wives, and
their sons, and their little ones.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know
that Jehovah has sent me to do all these deeds, for they are not out of
my own heart:

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> if these men die as all men die, and
are visited with the visitation of all men, Jehovah has not sent me;

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> but if Jehovah make a new thing, and
the ground open its mouth, and swallow them up, and all that they have,
and they go down alive into Sheol, then ye shall know that these men
have despised Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And it came to pass when he had ended
speaking all these words, that the ground clave apart that was under
them.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And the earth opened its mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and all the men that belonged
to Korah, and all their property.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And they went down, they and all that
they had, alive into Sheol, and the earth covered them; and they
perished from among the congregation.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And all Israel that were round about
them fled at their cry; for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up!

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And there came out a fire from Jehovah,
and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that had presented incense.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> Speak to Eleazar the son of Aaron the
priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning; and scatter the
fire afar; for they are hallowed,

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> the censers of these sinners who have
forfeited their life; and they shall make them into broad plates for the
covering of the altar; for they presented them before Jehovah, therefore
they are hallowed; and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> And Eleazar the priest took the copper
censers, which they that were burnt had presented; and they were made
broad plates for a covering of the altar:

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> as a memorial to the children of
Israel, that no stranger who is not of the seed of Aaron come near to
burn incense before Jehovah, that he be not as Korah, and as his band,
-- as Jehovah had said to him through Moses.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> And the whole assembly of the children
of Israel murmured on the morrow against Moses and against Aaron,
saying, Ye have killed the people of Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> And it came to pass, when the assembly
was gathered together against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked
toward the tent of meeting, and behold, the cloud covered it, and the
glory of Jehovah appeared.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> And Moses and Aaron went before the
tent of meeting.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> Get you up from the midst of this
assembly, and I will consume them in a moment. And they fell on their
faces.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> And Moses said to Aaron, Take the
censer, and put fire thereon from off the altar, and lay on incense, and
carry it quickly to the assembly, and make atonement for them; for there
is wrath gone out from Jehovah: the plague is begun.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> And Aaron took as Moses had said, and
ran into the midst of the congregation; and behold, the plague had begun
among the people; and he put on incense, and made atonement for the
people.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> And he stood between the dead and the
living; and the plague was stayed.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Now they that died in the plague were
fourteen thousand seven hundred, besides them that had died because of
the matter of Korah.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> And Aaron returned to Moses to the
entrance of the tent of meeting; and the plague was stayed.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
take of them a staff, a staff for each father's house, of all their
princes according to the houses of their fathers, twelve staves: thou
shalt write each one's name upon his staff.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And Aaron's name shalt thou write upon
the staff of Levi; for one staff shall be for \[each\] head of their
fathers' houses.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And thou shalt lay them up in the tent of
meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And it shall come to pass, that the man
whom I shall choose, his staff shall bud forth; and I will make to cease
from before me the murmurings of the children of Israel, that they
murmur against you.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And Moses spoke to the children of
Israel, and all their princes gave him a staff, one staff for each
prince according to their fathers' houses, twelve staves, and the staff
of Aaron was among their staves.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And Moses laid the staves before Jehovah
in the tent of the testimony.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And it came to pass, when on the morrow
Moses went into the tent of the testimony, behold, the staff of Aaron
for the house of Levi had budded, and brought forth buds, and bloomed
blossoms, and ripened almonds.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And Moses brought out all the staves from
before Jehovah to all the children of Israel, and they looked and took
each one his staff.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Bring
Aaron's staff again before the testimony, to be kept as a token for the
sons of rebellion, that thou mayest put an end to their murmurings
before me, that they may not die.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And Moses did so: as Jehovah had
commanded him, so did he.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the children of Israel spoke to
Moses, saying, Lo, we expire, we perish, we all perish.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Every one that comes at all near to the
tabernacle of Jehovah shall die: shall we then expire altogether?

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And Jehovah said to Aaron, Thou and thy
sons and thy father's house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the
sanctuary; and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of
your priesthood.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And thy brethren also, the tribe of Levi,
the tribe of thy father, bring near with thee, that they may unite with
thee, and minister unto thee; but thou and thy sons with thee \[shall
serve\] before the tent of the testimony.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And they shall keep thy charge, and the
charge of the whole tent: only they shall not come near to the vessels
of the sanctuary and to the altar, that they may not die, and you as
well as they.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And they shall unite with thee, and keep
the charge of the tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent; and
no stranger shall come near to you.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And ye shall keep the charge of the
sanctuary, and the charge of the altar; that there come no wrath any
more upon the children of Israel.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And I, behold, I have taken your
brethren, the Levites, from among the children of Israel; to you are
they given as a gift for Jehovah to perform the service of the tent of
meeting.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> But thou and thy sons with thee shall
attend to your priesthood for all that concerneth the altar, and for
that which is inside the veil; and ye shall perform the service: I give
you your priesthood as a service of gift, and the stranger that cometh
near shall be put to death.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Jehovah spoke to Aaron, And I,
behold, I have given thee the charge of my heave-offerings, of all the
hallowed things of the children of Israel; to thee have I given them,
because of the anointing, and to thy sons by an everlasting statute.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> This shall be thine of the most holy
things, \[reserved\] from the fire: every offering of theirs, of all
their oblations, and of all their sin-offerings, and of all their
trespass-offerings, which they render unto me, it is most holy for thee
and for thy sons.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> As most holy shalt thou eat it: every
male shall eat it; it shall be holy unto thee.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And this shall be thine: the
heave-offering of their gift, with all the wave-offerings of the
children of Israel; I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and to
thy daughters with thee, by an everlasting statute; every one that is
clean in thy house shall eat of it.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> All the best of the oil, and all the
best of the new wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them which
they give to Jehovah, have I given thee.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> The first ripe of everything that is in
their land, which they shall bring to Jehovah, shall be thine; every one
that is clean in thy house shall eat of it.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Every devoted thing in Israel shall be
thine.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Everything that breaketh open the womb
of all flesh, which they present to Jehovah, of men or of beasts, shall
be thine; nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt thou in any case
ransom, and the firstborn of unclean beasts shalt thou ransom.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And those that are to be ransomed from
a month old shalt thou ransom, according to thy valuation, for the money
of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty
gerahs.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> But the firstborn of a cow, or the
firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a goat, thou shalt not ransom:
they are holy. Thou shalt sprinkle their blood on the altar, and their
fat shalt thou burn as an offering by fire for a sweet odour to Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And their flesh shall be thine; as the
wave-breast and as the right shoulder shall it be thine.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> All the heave-offerings of the holy
things, which the children of Israel offer to Jehovah, have I given
thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, by an everlasting
statute: it shall be an everlasting covenant of salt before Jehovah unto
thee and thy seed with thee.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And Jehovah said to Aaron, In their
land thou shalt have no inheritance, neither shalt thou have any portion
among them: I am thy portion and thine inheritance among the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And to the children of Levi, behold, I
have given all the tithes in Israel for an inheritance, for their
service which they perform, the service of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Neither shall the children of Israel
henceforth come near the tent of meeting, to bear sin and die.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> But the Levite, he shall perform the
service of the tent of meeting, and they shall bear their iniquity: it
is an everlasting statute throughout your generations. And among the
children of Israel shall they possess no inheritance;

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> for I have given for an inheritance to
the Levites the tithes of the children of Israel, which they offer as a
heave-offering to Jehovah; therefore I have said of them, They shall
possess no inheritance among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And to the Levites shalt thou speak,
and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes
which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall
offer a heave-offering from it for Jehovah, the tenth of the tithe.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And your heave-offering shall be
reckoned unto you, as the corn from the threshing-floor, and as the
fulness of the winepress.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Thus ye also shall offer Jehovah's
heave-offering of all your tithes, which ye take of the children of
Israel; and ye shall give thereof Jehovah's heave-offering to Aaron the
priest.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Out of all that is given you ye shall
offer the whole heave-offering of Jehovah, -- of all the best thereof
the hallowed part thereof.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And thou shalt say unto them, When ye
heave the best thereof from it, then it shall be counted unto the
Levites as produce of the threshing-floor, and as produce of the
winepress.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And ye shall eat it in every place, ye
and your households; for it is your reward for your service in the tent
of meeting.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> And ye shall bear no sin by reason of
it, if ye heave from it the best of it; and ye shall not profane the
holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> This is the statute of the law which
Jehovah hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that
they bring thee a red heifer without blemish, wherein is no defect, and
upon which never came yoke;

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and ye shall give it to Eleazar the
priest, and he shall bring it outside the camp, and one shall slaughter
it before him.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Eleazar the priest shall take of its
blood with his finger, and shall sprinkle of its blood directly before
the tent of meeting seven times.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And one shall burn the heifer before his
eyes; its skin and its flesh, and its blood, with its dung, shall he
burn.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And the priest shall take cedar-wood, and
hyssop, and scarlet, and cast them into the midst of the burning of the
heifer.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And the priest shall wash his garments,
and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterwards he shall come into
the camp; and the priest shall be unclean until the even;

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> and he that hath burned it shall wash his
garments in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean
until the even.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And a clean man shall gather the ashes of
the heifer, and deposit them outside the camp in a clean place, and it
shall be kept for the assembly of the children of Israel for a water of
separation: it is a purification for sin.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And he that hath gathered the ashes of
the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even. And it
shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that
sojourneth among them, an everlasting statute.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> He that toucheth a dead person, any
dead body of a man, shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> He shall purify himself with it on the
third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean; but if he purify
not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Whoever toucheth a dead person, the
dead body of a man that is dead, and purifieth not himself, defileth the
tabernacle of Jehovah; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel; for
the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him: he shall be unclean;
his uncleanness is yet upon him.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> This is the law, when a man dieth in a
tent: every one that cometh into the tent, and all that is in the tent,
shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And every open vessel, which hath no
covering bound upon it, shall be unclean.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And every one that toucheth one that is
slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead person, or the bone of
a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And they shall take for the unclean of
the ashes of the purification-offering that hath been burned, and shall
put running water thereon in a vessel;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and a clean man shall take hyssop, and
dip it in the water, and sprinkle it on the tent, and upon all the
utensils, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that hath
touched the bone, or the one slain, or the dead person, or the grave;

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> and the clean shall sprinkle it on the
unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day; and he shall purify
him on the seventh day; and he shall wash his garments, and bathe
himself in water, and shall be clean at even.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the man that is unclean, and doth
not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of the
congregation, for he hath defiled the sanctuary of Jehovah: the water of
separation hath not been sprinkled on him: he is unclean.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And it shall be an everlasting statute
unto them. And he that sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his
garments, and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean
until even.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And whatever the unclean person
toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth it shall be
unclean until even.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And the children of Israel, the whole
assembly, came into the wilderness of Zin, in the first month; and the
people abode at Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And there was no water for the assembly,
and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And the people contended with Moses, and
spoke, saying, Would that we had died when our brethren died before
Jehovah!

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And why have ye brought the congregation
of Jehovah into this wilderness, that we should die there, we and our
beasts?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And why have ye made us to go up out of
Egypt, to bring us to this evil place? it is no place of seed, or of
figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates, neither is there any water to
drink.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And Moses and Aaron went from before the
congregation to the entrance of the tent of meeting, and fell upon their
faces; and the glory of Jehovah appeared to them.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Take the staff, and gather the assembly
together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before
their eyes, and it shall give its water; and thou shalt bring forth to
them water out of the rock, and shalt give the assembly and their beasts
drink.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And Moses took the staff from before
Jehovah, as he had commanded him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Moses and Aaron gathered the
congregation together before the rock, and he said to them, Hear now, ye
rebels: shall we bring forth to you water out of this rock?

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And Moses lifted up his hand, and with
his staff smote the rock twice, and much water came out, and the
assembly drank, and their beasts.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And Jehovah said to Moses and to Aaron,
Because ye believed me not, to hallow me before the eyes of the children
of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land
that I have given them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> These are the waters of Meribah, where
the children of Israel contended with Jehovah, and he hallowed himself
in them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh
to the king of Edom, Thus says thy brother Israel: Thou knowest all the
trouble that hath befallen us,

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> how our fathers went down to Egypt, and
we dwelt in Egypt a long time, and the Egyptians evil entreated us and
our fathers;

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> and when we cried to Jehovah, he heard
our voice, and sent an angel, and brought us forth out of Egypt; and
behold, we are at Kadesh, a city at the extremity of thy border.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy
country; we will not pass through fields, or through vineyards, neither
will we drink water out of the wells: we will go by the king's road; we
will not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed
thy border.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> But Edom said to him, Thou shalt not
pass by me, lest I come out against thee with the sword.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And the children of Israel said to him,
We will go by the high way; and if we drink of thy water, I and my
cattle, then I will pay for it: I will only, without anything else, go
through on my feet.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And he said, Thou shalt not go through.
And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Thus Edom refused to give Israel
passage through his territory; and Israel turned away from him.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And they removed from Kadesh; and the
children of Israel, the whole assembly, came to mount Hor.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron
in mount Hor, on the border of the land of Edom, saying,

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Aaron shall be gathered unto his
peoples; for he shall not enter into the land that I have given unto the
children of Israel, because ye rebelled against my commandment at the
waters of Meribah.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and
bring them up unto mount Hor,

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> and strip Aaron of his garments, and
put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron shall be gathered \[to his
peoples\], and shall die there.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And Moses did as Jehovah had commanded,
and they went up mount Hor before the eyes of the whole assembly.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Moses stripped Aaron of his
garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there upon
the top of the mountain; and Moses and Eleazar came down from the
mountain.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And the whole assembly saw that Aaron
was dead, and they mourned for Aaron thirty days, \[even\] the whole
house of Israel.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And the Canaanite king of Arad, who dwelt
in the south, heard that Israel came by the way of Atharim, and he
fought against Israel, and took some of them prisoners.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Then Israel vowed a vow to Jehovah, and
said, If thou give this people wholly into my hand, then I will utterly
destroy their cities.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And Jehovah listened to the voice of
Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed
them, and their cities. And they called the name of the place Hormah.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And they journeyed from mount Hor by the
way of the Red sea, to go round the land of Edom; and the soul of the
people became impatient on the way;

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> and the people spoke against God, and
against Moses, Why have ye brought us up out of Egypt that we should die
in the wilderness? for there is no bread, and no water, and our soul
loathes this light bread.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Then Jehovah sent fiery serpents among
the people, which bit the people; and much people of Israel died.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And the people came to Moses and said, We
have sinned, in that we have spoken against Jehovah, and against thee:
pray to Jehovah that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed
for the people.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Make thee a
fiery \[serpent\], and set it upon a pole; and it shall come to pass,
that every one that is bitten, and looketh upon it, shall live.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And Moses made a serpent of brass, and
put it upon a pole; and it came to pass, if a serpent had bitten any
man, and he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And the children of Israel journeyed,
and encamped in Oboth.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And they removed from Oboth, and
encamped at Ijim-Abarim, in the wilderness that is before Moab, toward
the sun-rising.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> From thence they removed, and encamped
at the torrent Zered.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> From thence they removed, and encamped
on the other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness that comes
out of the border of the Amorites. For the Arnon is the border of Moab,
between Moab and the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Therefore it is said in the book of the
wars of Jehovah, Vaheb in Suphah, and the brooks of Arnon;

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And the stream of the brooks which
turneth to the dwelling of Ar, And inclineth toward the border of Moab.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And from thence to Beer: that is the
well of which Jehovah spoke to Moses, Assemble the people, and I will
give them water.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> Then Israel sang this song, Rise up,
well! sing unto it:

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Well which princes digged, which the
nobles of the people hollowed out at \[the word of\] the lawgiver, with
their staves. And from the wilderness \[they went\] to Mattanah;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> and from Mattanah to Nahaliel; and from
Nahaliel to Bamoth;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and from Bamoth to the valley that is
in the fields of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looks over the
surface of the waste.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And Israel sent messengers to Sihon
king of the Amorites, saying,

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Let us pass through thy land; we will
not turn into the fields, or into the vineyards; we will not drink water
out of the wells; on the king's road will we go until we have passed thy
border.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> But Sihon would not suffer Israel to go
through his border; and Sihon gathered all his people, and went out
against Israel into the wilderness, and came to Jahaz, and fought
against Israel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Israel smote him with the edge of
the sword, and took possession of his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok,
even unto the children of Ammon; for the border of the children of Ammon
was strong.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And Israel took all these cities, and
Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, at Heshbon, and in all
its dependent villages.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the
king of the Amorites; and he had fought against the former king of Moab,
and had taken all his land out of his hand, even unto the Arnon.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Therefore the poets say, Come to
Heshbon; let the city of Sihon be built and established.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For there went forth fire from Heshbon,
a flame from the city of Sihon; It consumed Ar of Moab, the lords of the
high places of the Arnon.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Woe to thee, Moab! thou art undone,
people of Chemosh: He gave his sons that had escaped, and his daughters
into captivity to Sihon the king of the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And we have shot at them; Heshbon is
perished even unto Dibon; and we have laid \[them\] waste even unto
Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And Israel dwelt in the land of the
Amorites.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and
they took its dependent villages, and he dispossessed the Amorites that
were there.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> And they turned and went up by the way
to Bashan; and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all
his people, for battle to Edrei.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Fear him
not! for into thy hand have I given him, and all his people, and his
land; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon the king of the
Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And they smote him, and his sons, and
all his people, so that they left him none remaining, and took
possession of his land.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And the children of Israel journeyed, and
encamped in the plains of Moab on the other side of the Jordan from
Jericho.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that
Israel had done to the Amorites.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And Moab was much afraid of the people,
because they were many; and Moab was distressed because of the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And Moab said to the elders of Midian,
Now will this company lick up all that is round about us, as an ox licks
up the green herb of the field. Now Balak the son of Zippor was king of
Moab at that time.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And he sent messengers to Balaam the son
of Beor, to Pethor, which is on the river in the land of the children of
his people, to call him, saying, Behold, a people is come out from
Egypt; behold, they cover the face of the land, and they abide over
against me.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And now come, I pray thee, curse me this
people; for they are mightier than I: perhaps I may be able to smite
them, and drive them out of the land; for I know that he whom thou
blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And the elders of Moab and the elders of
Midian departed, having the rewards of divination in their hand. And
they came to Balaam, and spoke to him the words of Balak.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And he said to them, Lodge here this
night, and I will bring you word again, according as Jehovah shall speak
unto me. And the princes of Moab abode with Balaam.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And God came to Balaam, and said, Who are
these men with thee?

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And Balaam said to God, Balak the son
of Zippor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me,

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Behold, a people is come out of Egypt,
and it covers the face of the land. Now come, curse me them: perhaps I
may be able to fight against them, and drive them out.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And God said to Balaam, Thou shalt not
go with them; thou shalt not curse the people; for they are blessed.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And Balaam rose up in the morning, and
said to the princes of Balak, Go into your land; for Jehovah refuses to
give me leave to go with you.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And the princes of Moab rose up; and
they went to Balak, and said, Balaam has refused to come with us.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then sent Balak yet again princes,
more, and more honourable than they.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And they came to Balaam, and said to
him, Thus says Balak the son of Zippor: Suffer not thyself, I pray thee,
to be restrained from coming to me;

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> for very highly will I honour thee, and
whatever thou shalt say to me will I do; come therefore, I pray thee,
curse me this people.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And Balaam answered and said to the
servants of Balak, If Balak give me his house full of silver and gold, I
could not go beyond the commandment of Jehovah my God, to do less or
more.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And now, I pray you, abide ye also here
this night, and I shall know what Jehovah will say to me further.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Then God came to Balaam at night, and
said to him, If the men have come to call thee, rise up, \[and\] go with
them; but only what I shall say unto thee shalt thou do.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And Balaam rose up in the morning, and
saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And God's anger was kindled because he
went; and the Angel of Jehovah set himself in the way to withstand him.
Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two young men were with him.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And the ass saw the Angel of Jehovah
standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand; and the ass turned
aside out of the way, and went into the field, and Balaam smote the ass
to turn her into the way.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And the Angel of Jehovah stood in a
hollow of the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a wall on that
side.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And the ass saw the Angel of Jehovah,
and she pressed herself against the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot
against the wall; and he smote her again.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Then the Angel of Jehovah went still
further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to
the right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And the ass saw the Angel of Jehovah,
and lay down under Balaam; and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote
the ass with his staff.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And Jehovah opened the mouth of the
ass, and she said to Balaam, What have I done to thee, that thou hast
smitten me these three times?

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> And Balaam said to the ass, Because
thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword in my hand, for now
would I kill thee!

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And the ass said to Balaam, Am not I
thine ass, upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine to this
day? was I ever wont to do so to thee? And he said, No.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Then Jehovah opened the eyes of Balaam,
and he saw the Angel of Jehovah standing in the way, and his sword drawn
in his hand; and he bowed and prostrated himself on his face.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> And the Angel of Jehovah said to him,
Wherefore hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? behold, it was
I who came forth to withstand thee, for the way \[thou walkest in\] is
for ruin before me.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And the ass saw me, and turned from me
these three times; had she not turned from me, I had now certainly slain
thee, and saved her alive.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And Balaam said to the Angel of
Jehovah, I have sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way
against me; and now, if it be evil in thine eyes, I will get me back
again.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And the Angel of Jehovah said to
Balaam, Go with the men, but only the word that I shall speak unto thee,
that shalt thou speak. And Balaam went with the princes of Balak.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> And when Balak heard that Balaam came,
he went out to meet him, to the city of Moab, which is on the border of
the Arnon, which is at the extremity of the border.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> And Balak said to Balaam, Did I not
earnestly send to thee to call thee? why didst thou not come to me? am I
not surely able to honour thee?

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Lo, I am come
to thee; but shall I now be able at all to say anything? the word that
God puts in my mouth, that shall I speak.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And Balaam went with Balak, and they
came to Kirjath-huzoth.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> And Balak offered oxen and small
cattle, and sent to Balaam and to the princes that were with him.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Balak took Balaam, and brought him up to the high places of Baal, and he
saw from thence the extremity of the people.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Build me here
seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And Balak did as Balaam had said; and
Balak and Balaam offered up a bullock and a ram on \[each\] altar.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Stand by thy
burnt-offering, and I will go; perhaps Jehovah will come to meet me; and
whatever he shews me I will tell thee. And he went to a hill.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And God met Balaam; and \[Balaam\] said
to him, I have disposed seven altars, and have offered up a bullock and
a ram upon \[each\] altar.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Jehovah put a word in Balaam's mouth,
and said, Return to Balak, and thus shalt thou speak.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And he returned to him, and behold, he
was standing by his burnt-offering, he, and all the princes of Moab.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And he took up his parable, and said,
Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, from the mountains of
the east: Come, curse me Jacob, and come, denounce Israel!

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> How shall I curse whom ùGod hath not
cursed? or how shall I denounce whom Jehovah doth not denounce?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> For from the top of the rocks I see him,
and from the hills I behold him: Lo, \[it is\] a people that shall dwell
alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Who can count the dust of Jacob, and
the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let my soul die the death of
the righteous, and let my end be like his!

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And Balak said to Balaam, What hast
thou done to me? I took thee to curse mine enemies, and behold, thou
hast blessed them altogether.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And he answered and said, Must I not
take heed to speak that which Jehovah puts in my mouth?

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And Balak said to him, Come, I pray
thee, with me to another place, from whence thou wilt see them; thou
shalt see only the extremity of them and shalt not see them all, and
curse me them from thence.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And he took him to the watchmen's
field, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered up a
bullock and a ram on \[each\] altar.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And \[Balaam\] said to Balak, Stand
here by thy burnt-offering, and I will go to meet yonder.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And Jehovah met Balaam, and put a word
in his mouth, and said, Return to Balak, and thus shalt thou speak.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And he came to him, and behold, he was
standing by his burnt-offering, and the princes of Moab with him; and
Balak said to him, What has Jehovah spoken?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Then he took up his parable and said,
Rise up, Balak, and hear! hearken unto me, son of Zippor!

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> ùGod is not a man, that he should lie;
neither a son of man, that he should repent. Shall he say and not do?
and shall he speak and not make it good?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Behold, I have received \[mission\] to
bless; and he hath blessed, and I cannot reverse it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
neither hath he seen wrong in Israel; Jehovah his God is with him, and
the shout of a king is in his midst.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> ùGod brought him out of Egypt; he hath
as it were the strength of a buffalo.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> For there is no enchantment against
Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel. At this time it
shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath ùGod wrought!

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Lo, the people will rise up as a
lioness, and lift himself up as a lion. He shall not lie down until he
have eaten the prey and drunk the blood of the slain.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And Balak said to Balaam, Neither curse
them at all, nor bless them at all.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> And Balaam answered and said to Balak,
Did I not tell thee, saying, All that Jehovah shall speak, that will I
do?

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> And Balak said to Balaam, Come, I pray
thee, I will bring thee to another place; perhaps it will be right in
the sight of God that thou curse me them from thence.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And Balak brought Balaam to the top of
Peor, which looks over the surface of the waste.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Build me here
seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And Balak did as Balaam had said, and
offered up a bullock and a ram on each altar.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And Balaam saw that it was good in the
sight of Jehovah to bless Israel, and he went not, as at other times, to
seek for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Balaam lifted up his eyes and saw
Israel dwelling \[in tents\] according to his tribes; and the Spirit of
God came upon him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And he took up his parable, and said,
Balaam the son of Beor saith, and the man of opened eye saith,

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> He saith, who heareth the words of ùGod,
who seeth the vision of the Almighty, who falleth down, and who hath his
eyes open:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> How goodly are thy tents, Jacob, and thy
tabernacles, Israel!

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Like valleys are they spread forth, like
gardens by the river side, Like aloe-trees which Jehovah hath planted,
like cedars beside the waters.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Water shall flow out of his buckets, and
his seed shall be in great waters, And his king shall be higher than
Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> ùGod brought him out of Egypt; he hath as
it were the strength of a buffalo. He shall consume the nations his
enemies, and break their bones, and with his arrows shall smite \[them\]
in pieces.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> He stooped, he lay down like a lion, and
like a lioness: who will stir him up? Blessed is he that blesseth thee,
and cursed is he that curseth thee.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then Balak's anger was kindled against
Balaam, and he smote his hands together; and Balak said to Balaam, I
called thee to curse mine enemies, and behold, thou hast altogether
blessed \[them\] these three times!

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And now flee thou to thy place; I said
I would very highly honour thee, and behold, Jehovah has kept thee back
from honour.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And Balaam said to Balak, Did I not
also speak to thy messengers whom thou sentest to me, saying,

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> If Balak gave me his house full of
silver and gold, I could not go beyond the commandment of Jehovah to do
good or bad out of my heart: what Jehovah shall say, that will I speak?

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And now behold, I go to my people:
come, I will admonish thee what this people will do to thy people at the
end of days.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And he took up his parable, and said,
Balaam the son of Beor saith, and the man of opened eye saith,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> He saith, who heareth the words of
ùGod, who knoweth the knowledge of the Most High, Who seeth the vision
of the Almighty, who falleth down, and who hath his eyes open:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> I shall see him, but not now; I shall
behold him, but not nigh: There cometh a Star out of Jacob, and a
Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and he shall cut in pieces the corners
of Moab, and destroy all the sons of tumult.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And Edom shall be a possession, and
Seir a possession, -- they, his enemies; but Israel will do valiantly.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And one out of Jacob shall have
dominion, and will destroy out of the city what remaineth.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> And he saw Amalek, and took up his
parable, and said, Amalek is the first of the nations, but his latter
end shall be for destruction.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And he saw the Kenites, and took up his
parable, and said, Firm is thy dwelling-place, and thy nest fixed in the
rock;

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> But the Kenite shall be consumed, until
Asshur shall carry thee away captive.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And he took up his parable, and said,
Alas! Who shall live when ùGod doeth this?

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And ships shall come from the coast of
Chittim, and afflict Asshur, and afflict Eber, and he also shall be for
destruction.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And Balaam rose up, and went and
returned to his place; and Balak also went his way.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And Israel abode in Shittim; and the
people began to commit fornication with the daughters of Moab.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And they invited the people to the
sacrifices of their gods; and the people ate, and bowed down to their
gods.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And Israel joined himself to Baal-Peor;
and the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Take all the
heads of the people, and hang them up to Jehovah before the sun, that
the fierce anger of Jehovah may be turned away from Israel.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And Moses said to the judges of Israel,
Slay every one his men that have joined themselves to Baal-Peor.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And behold, a man of the children of
Israel came and brought a Midianitish woman to his brethren, in the
sight of Moses, and in the sight of the whole assembly of the children
of Israel, who were weeping before the entrance of the tent of meeting.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron the priest, saw it, and rose up from among the assembly, and
took a javelin in his hand,

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> and he went after the man of Israel into
the tent-chamber, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel and
the woman through her belly. And the plague was stayed from the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And those that died in the plague were
twenty-four thousand.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of
Israel, in that he was jealous with my jealousy among them, so that I
consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Therefore say, Behold, I give unto him
my covenant of peace!

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And he shall have it, and his seed
after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was
jealous for his God, and made atonement for the children of Israel.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And the name of the man of Israel that
was slain, who was slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son
of Salu, the prince of a father's house of the Simeonites.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And the name of the Midianitish woman
that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was tribal head of a
father's house in Midian.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Harass the Midianites, and smite them,

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> for they have harassed you with their
wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in
the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister,
who was slain on the day of the plague because of the matter of Peor.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And it came to pass after the plague,
that Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest,
saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Take the sum of the whole assembly of the
children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, according to their
fathers' houses, all that go forth to military service in Israel.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke
with them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan of Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> From twenty years old and upward ...; as
Jehovah had commanded Moses and the children of Israel, who went forth
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: the
children of Reuben: \[of\] Enoch, the family of the Enochites; of Pallu,
the family of the Palluites;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites;
of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> These are the families of the Reubenites;
and they that were numbered of them were forty-three thousand seven
hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And the sons of Pallu: Eliab;

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> and the sons of Eliab were Nemuel, and
Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Dathan and Abiram, summoned of the
assembly, who contended against Moses and against Aaron in the band of
Korah, when they contended against Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And the earth opened its mouth, and
swallowed them up together with Korah, when that band died, when the
fire devoured the two hundred and fifty men; and they became a sign.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> But the children of Korah died not.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> The sons of Simeon, after their
families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family
of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites;

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites;
of Saul, the family of the Saulites.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> These are the families of the
Simeonites, twenty-two thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The children of Gad, after their
families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family
of the Haggites; of Shuni,the family of the Shunites;

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of
Eri, the family of the Erites;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of
Areli, the family of the Arelites.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> These are the families of the children
of Gad according to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand
five hundred.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> The sons of Judah: Er and Onan; and Er
and Onan died in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And the sons of Judah, after their
families: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Pherez, the family
of the Pharzites; of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And the sons of Pherez: of Hezron, the
family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> These are the families of Judah
according to those that were numbered of them, seventy-six thousand five
hundred.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> The sons of Issachar, after their
families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puah, the family of
the Punites;

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> of Jashub, the family of the
Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> These are the families of Issachar
according to those that were numbered of them, sixty-four thousand three
hundred.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> The sons of Zebulun, after their
families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites; of Elon, the family of
the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> These are the families of the
Zebulunites according to those that were numbered of them, sixty
thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> The sons of Joseph, after their
families: Manasseh and Ephraim.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the
family of the Machirites (and Machir begot Gilead); of Gilead, the
family of the Gileadites.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> These are the sons of Gilead: of
Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites; of Helek, the family of the
Helkites;

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> and of Asriel, the family of the
Asrielites; and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> and of Shemida, the family of the
Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> -- And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had
no sons, but daughters; and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad
were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> -- These are the families of Manasseh;
and those that were numbered of them, fifty-two thousand seven hundred.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> These are the sons of Ephraim, after
their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites; of Becher,
the family of the Bachrites; of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of
Eran, the family of the Eranites.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> These are the families of the sons of
Ephraim according to those that were numbered of them, thirty-two
thousand five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their
families.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> The sons of Benjamin, after their
families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of
the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> of Shephupham, the family of the
Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> And the sons of Bela were Ard and
Naaman; \[of Ard\] the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of
the Naamites.

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> These are the sons of Benjamin after
their families; and they that were numbered of them were forty-five
thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> These are the sons of Dan, after their
families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the
families of Dan after their families.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> All the families of the Shuhamites,
according to those that were numbered of them, were sixty-four thousand
four hundred.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> The sons of Asher, after their
families: of Jimnah, the family of the Jimnites; of Jishvi, the family
of the Jishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Beriites.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the
family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> And the name of the daughter of Asher
was Serah.

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> These are the families of the sons of
Asher according to those that were numbered of them, fifty-three
thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> The sons of Naphtali, after their
families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family
of the Gunites;

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites;
of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> These are the families of Naphtali,
according to their families; and they that were numbered of them were
forty-five thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> These were the numbered of the children
of Israel, six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Unto these shall the land be divided
for an inheritance according to the number of the names;

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> to the many thou shalt increase their
inheritance, and to the few thou shalt diminish their inheritance; to
every one shall his inheritance be given according to those that were
numbered of him.

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> Notwithstanding the land shall be
divided by lot; according to the names of the tribes of their fathers
shall they inherit;

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> according to lot shall his inheritance
be divided to each, be they many or few in number.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> And these are the numbered of the
Levites, after their families: of Gershon, the family of the
Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the
family of the Merarites.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> These are the families of the Levites:
the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of
the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites.
-- And Kohath begot Amram.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> And the name of Amram's wife was
Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt; and she
bore to Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> And to Aaron were born Nadab, and
Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> And Nadab and Abihu died, when they
presented strange fire before Jehovah.

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> And those that were numbered of the
\[Levites\] were twenty-three thousand, all males from a month old and
upward; for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because
there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> These are they that were numbered by
Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the
plains of Moab, by the Jordan of Jericho.

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> But among these there was not a man
numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the children of
Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> For Jehovah had said of them, They
shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not left a man of
them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Then drew near the daughters of
Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph; and
these were the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And they stood before Moses, and before
Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and the whole assembly, at
the entrance of the tent of meeting, saying,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Our father died in the wilderness, and he
was not in the band of them that banded themselves together against
Jehovah in the band of Korah; but he died in his own sin, and he had no
sons.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Why should the name of our father be
taken away from his family, because he has no son? Give unto us a
possession among the brethren of our father.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And Moses brought their cause before
Jehovah.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The daughters of Zelophehad speak right:
thou shalt surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their
father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father
to pass unto them.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And unto the children of Israel shalt
thou speak, saying, If a man die, and have no son, then ye shall cause
his inheritance to pass unto his daughter.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And if he have no daughter, ye shall give
his inheritance unto his brethren.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And if he have no brethren, ye shall
give his inheritance unto his father's brethren.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And if his father have no brethren, ye
shall give his inheritance to his kinsman that is nearest to him in his
family, and he shall possess it; and it shall be unto the children of
Israel a statute of right, as Jehovah commanded Moses.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Get thee up
into this mount Abarim, and see the land that I have given unto the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And when thou hast seen it, thou also
shalt be gathered unto thy peoples, as Aaron thy brother was gathered,

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> because ye rebelled against my word in
the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, as to
hallowing me in the matter of the water before their eyes. (That is the
water of Meribah at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.)

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And Moses spoke to Jehovah, saying,

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Let Jehovah, the God of the spirits of
all flesh, set a man over the assembly,

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> who may go out before them, and who may
come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them
in, that the assembly of Jehovah be not as sheep that have no shepherd.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And Jehovah said to Moses, Take Joshua
the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and thou shalt lay thy hand
upon him;

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> and thou shalt set him before Eleazar
the priest, and before the whole assembly; and give him commandment
before their eyes.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And thou shalt put of thine honour upon
him, that the whole assembly of the children of Israel may obey him.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And he shall stand before Eleazar the
priest, who shall inquire for him, by the judgment of the Urim before
Jehovah: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come
in, he, and all the children of Israel with him, even the whole
assembly.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And Moses did as Jehovah had commanded
him; and he took Joshua and set him before Eleazar the priest, and
before the whole assembly.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> And he laid his hands upon him, and
gave him commandment, as Jehovah had said through Moses.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Command the children of Israel, and say
unto them, My offering, my bread for my offerings by fire of sweet odour
to me, shall ye take heed to present to me at their set time.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And say unto them, This is the offering
by fire which ye shall present to Jehovah: two yearling lambs without
blemish, day by day, as a continual burnt-offering.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> The one lamb shalt thou offer in the
morning, and the other lamb thou shalt offer between the two evenings;

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> and a tenth part of an ephah of fine
flour for an oblation, mingled with beaten oil, a fourth part of a hin:

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> \[it is\] the continual burnt-offering
which was ordained on mount Sinai for a sweet odour, an offering by fire
to Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And the drink-offering thereof shall be a
fourth part of a hin for one lamb; in the sanctuary shall the
drink-offering of strong drink be poured out to Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And the second lamb thou shalt offer
between the two evenings; \[with the\] like oblation as that of the
morning, and the like drink-offering, shalt thou offer it as an offering
by fire of a sweet odour to Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And on the sabbath day two yearling lambs
without blemish, and two tenth parts of fine flour as an oblation,
mingled with oil, and the drink-offering thereof:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> it is the burnt-offering of the
sabbath, for each sabbath besides the continual burnt-offering, and its
drink-offering.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And in the beginnings of your months ye
shall present a burnt-offering to Jehovah: two young bullocks, and one
ram, seven yearling lambs without blemish.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And three tenth parts of fine flour as
an oblation, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth parts of
fine flour as an oblation, mingled with oil, for the ram;

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> and a tenth part of fine flour mingled
with oil as an oblation for each lamb: \[it is\] a burnt-offering of a
sweet odour, an offering by fire to Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And their drink-offerings: half a hin
of wine for a bullock, and the third part of a hin for the ram, and the
fourth part of a hin for a lamb. This is the monthly burnt-offering for
each month throughout the months of the year.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And a buck of the goats shall be
offered, for a sin-offering to Jehovah, besides the continual
burnt-offering, and its drink-offering.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And in the first month, on the
fourteenth day of the month, is the passover to Jehovah.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And on the fifteenth day of this month
is the feast; seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> On the first day shall be a holy
convocation: no manner of servile work shall ye do;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> and ye shall present an offering by
fire, a burnt-offering to Jehovah: two young bullocks, and one ram, and
seven yearling lambs; they shall be unto you without blemish;

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> and their oblation shall be of fine
flour mingled with oil: three tenth parts shall ye offer for a bullock,
and two tenth parts for the ram;

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> one tenth part shalt thou offer for
each lamb, of the seven lambs;

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> and a he-goat as a sin-offering, to
make atonement for you.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Besides the burnt-offering of the
morning, which is for a continual burnt-offering, shall ye offer this.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> After this manner ye shall offer daily,
seven days, the bread of the offering by fire of a sweet odour to
Jehovah; it shall be offered besides the continual burnt-offering, and
its drink-offering.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And on the seventh day ye shall have a
holy convocation; no manner of servile work shall ye do.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And on the day of the first-fruits,
when ye present a new oblation to Jehovah, after your weeks, ye shall
have a holy convocation: no manner of servile work shall ye do.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> And ye shall present a burnt-offering
for a sweet odour to Jehovah: two young bullocks, one ram, seven
yearling lambs;

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> and their oblation of fine flour
mingled with oil, three tenth parts for one bullock, two tenth parts for
the ram,

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> one tenth part for each lamb of the
seven lambs;

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> \[and\] one buck of the goats, to make
atonement for you.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Ye shall offer them besides the
continual burnt-offering, and its oblation (without blemish shall they
be unto you), and their drink-offerings.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And in the seventh month, on the first of
the month, ye shall have a holy convocation: no manner of servile work
shall ye do; a day of blowing the trumpets shall it be unto you.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And ye shall offer a burnt-offering for a
sweet odour to Jehovah: one young bullock, one ram, seven yearling lambs
without blemish;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> and their oblation of fine flour mingled
with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the
ram,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> and one tenth part for each lamb of the
seven lambs;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> and one buck of the goats for a
sin-offering, to make atonement for you,

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> -- besides the monthly burnt-offering and
its oblation, and the continual burnt-offering and its oblation, and
their drink-offerings, according to their ordinance, for a sweet odour,
an offering by fire to Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And on the tenth of this seventh month ye
shall have a holy convocation; and ye shall afflict your souls; no
manner of work shall ye do.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And ye shall present a burnt-offering to
Jehovah for a sweet odour: one young bullock, one ram, seven yearling
lambs (without blemish shall they be unto you);

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> and their oblation of fine flour mingled
with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the
ram,

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> one tenth part for each lamb, of the
seven lambs;

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> \[and\] one buck of the goats for a
sin-offering, -- besides the sin-offering of atonement, and the
continual burnt-offering and its oblation, and their drink-offerings.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And on the fifteenth day of the seventh
month ye shall have a holy convocation: no manner of servile work shall
ye do; and ye shall celebrate a feast to Jehovah seven days;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> and ye shall present a burnt-offering,
an offering by fire for a sweet odour to Jehovah: thirteen young
bullocks, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs (they shall be without
blemish);

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and their oblation of fine flour
mingled with oil: three tenth parts for each bullock of the thirteen
bullocks, two tenth parts for each ram of the two rams,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> and one tenth part for each lamb of the
fourteen lambs;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> and one buck of the goats for a
sin-offering, -- besides the continual burnt-offering, its oblation and
its drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And on the second day, \[ye shall
present\] twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen yearling lambs
without blemish;

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> and their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> and one buck of the goats for a
sin-offering, -- besides the continual burnt-offering and its oblation,
and their drink-offerings.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> And on the third day, eleven bullocks,
two rams, fourteen yearling lambs without blemish;

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> and their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering, --
besides the continual burnt-offering and its oblation and its
drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And on the fourth day, ten bullocks,
two rams, fourteen yearling lambs without blemish;

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> and one buck of the goats for a
sin-offering, -- besides the continual burnt-offering, its oblation and
its drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And on the fifth day, nine bullocks,
two rams, fourteen yearling lambs without blemish;

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> and their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering, --
besides the continual burnt-offering and its oblation and its
drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And on the sixth day, eight bullocks,
two rams, fourteen yearling lambs without blemish;

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> and their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering, --
besides the continual burnt-offering, its oblation and its
drink-offerings.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And on the seventh day, seven bullocks,
two rams, fourteen yearling lambs without blemish;

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> and their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to their ordinance;

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering, --
besides the continual burnt-offering, its oblation and its
drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> On the eighth day ye shall have a
solemn assembly: no manner of servile work shall ye do.

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> And ye shall present a burnt-offering,
an offering by fire of a sweet odour to Jehovah: one bullock, one ram,
seven yearling lambs without blemish;

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> their oblation and their
drink-offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, by
their number, according to the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> and one he-goat for a sin-offering, --
besides the continual burnt-offering and its oblation and its
drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> These shall ye offer to Jehovah in your
set feasts, besides your vows, and your voluntary-offerings, for your
burnt-offerings, and for your oblations, and for your drink-offerings,
and for your peace-offerings.

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> And Moses told the children of Israel
according to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And Moses spoke to the heads of the
tribes of the children of Israel, saying, This is what Jehovah hath
commanded.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> If a man vow a vow to Jehovah, or swear
an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word;
according to all that hath gone out of his mouth shall he do.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> If a woman also vow a vow to Jehovah, and
bind herself by a bond, in her father's house in her youth,

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> and her father hear her vow, and her bond
wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall be silent at
her, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath
bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> But if her father prohibited her in the
day that he heard, none of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath
bound her soul, shall stand; and Jehovah shall pardon her, because her
father prohibited her.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And if she have a husband, when she hath
her vow upon her or ought that hath passed her lips wherewith she hath
bound her soul,

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> and her husband hear it and be silent at
her in the day that he heareth it, then her vows shall stand, and her
bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> But if her husband prohibit her on the
day that he heareth it, and annul her vow which is upon her, and what
hath passed her lips, wherewith she hath bound her soul, then Jehovah
shall pardon her.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> But the vow of a widow, and of her that
is divorced, -- everything wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand
against her.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And if she have vowed in her husband's
house, or have bound her soul by an oath with a bond,

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> and her husband have heard it, and been
silent at her, and hath not prohibited her, then all her vows shall
stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> But if her husband have expressly
annulled them on the day that he heard them, then nothing of that which
is gone out of her lips as to her vows or the bond on her soul, shall
stand: her husband hath annulled them; and Jehovah will pardon her.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Every vow, and every binding oath to
afflict the soul, her husband can establish it, or her husband can annul
it.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And if her husband be altogether silent
at her from day to day, then he hath established all her vows or all her
bonds which are upon her; he hath confirmed them, for he hath been
silent at her in the day that he heard them.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> But if he in any way annul them after
he hath heard them, then he shall bear her iniquity.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> These are the statutes, which Jehovah
commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between a father and his
daughter, in her youth in her father's house.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Avenge the children of Israel upon the
Midianites; afterwards shalt thou be gathered unto thy peoples.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And Moses spoke to the people, saying,
Arm from amongst you men for military service, that they go against
Midian to execute Jehovah's vengeance upon Midian.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Of every tribe a thousand, of all the
tribes of Israel, shall ye send to the war.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And there were levied out of the
thousands of Israel, a thousand by tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And Moses sent them to the war, a
thousand by the tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,
to the war, and the holy instruments, even the alarm-trumpets in his
hand.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> And they warred against Midian, as
Jehovah had commanded Moses, and slew all the males.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And they slew the kings of Midian,
besides the others slain, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba,
five kings of Midian; and Balaam the son of Beor they slew with the
sword.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And the children of Israel took the women
of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took for a spoil all
their cattle and all their flocks and all their goods;

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> and all their cities in their
settlements and all their encampments they burned with fire.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And they took all the booty, and all
the prey, of man and of cattle;

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> and they brought to Moses and Eleazar
the priest, and to the assembly of the children of Israel, the captives
and the prey and the booty, to the camp in the plains of Moab, which are
by the Jordan of Jericho.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest and
all the princes of the assembly went forth to meet them outside the
camp.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> And Moses was wroth with the officers
of the army, with the captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds,
who came from the service of the war;

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> and Moses said to them, Have ye saved
all the women alive?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Lo, these, through the counsel of
Balaam, caused the children of Israel to commit sin against Jehovah in
the matter of Peor, and there was a plague on the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> And now slay every male among the
little ones, and slay every woman that hath known man by lying with him,

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> but all the children among the women
that have not known lying with a man, keep alive for yourselves.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> And encamp outside the camp seven days;
whoever hath killed a person, and whoever hath touched any slain; ye
shall purify yourselves on the third day, and on the seventh day, you
and your captives.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> And every garment, and every vessel of
skin, and all work of goat's hair, and every utensil of wood shall ye
purify.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> And Eleazar the priest said to the men
of war that had gone to the battle, This is the statute of the law which
Jehovah hath commanded Moses.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> Only the gold, and the silver, the
copper, the iron, the tin, and the lead,

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> everything that passeth through the
fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean; only
it shall be purified with the water of separation; and everything that
cannot pass through the fire ye shall make go through the water.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> And ye shall wash your garments on the
seventh day, and ye shall be clean; and afterwards ye may come into the
camp.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> Take the sum of the prey that was
taken, of man and of cattle, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief
fathers of the assembly;

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> and divide the prey into halves,
between them that conducted the war, who went out to the battle, and the
whole assembly.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> And thou shalt levy a tribute for
Jehovah of the men of war who went out to the army, one soul of five
hundred of the persons, and of the oxen, and of the asses, and of the
small cattle.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Of their half shall ye take it, and
give it unto Eleazar the priest, for a heave-offering of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> And of the children of Israel's half,
thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of the oxen, of
the asses, and of the small cattle, of every \[kind of\] beasts, and
thou shalt give them unto the Levites, who keep the charge of the
tabernacle of Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as
Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> And the prey, the rest of the spoil,
which the men of war had taken, was six hundred and seventy-five
thousand sheep,

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> and seventy-two thousand oxen,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> and sixty-one thousand asses,

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> and of human persons, of the women that
had not known lying with a man, all the persons were thirty-two
thousand.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> And the half, the portion of them that
had gone out to the war, was in number three hundred and thirty-seven
thousand five hundred sheep,

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> and the tribute for Jehovah of the
sheep was six hundred and seventy-five;

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> and the oxen were thirty-six thousand,
and the tribute thereof for Jehovah, seventy-two;

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> and the asses were thirty thousand five
hundred, and the tribute thereof for Jehovah, sixty-one;

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> and the human persons were sixteen
thousand, of whom the tribute for Jehovah was thirty-two persons.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> And Moses gave the tribute of Jehovah's
heave-offering to Eleazar the priest, as Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> And of the children of Israel's half,
which Moses had divided, \[taking it\] from the men that served in the
war,

<span id="an_31:43">31:43</span> (now the half belonging to the assembly
was of the sheep, three hundred and thirty-seven thousand five hundred,

<span id="an_31:44">31:44</span> and thirty-six thousand oxen,

<span id="an_31:45">31:45</span> and thirty thousand five hundred asses,

<span id="an_31:46">31:46</span> and sixteen thousand human persons,)

<span id="an_31:47">31:47</span> ... of the children of Israel's half,
Moses took one portion of fifty, of man and of cattle, and gave them to
the Levites who kept the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah; as Jehovah
had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_31:48">31:48</span> And the officers who were over the
thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and captains of
hundreds, came near to Moses,

<span id="an_31:49">31:49</span> and they said to Moses, Thy servants
have taken the sum of the men of war who were under our hand, and there
is not one man of us lacking.

<span id="an_31:50">31:50</span> So we present the offering of Jehovah,
that which each one hath found, jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets,
rings, earrings, and necklaces, to make atonement for our souls before
Jehovah.

<span id="an_31:51">31:51</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest took
the gold of them, all manner of wrought jewels.

<span id="an_31:52">31:52</span> And all the gold of the heave-offering
that they offered to Jehovah was sixteen thousand seven hundred and
fifty shekels, from the captains of thousands and the captains of
hundreds.

<span id="an_31:53">31:53</span> (The men of war had taken spoil each
one for himself.)

<span id="an_31:54">31:54</span> And Moses and Eleazar the priest took
the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it
into the tent of meeting, as a memorial for the children of Israel
before Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad had much cattle, a very great multitude; and they saw
the land of Jaazer, and the land of Gilead, and behold, the place was a
place for cattle.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And the children of Gad and the children
of Reuben came and spoke to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and to the
princes of the assembly, saying,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jaazer, and
Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elaleh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon,

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> the country that Jehovah smote before the
assembly of Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle;

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> and they said, If we have found favour in
thine eyes, let this land be given to thy servants for a possession:
bring us not over the Jordan.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And Moses said to the children of Gad,
and to the children of Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall
\*ye\* abide here?

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And why do ye discourage the children of
Israel from going over into the land that Jehovah has given them?

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> Thus did your fathers, when I sent them
from Kadesh-barnea to see the land:

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> they went up to the valley of Eshcol, and
saw the land, and discouraged the children of Israel, that they should
not go into the land that Jehovah had given them.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> And Jehovah's anger was kindled the
same time, and he swore, saying,

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> If the men that came up out of Egypt,
from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land that I swore to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob! for they have not wholly followed me;

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the
Kenizzite, and Joshua the son of Nun; for they have wholly followed
Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> And Jehovah's anger was kindled against
Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderness forty years, until the
whole generation was consumed that had done evil in the eyes of Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> And behold, ye are risen up in your
fathers' stead, a progeny of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger
of Jehovah toward Israel.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> If ye turn away from after him, he will
yet again leave them in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this
people.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And they drew near to him, and said, We
will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little
ones;

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> but we ourselves will go with diligence
armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought them to their
place; and our little ones shall dwell in the strong cities because of
the inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> We will not return to our houses, until
the children of Israel have inherited each one his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> For we will not inherit with them on
yonder side the Jordan, and further, because our inheritance is fallen
to us on this side the Jordan eastward.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And Moses said to them, If ye do this
thing, if ye arm yourselves before Jehovah for war,

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> and all of you that are armed go over
the Jordan before Jehovah, until he have dispossessed his enemies from
before him,

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> and the land is subdued before Jehovah,
and afterwards ye return, ye shall be guiltless toward Jehovah and
toward Israel, and this land shall be your possession before Jehovah.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> But if ye do not do so, behold, ye have
sinned against Jehovah, and be sure your sin will find you out.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Build yourselves cities for your little
ones, and folds for your flocks, and do that which has gone out of your
mouth.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben spoke to Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my
lord commands.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Our little ones, our wives, our cattle,
and all our beasts shall be there in the cities of Gilead;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> but thy servants will pass over, every
one armed for war, before Jehovah to battle, as my lord says.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> So concerning them Moses commanded
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of
the tribes of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And Moses said unto them, If the
children of Gad and the children of Reuben pass with you over the
Jordan, every one armed for battle, before Jehovah, and the land be
subdued before you, then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a
possession;

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> but if they do not pass over with you
armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And the children of Gad and the
children of Reuben answered, saying, As Jehovah has said to thy
servants, so will we do.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> We will pass over armed before Jehovah
into the land of Canaan, and the possession of our inheritance on this
side the Jordan shall be ours.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And Moses gave to them, to the children
of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and to half the tribe of Manasseh
the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the
kingdom of Og the king of Bashan, the land, according to its cities and
territories, the cities of the land round about.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> And the children of Gad built Dibon,
and Ataroth, and Aroer,

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> and Atroth-Shophan, and Jaazer, and
Jogbebah,

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> and Beth-Nimrah, and Beth-haran, strong
cities, and sheepfolds.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> -- And the children of Reuben built
Heshbon, and Elaleh, and Kirjathaim,

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> and Nebo, and Baal-meon (of which the
names were changed), and Sibmah; and they gave other names to the cities
that they built.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> -- And the children of Machir the son
of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and they dispossessed the
Amorites that were therein.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> And Moses gave Gilead to Machir the son
of Manasseh; and he dwelt therein.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> And Jair the son of Manasseh went and
took their hamlets, and called them Havoth-Jair.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> And Nobah went and took Kenath, and its
dependent villages, and called it Nobah, after his name.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> These are the journeys of the children of
Israel, who went forth out of the land of Egypt according to their
armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And Moses wrote their goings out
according to their journeys by the commandment of Jehovah; and these are
their journeys according to their goings out.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> They journeyed from Rameses in the first
month, on the fifteenth day of the first month. On the morrow after the
passover the children of Israel went out with a high hand in the sight
of all the Egyptians.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And the Egyptians buried those whom
Jehovah had smitten among them, all the firstborn; and upon their gods
Jehovah executed judgments.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And the children of Israel removed from
Rameses, and encamped in Succoth.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And they removed from Succoth and
encamped in Etham, which is at the end of the wilderness.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And they removed from Etham, and turned
back to Pi-hahiroth, which is opposite Baal-Zephon, and encamped before
Migdol.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And they removed from before Hahiroth,
and passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went
three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and encamped in Marah.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And they removed from Marah, and came to
Elim; and in Elim were twelve springs of water, and seventy palm-trees,
and they encamped there.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And they removed from Elim, and
encamped by the Red sea.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And they removed from the Red sea, and
encamped in the wilderness of Sin.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And they removed from the wilderness of
Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> And they removed from Dophkah, and
encamped in Alush.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And they removed from Alush, and
encamped at Rephidim, where there was no water for the people to drink.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And they removed from Rephidim, and
encamped in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> And they removed from the wilderness of
Sinai, and encamped at Kibroth-hattaavah.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And they removed from
Kibroth-hattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And they removed from Hazeroth, and
encamped in Rithmah.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And they removed from Rithmah, and
encamped at Rimmon-perez.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And they removed from Rimmon-perez, and
encamped in Libnah.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And they removed from Libnah, and
encamped at Rissah.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And they removed from Rissah, and
encamped in Kehelathah.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And they removed from Kehelathah, and
encamped in mount Shapher.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And they removed from mount Shapher,
and encamped in Haradah.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> And they removed from Haradah, and
encamped in Makheloth.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> And they removed from Makheloth, and
encamped at Tahath.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> And they removed from Tahath, and
encamped at Terah.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> And they removed from Terah, and
encamped in Mithcah.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> And they removed from Mithcah, and
encamped in Hashmonah.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> And they removed from Hashmonah, and
encamped in Moseroth.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> And they removed from Moseroth, and
encamped in Bene-Jaakan.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> And they removed from Bene-Jaakan, and
encamped at Hor-hagidgad.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And they removed from Hor-hagidgad, and
encamped in Jotbathah.

<span id="an_33:34">33:34</span> And they removed from Jotbathah, and
encamped at Abronah.

<span id="an_33:35">33:35</span> And they removed from Abronah, and
encamped at Ezion-geber.

<span id="an_33:36">33:36</span> And they removed from Ezion-geber, and
encamped in the wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh.

<span id="an_33:37">33:37</span> And they removed from Kadesh, and
encamped in mount Hor, in the border of the land of Edom.

<span id="an_33:38">33:38</span> And Aaron the priest went up mount Hor
by the commandment of Jehovah, and died there, in the fortieth year
after the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth
month, on the first of the month.

<span id="an_33:39">33:39</span> And Aaron was a hundred and
twenty-three years old when he died on mount Hor.

<span id="an_33:40">33:40</span> And the Canaanite, the king of Arad who
dwelt in the south in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:41">33:41</span> And they removed from mount Hor, and
encamped in Zalmonah.

<span id="an_33:42">33:42</span> And they removed from Zalmonah, and
encamped in Punon.

<span id="an_33:43">33:43</span> And they removed from Punon, and
encamped in Oboth.

<span id="an_33:44">33:44</span> And they removed from Oboth, and
encamped in Ijim-Abarim, in the border of Moab.

<span id="an_33:45">33:45</span> And they removed from Ijim, and
encamped in Dibon-Gad.

<span id="an_33:46">33:46</span> And they removed from Dibon-Gad, and
encamped in Almon-Diblathaim.

<span id="an_33:47">33:47</span> And they removed from Almon-Diblathaim,
and encamped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.

<span id="an_33:48">33:48</span> And they removed from the mountains of
Abarim, and encamped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan of Jericho.

<span id="an_33:49">33:49</span> And they encamped by the Jordan, from
Beth-jeshimoth unto Abel-Shittim, in the plains of Moab.

<span id="an_33:50">33:50</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the
plains of Moab by the Jordan of Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_33:51">33:51</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them, When ye pass over Jordan into the land of Canaan,

<span id="an_33:52">33:52</span> then ye shall dispossess all the
inhabitants of the land from before you, and ye shall destroy all their
figured images, and all their molten images shall ye destroy, and all
their high places shall ye lay waste;

<span id="an_33:53">33:53</span> and ye shall take possession of the
land, and dwell therein, for to you have I given the land to possess it.

<span id="an_33:54">33:54</span> And ye shall take for yourselves the
land as an inheritance by lot according to your families: to the many ye
shall increase their inheritance, and to the few thou shalt diminish
their inheritance: where the lot falleth to him, there shall be each
man's \[inheritance\]; according to the tribes of your fathers shall ye
take for yourselves the inheritance.

<span id="an_33:55">33:55</span> But if ye will not dispossess the
inhabitants of the land from before you, those that ye let remain of
them shall be thorns in your eyes, and pricks in your sides, and they
shall harass you in the land wherein ye dwell.

<span id="an_33:56">33:56</span> And it shall come to pass that I will
do unto you as I thought to do unto them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Command the children of Israel, and say
unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan, this shall be the land
that shall fall to you for an inheritance, the land of Canaan according
to the borders thereof.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Then your south side shall be from the
wilderness of Zin alongside of Edom, and your southern border shall be
from the end of the salt sea eastward;

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> and your border shall turn from the south
of the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin, and shall end southward
at Kadesh-barnea, and shall go on to Hazar-Addar, and pass on to Azmon.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And the border shall turn from Azmon unto
the torrent of Egypt, and shall end at the sea.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And as west border ye shall have the
great sea, and \[its\] coast. This shall be your west border.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And this shall be your north border: from
the great sea ye shall mark out for you mount Hor;

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> from mount Hor ye shall mark out the
entrance to Hamath, and the end of the border shall be toward Zedad;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> and the border shall go to Ziphron, and
shall end at Hazar-enan. This shall be your north border.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And ye shall mark out for you as
eastern border from Hazar-enan to Shepham:

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> and the border shall go down from
Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall
descend, and shall strike upon the extremity of the sea of Chinnereth
eastward;

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> and the border shall go down to the
Jordan, and shall end at the salt sea. This shall be your land according
to the borders thereof round about.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And Moses commanded the children of
Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall take for yourselves as
inheritance by lot, which Jehovah commanded to give to the nine tribes,
and to the half tribe.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> For the tribe of the children of the
Reubenites according to their fathers' houses, and the tribe of the
children of the Gadites according to their fathers' houses, have
received, and half the tribe of Manasseh have received their
inheritance;

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> the two tribes and the half tribe have
received their inheritance on this side the Jordan of Jericho eastward,
toward the sun-rising.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> These are the names of the men who
shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son
of Nun.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> And ye shall take one prince of every
tribe, to divide the land.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> And these are the names of the men: for
the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh;

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Simeon, Samuel the son of Ammihud;

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> for the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the
son of Chislon;

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Dan, a prince, Bukki the son of Jogli;

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> for the children of Joseph: for the
tribe of the children of Manasseh, a prince, Hanniel the son of Ephod,

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Ephraim, a prince, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan;

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Zebulun, a prince, Elizaphan the son of Pharnach;

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Issachar, a prince, Phaltiel the son of Azzan;

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Asher, a prince, Ahihud the son of Shelomi;

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> and for the tribe of the children of
Naphtali, a prince, Phedahel the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> These are they whom Jehovah commanded
to distribute to the children of Israel their inheritance in the land of
Canaan.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the plains
of Moab by the Jordan of Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Command the children of Israel, that of
the inheritance of their possession they give unto the Levites cities to
dwell in; and a suburb for the cities round about them shall ye give
unto the Levites.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> And the cities shall they have to dwell
in, and their suburbs shall be for their cattle, and for their goods,
and for all their beasts.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And the suburbs of the cities that ye
shall give unto the Levites shall be from the walls of the city outward,
a thousand cubits round about.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> And ye shall measure, without the city,
the east side two thousand cubits, and the south side two thousand
cubits, and the west side two thousand cubits, and the north side two
thousand cubits, and the city shall be in the midst: they shall have
this as suburbs of the cities.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And \[among\] the cities that ye shall
give unto the Levites \[shall be\] the six cities of refuge, which ye
shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither, -- and
besides them ye shall give forty-two cities:

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> all the cities that ye shall give to the
Levites shall be forty-eight cities, they and their suburbs.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And the cities which ye shall give shall
be of the possession of the children of Israel: from them that have much
ye shall take much, and from them that have little ye shall take little;
each one according to his inheritance which he will inherit shall give
of his cities to the Levites.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Speak unto the children of Israel, and
say unto them, When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> then ye shall appoint for yourselves
cities: cities of refuge shall they be for you; that a manslayer may
flee thither, who without intent smiteth a person mortally.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> And ye shall have these cities for
refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he have stood
before the assembly in judgment.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> And the cities that ye shall give shall
be six cities of refuge for you.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Three cities shall ye give on this side
of the Jordan, and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan;
they shall be cities of refuge.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> For the children of Israel, and for the
stranger, and for the sojourner among them shall these six cities be a
refuge, that one who smiteth a person mortally without intent may flee
thither.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> And if he have smitten him with an
instrument of iron, so that he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shall
certainly be put to death.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> And if he have smitten him with a stone
from the hand, wherewith one may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the
murderer shall certainly be put to death.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> Or if he have smitten him with an
instrument of wood, in the hand, wherewith one may die, and he die, he
is a murderer: the murderer shall certainly be put to death;

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> the avenger of blood, he shall put the
murderer to death; when he meeteth him, he shall put him to death.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And if he thrust at him out of hatred,
or hurl at him intentionally, so that he die,

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> or from enmity smite him with his hand,
so that he die, he that smote him shall certainly be put to death; he is
a murderer: the avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death, when
he meeteth him. --

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> But if he have thrust at him suddenly
without enmity, or have cast upon him anything unintentionally,

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> or \[have smitten him\] with any stone
wherewith one may die, without seeing him, and have cast it upon him so
that he die, and he was not his enemy, neither sought his harm:

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> then the assembly shall judge between
the smiter and the avenger of blood according to these judgments;

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> and the assembly shall rescue the
manslayer out of the hand of the avenger of blood, and the assembly
shall restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he had fled; and he
shall abide in it until the death of the high-priest, who was anointed
with the holy oil.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> But if the manslayer shall in any way
come outside the limits of the city of his refuge whither he hath fled,

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> and the avenger of blood find him
outside the limits of his city of refuge, and the avenger of blood kill
the manslayer, there shall be no blood-guiltiness upon him;

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> for the manslayer should have remained
in the city of his refuge until the death of the high-priest; but after
the death of the high-priest he may return into the land of his
possession.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> And this shall be unto you a statute of
right throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> Whoever shall smite a person mortally,
at the mouth of witnesses shall the murderer be put to death; but one
witness shall not testify against a person to cause him to die.

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> And ye shall take no satisfaction for
the life of a murderer, who is guilty of death, but he shall certainly
be put to death.

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> And ye shall take no satisfaction for
him that hath fled to the city of his refuge, that he should come again
to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> And ye shall not pollute the land
wherein ye are; for blood, it polluteth the land; and there can be no
atonement made for the land, for the blood that hath been shed therein,
but by the blood of him that shed it.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> And ye shall not defile the land that
ye inhabit, in the midst whereof I dwell; for I am Jehovah who dwell in
the midst of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> And the chief fathers of families of the
sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families
of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spoke before Moses, and before the
princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> and they said, Jehovah commanded my lord
to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel;
and my lord was commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of
Zelophehad our brother to his daughters.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Now if they be married to any of the sons
of the \[other\] tribes of the children of Israel, then shall their
inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be
added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they shall belong; and it
shall be taken from the lot of our inheritance.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And when the jubilee of the children of
Israel shall come, then shall their inheritance be added to the
inheritance of the tribe to which they shall belong; and their
inheritance shall be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our
fathers.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And Moses commanded the children of
Israel according to the word of Jehovah, saying, The tribe of the sons
of Joseph hath said well.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> This is the thing which Jehovah hath
commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry
whom they please; only they shall marry one of the tribe of their
father,

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> that no inheritance of the children of
Israel pass from tribe to tribe; for every one of the children of Israel
shall keep to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And every daughter that possesseth an
inheritance among the tribes of the children of Israel, shall be married
to one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of
Israel may possess every one the inheritance of his fathers,

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> and the inheritance shall not pass from
one tribe to another tribe; for each of the tribes of the children of
Israel shall keep to his inheritance.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> Even as Jehovah had commanded Moses, so
did the daughters of Zelophehad;

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> and Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married unto their
uncles' sons.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> To those that were of the families of
the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph were they married; and their
inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> These are the commandments and the
ordinances which Jehovah commanded through Moses to the children of
Israel, in the plains of Moab, by the Jordan of Jericho.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy](deu.md)
