[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](amo)  [Next](jon.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Obadiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah concerning Edom: We have heard a report from Jehovah, and an
ambassador is sent among the nations. Arise ye, and let us rise up
against her in battle.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Behold, I have made thee small among the
nations; thou art greatly despised.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The pride of thy heart hath deceived thee,
thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high;
-- he that saith in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and
though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> If thieves had come to thee, if robbers by
night, (how art thou cut off!) would they not have stolen \[till\] they
had had enough? If grape-gatherers had come to thee, would they not have
left some gleanings?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> How is Esau searched! his hidden things
sought out!

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the men of thy confederacy have pushed
thee to the border; the men that were at peace with thee have deceived
thee, they have prevailed against thee; \[they that eat\] thy bread have
laid a snare under thee. There is no understanding in him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Shall I not in that day, saith Jehovah,
destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of
Esau?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be
dismayed, to the end that every one may be cut off from the mount of
Esau by slaughter.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Because of violence against thy brother
Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In the day that thou stoodest on the
other side, in the day that strangers carried away captive his
substance, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon
Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But thou shouldest not have looked on the
day of thy brother in the day of his disaster; neither shouldest thou
have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their
destruction; nor have opened wide thy mouth in the day of distress.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Thou shouldest not have entered into the
gate of my people in the day of their calamity, nor have looked, even
thou, on their affliction in the day of their calamity, neither
shouldest thou have laid \[hands\] on their substance in the day of
their calamity;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and thou shouldest not have stood on the
crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape, nor have delivered up
those remaining of him in the day of distress.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For the day of Jehovah is near upon all
the nations: as thou hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy
recompence shall return upon thine own head.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For as ye have drunk upon my holy
mountain, so shall all the nations drink continually; yea, they shall
drink, and shall swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not
been.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But upon mount Zion shall there be
deliverance, and it shall be holy; and the house of Jacob shall possess
their possessions.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble; and
they shall kindle in them and devour them; and there shall not be any
remaining of the house of Esau: for Jehovah hath spoken \[it\].

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And \[they of\] the south shall possess
the mount of Esau; and they of the lowland the Philistines; yea, they
shall possess the field of Ephraim and the field of Samaria; and
Benjamin \[shall possess\] Gilead;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> and the captives of this host of the
children of Israel \[shall possess\] what belonged to the Canaanites,
unto Zarephath; and the captives of Jerusalem, who \[were\] in Sepharad,
shall possess the cities of the south.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And saviours shall come up on mount Zion,
to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shall be Jehovah's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah](jon.md)
