[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simon Peter, bondman and apostle of Jesus
Christ, to them that have received like precious faith with us through
\[the\] righteousness of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace and peace be multiplied to you in
\[the\] knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> As his divine power has given to us all
things which relate to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him
that has called us by glory and virtue,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> through which he has given to us the
greatest and precious promises, that through these ye may become
partakers of \[the\] divine nature, having escaped the corruption that
is in the world through lust.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But for this very reason also, using
therewith all diligence, in your faith have also virtue, in virtue
knowledge,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> in knowledge temperance, in temperance
endurance, in endurance godliness,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> in godliness brotherly love, in brotherly
love love:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> for these things existing and abounding in
you make \[you\] to be neither idle nor unfruitful as regards the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for he with whom these things are not
present is blind, short-sighted, and has forgotten the purging of his
former sins.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Wherefore the rather, brethren, use
diligence to make your calling and election sure, for doing these things
ye will never fall;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> for thus shall the entrance into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ be richly
furnished unto you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Wherefore I will be careful to put you
always in mind of these things, although knowing \[them\] and
established in the present truth.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But I account it right, as long as I am
in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting \[you\] in remembrance,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> knowing that the putting off of my
tabernacle is speedily \[to take place\], as also our Lord Jesus Christ
has manifested to me;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> but I will use diligence, that after my
departure ye should have also, at any time, \[in your power\] to call to
mind these things.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For we have not made known to you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, following cleverly imagined
fables, but having been eyewitnesses of \*his\* majesty.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he received from God \[the\] Father
honour and glory, such a voice being uttered to him by the excellent
glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom \*I\* have found my delight;

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and this voice \*we\* heard uttered from
heaven, being with him on the holy mountain.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And we have the prophetic word \[made\]
surer, to which ye do well taking heed (as to a lamp shining in an
obscure place) until \[the\] day dawn and \[the\] morning star arise in
your hearts;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> knowing this first, that \[the scope of\]
no prophecy of scripture is had from its own particular interpretation,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> for prophecy was not ever uttered by
\[the\] will of man, but holy men of God spake under the power of
\[the\] Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But there were false prophets also among
the people, as there shall be also among you false teachers, who shall
bring in by the bye destructive heresies, and deny the master that
bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> and many shall follow their dissolute ways,
through whom the way of the truth shall be blasphemed.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And through covetousness, with well-turned
words, will they make merchandise of you: for whom judgment of old is
not idle, and their destruction slumbers not.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For if God spared not \[the\] angels who
had sinned, but having cast them down to the deepest pit of gloom has
delivered them to chains of darkness \[to be\] kept for judgment;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> and spared not \[the\] old world, but
preserved Noe, \[the\] eighth, a preacher of righteousness, having
brought in \[the\] flood upon \[the\] world of \[the\] ungodly;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and having reduced \[the\] cities of Sodom
and Gomorrha to ashes, condemned \[them\] with an overthrow, setting
\[them as\] an example to those that should \[afterwards\] live an
ungodly life;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and saved righteous Lot, distressed with
the abandoned conversation of the godless,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (for the righteous man through seeing and
hearing, dwelling among them, tormented \[his\] righteous soul day after
day with \[their\] lawless works,)

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> \[the\] Lord knows \[how\] to deliver the
godly out of trial, and to keep \[the\] unjust to \[the\] day of
judgment \[to be\] punished;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and specially those who walk after the
flesh in \[the\] lust of uncleanness, and despise lordship. Bold \[are
they\], self-willed; they do not fear speaking injuriously of dignities:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> when angels, who are greater in might and
power, do not bring against them, before the Lord, an injurious charge.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But these, as natural animals without
reason, made to be caught and destroyed, speaking injuriously in things
they are ignorant of, shall also perish in their own corruption,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> receiving \[the\] reward of
unrighteousness; accounting ephemeral indulgence pleasure; spots and
blemishes, rioting in their own deceits, feasting with you;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> having eyes full of adultery, and that
cease not from sin, alluring unestablished souls; having a heart
practised in covetousness, children of curse;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> having left \[the\] straight way they
have gone astray, having followed in the path of Balaam \[the son\] of
Bosor, who loved \[the\] reward of unrighteousness;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> but had reproof of his own wickedness --
\[the\] dumb ass speaking with man's voice forbad the folly of the
prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These are springs without water, and
mists driven by storm, to whom the gloom of darkness is reserved \[for
ever\].

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For \[while\] speaking great highflown
words of vanity, they allure with \[the\] lusts of \[the\] flesh, by
dissoluteness, those who have just fled those who walk in error,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> promising them liberty, while they
themselves are slaves of corruption; for by whom a man is subdued, by
him is he also brought into slavery.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For if after having escaped the
pollutions of the world through \[the\] knowledge of the Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, again entangled, they are subdued by these, their
last state is worse than the first.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For it were better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, than having known \[it\] to turn back
from the holy commandment delivered to them.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But that \[word\] of the true proverb has
happened to them: \[The\] dog \[has\] turned back to his own vomit; and,
\[The\] washed sow to \[her\] rolling in mud.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This, a second letter, beloved, I already
write to you, in \[both\] which I stir up, in the way of putting you in
remembrance, your pure mind,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> to be mindful of the words spoken before by
the holy prophets, and of the commandment of the Lord and Saviour by
your apostles;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> knowing this first, that there shall come
at \[the\] close of the days mockers with mocking, walking according to
their own lusts,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? for from the time the fathers fell asleep all things remain thus
from \[the\] beginning of \[the\] creation.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this is hidden from them through their
own wilfulness, that heavens were of old, and an earth, having its
subsistence out of water and in water, by the word of God,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> through which \[waters\] the then world,
deluged with water, perished.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the present heavens and the earth by
his word are laid up in store, kept for fire unto a day of judgment and
destruction of ungodly men.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But let not this one thing be hidden from
you, beloved, that one day with \[the\] Lord \[is\] as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> \[The\] Lord does not delay his promise, as
some account of delay, but is longsuffering towards you, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But the day of \[the\] Lord will come as
a thief, in which the heavens will pass away with a rushing noise, and
\[the\] elements, burning with heat, shall be dissolved, and \[the\]
earth and the works in it shall be burnt up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> All these things then being to be
dissolved, what ought ye to be in holy conversation and godliness,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> waiting for and hastening the coming of
the day of God, by reason of which \[the\] heavens, being on fire, shall
be dissolved, and \[the\] elements, burning with heat, shall melt?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But, according to his promise, we wait
for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Wherefore, beloved, as ye wait for these
things, be diligent to be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and account the longsuffering of our Lord
\[to be\] salvation; according as our beloved brother Paul also has
written to you according to the wisdom given to him,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> as also in all \[his\] epistles, speaking
in them of these things; among which some things are hard to be
understood, which the untaught and ill-established wrest, as also the
other scriptures, to their own destruction.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> \*Ye\* therefore, beloved, knowing
\[these\] things before, take care lest, being led away along with the
error of the wicked, ye should fall from your own stedfastness:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> but grow in grace, and in \[the\]
knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him \[be\] glory both
now and to \[the\] day of eternity. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1.md)
