[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psa)  [Next](ecc.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Proverbs

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Proverbs of Solomon, son of David, king of
Israel:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to know wisdom and instruction; to discern
the words of understanding;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> to receive the instruction of wisdom,
righteousness and judgment, and equity;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to give prudence to the simple, to the
young man knowledge and discretion.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> He that is wise will hear, and will
increase learning; and the intelligent will gain wise counsels:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> to understand a proverb and an allegory,
the words of the wise and their enigmas.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of
knowledge: fools despise wisdom and instruction.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Hear, my son, the instruction of thy
father, and forsake not the teaching of thy mother;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for they shall be a garland of grace unto
thy head, and chains about thy neck.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> My son, if sinners entice thee, consent
not.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> If they say, Come with us, let us lay
wait for blood, let us lurk secretly for the innocent without cause;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> let us swallow them up alive as Sheol,
and whole, as those that go down into the pit;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> we shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoil:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> cast in thy lot among us; we will all
have one purse:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> -- my son, walk not in the way with them,
keep back thy foot from their path;

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> for their feet run to evil, and they make
haste to shed blood.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For in vain the net is spread in the
sight of anything which hath wings.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And these lay wait for their own blood;
they lurk secretly for their own lives.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So are the paths of every one that is
greedy of gain: it taketh away the life of its possessors.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wisdom crieth without; she raiseth her
voice in the broadways;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> she calleth in the chief \[place\] of
concourse, in the entry of the gates; in the city she uttereth her
words:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> How long, simple ones, will ye love
simpleness, and scorners take pleasure in their scorning, and the
foolish hate knowledge?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will
pour forth my spirit unto you, I will make known to you my words.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because I have called, and ye refused; I
have stretched out my hand, and no one regarded;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and ye have rejected all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I also will laugh in your calamity, I
will mock when your fear cometh;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> when your fear cometh as sudden
destruction, and your calamity cometh as a whirlwind; when distress and
anguish come upon you:

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> -- then will they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they will seek me early, and shall not find me.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Because they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of Jehovah;

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> they would none of my counsel, they
despised all my reproof:

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> therefore shall they eat of the fruit of
their way, and be filled with their own devices.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> For the turning away of the simple shall
slay them, and the prosperity of the foolish shall cause them to perish.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell
safely, and shall be at rest from fear of evil.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My son, if thou receivest my words, and
layest up my commandments with thee,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> so that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom
\[and\] thou apply thy heart to understanding;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> yea, if thou criest after discernment
\[and\] liftest up thy voice to understanding;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> if thou seekest her as silver and searchest
for her as for hidden treasures:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> then shalt thou understand the fear of
Jehovah, and find the knowledge of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For Jehovah giveth wisdom; out of his mouth
\[come\] knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He layeth up sound wisdom for the upright;
\[he\] is a shield to them that walk in integrity;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> guarding the paths of just judgment and
keeping the way of his godly ones.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then shalt thou understand righteousness
and judgment and equity: every good path.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When wisdom entereth into thy heart and
knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> discretion shall keep thee, understanding
shall preserve thee:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> To deliver thee from the way of evil,
from the man that speaketh froward things;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> \[from those\] who leave the paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> who rejoice to do evil, \[and\] delight
in the frowardness of evil;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> whose paths are crooked, and who are
perverted in their course:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To deliver thee from the strange woman,
from the stranger who flattereth with her words;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> who forsaketh the guide of her youth, and
forgetteth the covenant of her God;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> -- for her house inclineth unto death,
and her paths unto the dead;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> none that go unto her return again,
neither do they attain to the paths of life:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> -- that thou mayest walk in the way of
the good, and keep the paths of the righteous.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For the upright shall dwell in the land,
and the perfect shall remain in it;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> but the wicked shall be cut off from the
land, and the unfaithful shall be plucked up out of it.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My son, forget not my teaching, and let thy
heart observe my commandments;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> for length of days, and years of life, and
peace shall they add to thee.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let not loving-kindness and truth forsake
thee; bind them about thy neck, write them upon the tablet of thy heart:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and thou shalt find favour and good
understanding in the sight of God and man.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Confide in Jehovah with all thy heart, and
lean not unto thine own intelligence;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
will make plain thy paths.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Be not wise in thine own eyes; fear
Jehovah, and depart from evil:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> it shall be health for thy navel, and
moisture for thy bones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Honour Jehovah with thy substance, and with
the first-fruits of all thine increase;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> so shall thy barns be filled with plenty,
and thy vats shall overflow with new wine.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My son, despise not the instruction of
Jehovah, neither be weary of his chastisement;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> for whom Jehovah loveth he chasteneth,
even as a father the son in whom he delighteth.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom,
and the man that getteth understanding.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For the gain thereof is better than the
gain of silver, and her revenue than fine gold.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> She is more precious than rubies; and all
the things thou canst desire are not equal unto her.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Length of days is in her right hand; in
her left hand riches and honour.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> She is a tree of life to them that lay
hold upon her; and happy is he that retaineth her.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Jehovah by wisdom founded the earth; by
understanding he established the heavens.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> By his knowledge the deeps were broken
up, and the skies drop down the dew.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My son, let them not depart from thine
eyes; keep sound wisdom and discretion:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> so shall they be life unto thy soul, and
grace unto thy neck.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then shalt thou walk in thy way securely,
and thy foot shall not stumble;

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> when thou liest down, thou shalt not be
afraid, but thou shalt lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of
the destruction of the wicked, when it cometh;

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for Jehovah shall be thy confidence, and
he will keep thy foot from being taken.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Withhold not good from them to whom it is
due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come
again, and to-morrow I will give, when thou hast it by thee.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Devise not evil against thy neighbour,
seeing he dwelleth securely by thee.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Strive not with a man without cause, if
he have done thee no harm.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Envy not the man of violence, and choose
none of his ways.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For the perverse is an abomination to
Jehovah; but his secret is with the upright.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> The curse of Jehovah is in the house of
the wicked; but he blesseth the habitation of the righteous.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> He indeed scorneth the scorners; but he
giveth grace unto the lowly.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The wise shall inherit glory; but shame
shall be the promotion of the foolish.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear, ye children, the instruction of a
father, and attend to know intelligence;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> for I give you good doctrine: forsake ye
not my law.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For I was a son unto my father, tender and
an only one in the sight of my mother.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And he taught me, and said unto me, Let thy
heart retain my words; keep my commandments and live.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Get wisdom, get intelligence: forget \[it\]
not; neither decline from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Forsake her not, and she shall keep thee;
love her, and she shall preserve thee.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The beginning of wisdom \[is\], Get wisdom;
and with all thy getting get intelligence.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she
shall bring thee to honour when thou dost embrace her.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She shall give to thy head a garland of
grace; a crown of glory will she bestow upon thee.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Hear, my son, and receive my sayings, and
the years of thy life shall be multiplied.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I will teach thee in the way of wisdom, I
will lead thee in paths of uprightness.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> When thou goest, thy steps shall not be
straitened; and when thou runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take fast hold of instruction, let
\[her\] not go: keep her, for she is thy life.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Enter not into the path of the wicked,
and go not in the way of evil \[men\]:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> avoid it, pass not by it; turn from it,
and pass away.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For they sleep not except they have done
mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they have caused \[some\]
to fall.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For they eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the wine of violence.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But the path of the righteous is as the
shining light, going on and brightening until the day be fully come.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The way of the wicked is as darkness:
they know not at what they stumble.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> My son, attend to my words; incline thine
ear unto my sayings.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep
them in the midst of thy heart.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For they are life unto those that find
them, and health to all their flesh.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Keep thy heart more than anything that is
guarded; for out of it are the issues of life.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Put away from thee perverseness of mouth,
and corrupt lips put far from thee.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Let thine eyes look right on, and let
thine eyelids look straight before thee.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all
thy ways be well-ordered.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Turn not to the right hand nor to the
left; remove thy foot from evil.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> My son, attend unto my wisdom, incline
thine ear to my understanding;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> that thou mayest keep reflection, and that
thy lips may preserve knowledge.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For the lips of the strange woman drop
honey, and her mouth is smoother than oil;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> but her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as
a two-edged sword.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Her feet go down to death; her steps take
hold on Sheol.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Lest she should ponder the path of life,
her ways wander, she knoweth not \[whither\].

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And now, children, hearken unto me, and
depart not from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Remove thy way far from her, and come not
nigh the door of her house:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> lest thou give thine honour unto others,
and thy years unto the cruel;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> lest strangers be filled with thy wealth,
and the fruits of thy toil \[come\] into the house of a stranger;

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> and thou mourn in thine end, when thy
flesh and thy body are consumed;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and thou say, How have I hated
instruction, and my heart despised reproof!

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and I have not hearkened unto the voice
of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to those that instructed me;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I was well nigh in all evil in the midst
of the congregation and assembly.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Drink waters out of thine own cistern,
and running waters out of thine own well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Thy fountains shall be poured forth, as
water-brooks in the broadways.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let them be only thine own, and not
strangers' with thee.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Let thy fountain be blessed; and have joy
of the wife of thy youth.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> As a lovely hind and a graceful roe, let
her breasts satisfy thee at all times: be thou ravished continually with
her love.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And why shouldest thou, my son, be
ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For the ways of man are before the eyes
of Jehovah, and he pondereth all his paths.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> His own iniquities shall take the wicked,
and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> He shall die for want of discipline; and
in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My son, if thou hast become surety for thy
friend, if thou hast stricken thy hand for a stranger,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> thou art snared with the words of thy
mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself,
since thou hast come into the hand of thy friend: go, humble thyself,
and be urgent with thy friend.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber
to thine eyelids:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> deliver thyself as a gazelle from the hand
\[of the hunter\], and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her
ways and be wise:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> which having no chief, overseer, or ruler,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> provideth her bread in the summer, \[and\]
gathereth her food in the harvest.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> How long, sluggard, wilt thou lie down?
When wilt thou arise out of thy sleep?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> A little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to rest!

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So shall thy poverty come as a roving
plunderer, and thy penury as an armed man.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> A man of Belial, a wicked person, is he
that goeth about with a perverse mouth;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> he winketh with his eyes, he speaketh
with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> deceits are in his heart; he deviseth
mischief at all times, he soweth discords.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Therefore shall his calamity come
suddenly: in a moment shall he be broken, and without remedy.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> These six \[things\] doth Jehovah hate,
yea, seven are an abomination unto him:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands
that shed innocent blood;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> a heart that deviseth wicked
imaginations; feet that are swift in running to mischief;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> a false witness that uttereth lies, and
he that soweth discords among brethren.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> My son, observe thy father's commandment,
and forsake not the teaching of thy mother;

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> bind them continually upon thy heart, tie
them about thy neck:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> when thou walkest, it shall lead thee;
when thou sleepest, it shall keep thee; and \[when\] thou awakest, it
shall talk with thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the commandment is a lamp, and the
teaching a light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life:

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> to keep thee from the evil woman, from
the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Lust not after her beauty in thy heart,
neither let her take thee with her eyelids;

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> for by means of a whorish woman \[a man
is brought\] to a loaf of bread, and another's wife doth hunt for the
precious soul.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his
garments not be burned?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet
not be scorched?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> So he that goeth in to his neighbour's
wife: whosoever toucheth her shall not be innocent.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> They do not despise a thief, if he steal
to satisfy his soul when he is hungry:

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> and if he be found, he shall restore
sevenfold; he shall give all the substance of his house.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Whoso committeth adultery with a woman is
void of understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> A wound and contempt shall he get; and
his reproach shall not be wiped away.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> For jealousy is the rage of a man, and he
will not spare in the day of vengeance;

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> he will not regard any ransom, neither
will he rest content though thou multipliest \[thy\] gifts.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> My son, keep my words, and lay up my
commandments with thee.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Keep my commandments, and live; and my
teaching, as the apple of thine eye.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon
the tablet of thy heart.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, and
call intelligence \[thy\] kinswoman:

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> that they may keep thee from the strange
woman, from the stranger who flattereth with her words.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For at the window of my house, I looked
forth through my lattice,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and I beheld among the simple ones, I
discerned among the sons, a young man void of understanding,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> passing through the street near her corner;
and he went the way to her house,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> in the twilight, in the evening of the day,
in the blackness of night and the darkness.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And behold, there met him a woman in the
attire of a harlot, and subtle of heart.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> She is clamorous and unmanageable; her
feet abide not in her house:

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> now without, now in the broadways, -- and
she lieth in wait at every corner.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And she caught him and kissed him, and
with an impudent face said unto him,

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I have peace-offerings with me; this day
have I paid my vows:

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> therefore came I forth to meet thee, to
seek earnestly thy face, and I have found thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have decked my bed with tapestry
coverlets of variegated linen from Egypt;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> I have perfumed my couch with myrrh,
aloes, and cinnamon.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Come, let us revel in love until the
morning, let us delight ourselves with loves.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the husband is not at home, he is
gone a long journey;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> he hath taken the money-bag with him, he
will come home on the day of the full moon.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> With her much enticement she beguiled
him; with the smoothness of her lips she constrained him.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> He went after her straightway, as an ox
goeth to the slaughter, and as stocks \[serve\] for the correction of
the fool;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> till an arrow strike through his liver:
as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for its life.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And now, ye sons, hearken unto me, and
attend to the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go
not astray in her paths:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> for she hath cast down many wounded, and
all slain by her were strong.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Her house is the way to Sheol, going down
to the chambers of death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding give
forth her voice?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> On the top of high places by the way, at
the cross-paths she taketh her stand.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Beside the gates, at the entry of the city,
at the coming in at the doors, she crieth aloud.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Unto you, men, I call, and my voice is to
the sons of man:

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> O ye simple, understand prudence; and ye
foolish, understand sense.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Hear, for I will speak excellent things,
and the opening of my lips shall be right things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For my palate shall meditate truth, and
wickedness is an abomination to my lips.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness; there is nothing tortuous or perverse in them.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They are all plain to him that
understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Receive my instruction, and not silver;
and knowledge rather than choice gold:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> for wisdom is better than rubies, and all
the things that may be desired are not equal to it.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I wisdom dwell \[with\] prudence, and
find the knowledge \[which cometh\] of reflection.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The fear of Jehovah is to hate evil;
pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth do I hate.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am
intelligence; I have strength.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> By me kings reign, and rulers make just
decrees;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> by me princes rule, and nobles, all the
judges of the earth.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> I love those that love me; and they that
seek me early shall find me.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Riches and honour are with me; durable
wealth and righteousness.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> My fruit is better than fine gold, yea,
than pure gold; and my revenue than choice silver.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> I walk in the path of righteousness, in
the midst of the paths of judgment:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> that I may cause those that love me to
inherit substance; and I will fill their treasuries.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of
his way, before his works of old.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> I was set up from eternity, from the
beginning, before the earth was.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> When there were no depths, I was brought
forth, when there were no fountains abounding with water.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Before the mountains were settled, before
the hills was I brought forth;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> while as yet he had not made the earth,
nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> When he prepared the heavens I was there;
when he ordained the circle upon the face of the deep;

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> when he established the skies above, when
the fountains of the deep became strong;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> when he imposed on the sea his decree
that the waters should not pass his commandment, when he appointed the
foundations of the earth:

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> then I was by him \[his\] nursling, and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him;

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> rejoicing in the habitable part of his
earth, and my delights \[were\] with the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And now, sons, hearken unto me, and
blessed are they that keep my ways:

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> hear instruction and be wise, and refuse
it not.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Blessed is the man that heareth me,
watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whoso findeth me findeth life, and
obtaineth favour of Jehovah;

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> but he that sinneth against me doeth
violence to his own soul: all they that hate me love death.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Wisdom hath built her house, she hath hewn
out her seven pillars;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> she hath slaughtered her cattle, she hath
mingled her wine, she hath also prepared her table;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> she hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth
upon the summits of the high places of the city,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither. To
him that is void of understanding, she saith,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Come, eat ye of my bread, and drink of the
wine that I have mingled.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Forsake follies and live, and go in the way
of intelligence.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He that instructeth a scorner getteth to
himself shame; and he that reproveth a wicked \[man\] \[getteth\] to
himself a blot.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee;
reprove a wise \[man\], and he will love thee.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Impart to a wise \[man\], and he will
become yet wiser; teach a righteous \[man\], and he will increase
learning.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of
wisdom; and the knowledge of the Holy is intelligence.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For by me thy days shall be multiplied,
and years of life shall be added to thee.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If thou art wise, thou shalt be wise for
thyself; and if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> The foolish woman is clamorous; she is
stupid, and knoweth nothing.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And she sitteth at the entry of her
house, on a seat in the high places of the city,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> to call passers-by who go right on their
ways:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither.
And to him that is void of understanding she saith,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Stolen waters are sweet, and the bread of
secrecy is pleasant.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But he knoweth not that the dead are
there; \[that\] her guests are in the depths of Sheol.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> The Proverbs of Solomon. A wise son
maketh a glad father; but a foolish son is the grief of his mother.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Treasures of wickedness profit nothing;
but righteousness delivereth from death.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Jehovah suffereth not the soul of the
righteous \[man\] to famish; but he repelleth the craving of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He cometh to want that dealeth with a
slack hand; but the hand of the diligent maketh rich.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He that gathereth in summer is a wise
son; he that sleepeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Blessings are upon the head of a
righteous \[man\]; but the mouth of the wicked covereth violence.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The memory of the righteous \[man\] shall
be blessed; but the name of the wicked shall rot.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The wise in heart receiveth commandments;
but a prating fool shall fall.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He that walketh in integrity walketh
securely; but he that perverteth his ways shall be known.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> He that winketh with the eye causeth
grief, and a prating fool shall fall.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The mouth of a righteous \[man\] is a
fountain of life; but the mouth of the wicked covereth violence.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Hatred stirreth up strifes; but love
covereth all transgressions.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> In the lips of an intelligent \[man\]
wisdom is found; but a rod is for the back of him that is void of
understanding.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> The wise lay up knowledge; but the
mouth of the fool is near destruction.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city; the destruction of the poor is their poverty.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The labour of a righteous \[man\]
\[tendeth\] to life; the revenue of a wicked \[man\], to sin.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Keeping instruction is the path to
life; but he that forsaketh reproof goeth astray.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He that covereth hatred hath lying
lips, and he that sendeth forth a slander is a fool.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> In the multitude of words there wanteth
not transgression; but he that restraineth his lips doeth wisely.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> The tongue of the righteous \[man\] is
\[as\] choice silver; the heart of the wicked is little worth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The lips of a righteous \[man\] feed
many; but fools die for want of understanding.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The blessing of Jehovah, it maketh
rich, and he addeth no sorrow to it.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> It is as sport to a foolish \[man\] to
do wickedness; but a man of understanding hath wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The fear of a wicked \[man\], it shall
come upon him; but the desire of the righteous shall be granted.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> As a whirlwind passeth, so is the
wicked no \[more\]; but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke
to the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that send him.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The fear of Jehovah prolongeth days;
but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The hope of the righteous is joy; but
the expectation of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> The way of Jehovah is strength to the
perfect \[man\], but destruction to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> The righteous \[man\] shall never be
moved; but the wicked shall not inhabit the land.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The mouth of a righteous \[man\]
putteth forth wisdom; but the froward tongue shall be cut out.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> The lips of a righteous \[man\] know
what is acceptable; but the mouth of the wicked is frowardness.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> A false balance is an abomination to
Jehovah; but a just weight is his delight.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> \[When\] pride cometh, then cometh shame;
but with the lowly is wisdom.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The integrity of the upright guideth
them; but the crookedness of the unfaithful destroyeth them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Wealth profiteth not in the day of wrath;
but righteousness delivereth from death.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The righteousness of the perfect maketh
plain his way; but the wicked falleth by his own wickedness.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The righteousness of the upright
delivereth them; but the treacherous are taken in their own craving.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When a wicked man dieth, \[his\]
expectation shall perish; and the hope of evil \[men\] perisheth.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The righteous is delivered out of
trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> With his mouth a hypocrite destroyeth his
neighbour; but through knowledge are the righteous delivered.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When it goeth well with the righteous,
the city rejoiceth; and when the wicked perish, there is shouting.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By the blessing of the upright the city
is exalted; but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> He that despiseth his neighbour is void
of heart; but a man of understanding holdeth his peace.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> He that goeth about talebearing
revealeth secrets; but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the
matter.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Where no advice is, the people fall;
but in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> It goeth ill with him that is surety
for another; but he that hateth suretyship is secure.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> A gracious woman retaineth honour; and
the violent retain riches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The merciful man doeth good to his own
soul; but the cruel troubleth his own flesh.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> The wicked worketh a deceitful work;
but he that soweth righteousness hath a sure reward.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> As righteousness \[tendeth\] to life,
so he that pursueth evil \[doeth it\] to his own death.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> The perverse in heart are abomination
to Jehovah; but they that are perfect in \[their\] way are his delight.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Hand for hand! an evil \[man\] shall
not be held innocent; but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> A fair woman who is without discretion,
is \[as\] a gold ring in a swine's snout.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The desire of the righteous is only
good; the expectation of the wicked is wrath.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> There is that scattereth, and yet
increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is right, but \[it
tendeth\] only to want.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> The liberal soul shall be made fat, and
he that watereth shall be watered also himself.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> He that withholdeth corn, the people
curse him; but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> He that is earnest after good seeketh
favour; but he that searcheth for mischief, it shall come upon him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> He that trusteth in his riches shall
fall; but the righteous shall flourish as a leaf.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> He that troubleth his own house shall
inherit wind; and the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life; and the wise winneth souls.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Behold, the righteous shall be requited
on the earth: how much more the wicked and the sinner.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Whoso loveth discipline loveth knowledge,
but he that hateth reproof is brutish.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> A good \[man\] obtaineth favour of
Jehovah; but a man of mischievous devices will he condemn.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> A man shall not be established by
wickedness; but the root of the righteous shall not be moved.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A woman of worth is a crown to her
husband; but she that maketh ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The thoughts of the righteous are right;
the counsels of the wicked are deceit.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The words of the wicked are a
lying-in-wait for blood; but the mouth of the upright shall deliver
them.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Overthrow the wicked, and they are no
\[more\]; but the house of the righteous shall stand.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A man is commended according to his
wisdom; but he that is of a perverted heart shall be despised.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Better is he that is lightly esteemed,
and hath a servant, than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> A righteous man is concerned for the
life of his beast; but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He that tilleth his land shall be
satisfied with bread; but he that followeth the worthless is void of
understanding.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The wicked desireth the net of evil
\[men\]; but the root of the righteous yieldeth \[fruit\].

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> In the transgression of the lips is an
evil snare; but a righteous \[man\] shall go forth out of trouble.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> A man is satisfied with good by the
fruit of his mouth; and the recompense of a man's hands shall be
rendered unto him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The way of a fool is right in his own
eyes; but he that is wise hearkeneth unto counsel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The vexation of the fool is presently
known; but a prudent \[man\] covereth shame.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He that uttereth truth sheweth forth
righteousness; but a false witness deceit.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> There is that babbleth like the
piercings of a sword; but the tongue of the wise is health.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The lip of truth shall be established
for ever; but a lying tongue is but for a moment.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of them that
devise evil; but to the counsellors of peace is joy.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> There shall no evil happen to a
righteous \[man\]; but the wicked shall be filled with mischief.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Lying lips are an abomination to
Jehovah; but they that deal truly are his delight.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> A prudent man concealeth knowledge; but
the heart of the foolish proclaimeth folly.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The hand of the diligent shall bear
rule; but the slothful \[hand\] shall be under tribute.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it
stoop; but a good word maketh it glad.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> The righteous guideth his neighbour;
but the way of the wicked misleadeth them.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> The slothful roasteth not what he took
in hunting; but man's precious substance is to the diligent.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> In the path of righteousness is life,
and in the pathway thereof there is no death.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A wise son \[heareth\] his father's
instruction; but a scorner heareth not rebuke.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> A man shall eat good by the fruit of his
mouth; but the soul of the treacherous, violence.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He that guardeth his mouth keepeth his
soul; destruction shall be to him that openeth wide his lips.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> A sluggard's soul desireth and hath
nothing; but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> A righteous \[man\] hateth lying; but the
wicked maketh himself odious and cometh to shame.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Righteousness preserveth him that is
perfect in the way; but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> There is that feigneth himself rich, and
hath nothing; there is that maketh himself poor, and hath great wealth.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The ransom of a man's life is his riches;
but the indigent heareth not rebuke.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> The light of the righteous rejoiceth; but
the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> By pride there only cometh contention;
but with the well-advised is wisdom.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Wealth \[gotten\] by vanity
diminisheth; but he that gathereth by manual-labour shall increase
\[it\].

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Hope deferred maketh the heart sick;
but the desire \[that\] cometh to pass is a tree of life.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Whoso despiseth the word shall be held
by it; but he that feareth the commandment shall be rewarded.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The teaching of the wise \[man\] is a
fountain of life, to turn away from the snares of death.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Good understanding procureth favour;
but the way of the treacherous is hard.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Every prudent \[man\] acteth with
knowledge; but the foolish layeth open \[his\] folly.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> A wicked messenger falleth into evil;
but a faithful ambassador is health.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Poverty and shame shall be \[to\] him
that refuseth instruction; but he that regardeth reproof shall be
honoured.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The desire accomplished is sweet to the
soul; but it is abomination to the foolish to depart from evil.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> He that walketh with wise \[men\]
becometh wise; but a companion of the foolish will be depraved.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Evil pursueth sinners; but to the
righteous good shall be repaid.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> A good man leaveth an inheritance to
his children's children; but the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the
righteous \[man\].

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Much food is in the tillage of the
poor; but there is that is lost for want of judgment.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He that spareth his rod hateth his son;
but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The righteous eateth to the satisfying
of his soul; but the belly of the wicked shall want.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> The wisdom of women buildeth their house;
but folly plucketh it down with her hands.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He that walketh in his uprightness
feareth Jehovah; but he that is perverted in his ways despiseth him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> In the fool's mouth is a rod of pride;
but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where no oxen are, the crib is clean; but
much increase is by the strength of the ox.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> A faithful witness will not lie; but a
false witness uttereth lies.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> A scorner seeketh wisdom, and there is
none \[for him\]; but knowledge is easy unto the intelligent.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go from the presence of a foolish man, in
whom thou perceivest not the lips of knowledge.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The wisdom of the prudent is to discern
his way; but the folly of the foolish is deceit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Fools make a mock at trespass; but for
the upright there is favour.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The heart knoweth its own bitterness,
and a stranger doth not intermeddle with its joy.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The house of the wicked shall be
overthrown; but the tent of the upright shall flourish.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> There is a way that seemeth right unto
a man, but the end thereof is the ways of death.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of mirth is sadness.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The backslider in heart shall be filled
with his own ways, and the good man from what is in himself.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The simple believeth every word; but
the prudent \[man\] heedeth his going.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> A wise \[man\] feareth and departeth
from evil; but the foolish is overbearing and confident.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> He that is soon angry dealeth
foolishly, and a man of mischievous devices is hated.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The simple inherit folly; but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The evil bow before the good, and the
wicked at the gates of the righteous \[man\].

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> He that is poor is hated even of his
own neighbour; but the rich hath many friends.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He that despiseth his neighbour
sinneth; but he that is gracious to the afflicted, happy is he.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Do they not err that devise evil? but
loving-kindness and truth are for those that devise good.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In all labour there is profit; but the
talk of the lips \[tendeth\] only to want.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The crown of the wise is their riches;
the folly of the foolish is folly.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> A true witness delivereth souls; but
deceit uttereth lies.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> In the fear of Jehovah is strong
confidence, and his children shall have a place of refuge.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of
life, to turn away from the snares of death.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the multitude of people is the
king's glory; but in the lack of people is the ruin of a prince.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He that is slow to anger is of great
understanding; but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> A sound heart is the life of the flesh;
but envy the rottenness of the bones.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth
his Maker; but he that honoureth Him is gracious to the needy.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The wicked is driven away by his
evil-doing; but the righteous trusteth, \[even\] in his death.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Wisdom resteth in the heart of the
intelligent \[man\]; but that which is in the foolish maketh itself
known.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Righteousness exalteth a nation; but
sin is a reproach to peoples.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> The king's favour is toward a wise
servant; but his wrath is \[against\] him that causeth shame.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> A soft answer turneth away fury; but a
grievous word stirreth up anger.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The tongue of the wise useth knowledge
aright; but the mouth of the foolish poureth out folly.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The eyes of Jehovah are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Gentleness of tongue is a tree of life;
but crookedness therein is a breaking of the spirit.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> A fool despiseth his father's
instruction; but he that regardeth reproof becometh prudent.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> In the house of a righteous \[man\] is
much treasure; but in the revenue of a wicked \[man\] is disturbance.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The lips of the wise disperse knowledge,
but not so the heart of the foolish.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to Jehovah; but the prayer of the upright is his delight.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The way of a wicked \[man\] is an
abomination to Jehovah; but him that pursueth righteousness he loveth.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Grievous correction is for him that
forsaketh the path; he that hateth reproof shall die.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Sheol and destruction are before
Jehovah; how much more then the hearts of the children of men!

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> A scorner loveth not one that reproveth
him; he will not go unto the wise.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A joyful heart maketh a cheerful
countenance; but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The heart of an intelligent \[man\]
seeketh knowledge; but the mouth of the foolish feedeth on folly.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All the days of the afflicted are evil;
but a cheerful heart is a continual feast.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Better is little with the fear of
Jehovah than great store and disquietude therewith.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Better is a meal of herbs where love
is, than a fatted ox and hatred therewith.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> A furious man stirreth up contention;
but he that is slow to anger appeaseth strife.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The way of the sluggard is as a hedge
of thorns; but the path of the upright is made plain.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> A wise son maketh a glad father; but a
foolish man despiseth his mother.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Folly is joy to him that is void of
sense; but a man of understanding regulateth his walk.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Without counsel purposes are
disappointed; but in the multitude of counsellors they are established.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> A man hath joy by the answer of his
mouth; and a word in its season, how good is it!

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> The path of life is upwards for the
wise, that he may depart from Sheol beneath.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Jehovah plucketh up the house of the
proud; but he establisheth the boundary of the widow.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> The thoughts of the evil \[man\] are an
abomination to Jehovah; but pure words are pleasant.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> He that is greedy of gain troubleth his
own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The heart of a righteous \[man\]
studieth to answer; but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Jehovah is far from the wicked; but he
heareth the prayer of the righteous.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> That which enlighteneth the eyes
rejoiceth the heart; good tidings make the bones fat.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> The ear that heareth the reproof of
life shall abide among the wise.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> He that refuseth instruction despiseth
his own soul; but he that heareth reproof getteth sense.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The fear of Jehovah is the discipline
of wisdom, and before honour \[goeth\] humility.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The purposes of the heart are of man, but
the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> All the ways of a man are clean in his
own eyes; but Jehovah weigheth the spirits.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Commit thy works unto Jehovah, and thy
thoughts shall be established.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Jehovah hath wrought everything on his
own account, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Every proud heart is an abomination to
Jehovah: hand for hand, he shall not be held innocent.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> By loving-kindness and truth iniquity is
atoned for; and by the fear of Jehovah \[men\] depart from evil.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When a man's ways please Jehovah, he
maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Better is a little with righteousness,
than great revenues without right.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> The heart of man deviseth his way, but
Jehovah directeth his steps.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> An oracle is on the lips of the king:
his mouth will not err in judgment.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> The just balance and scales are
Jehovah's; all the weights of the bag are his work.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> It is an abomination to kings to commit
wickedness; for the throne is established by righteousness.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Righteous lips are the delight of
kings, and they love him that speaketh aright.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The fury of a king is \[as\] messengers
of death; but a wise man will pacify it.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the light of the king's countenance
is life, and his favour is as a cloud of the latter rain.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> How much better is it to get wisdom
than fine gold, and the getting of intelligence to be preferred to
silver!

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The highway of the upright is to depart
from evil: he that taketh heed to his way keepeth his soul.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Pride \[goeth\] before destruction, and
a haughty spirit before a fall.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Better is it to be of a humble spirit
with the meek, than to divide the spoil with the proud.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> He that giveth heed to the word shall
find good; and whoso confideth in Jehovah, happy is he.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The wise in heart is called
intelligent, and the sweetness of the lips increaseth learning.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Wisdom is a fountain of life for him
that hath it; but the instruction of fools is folly.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The heart of the wise maketh his mouth
intelligent, and upon his lips increaseth learning.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Pleasant words are \[as\] a honeycomb,
sweet to the soul, and health for the bones.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> There is a way that seemeth right unto
a man, but the end thereof is the ways of death.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> The appetite of the labourer laboureth
for him, for his mouth urgeth him on.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> A man of Belial diggeth up evil, and on
his lips there is as a scorching fire.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> A false man soweth contention; and a
talebearer separateth very friends.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> A violent man enticeth his neighbour,
and leadeth him into a way that is not good.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> He that shutteth his eyes, \[it is\] to
devise froward things; biting his lips, he bringeth evil to pass.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> The hoary head is a crown of glory,
\[if\] it is found in the way of righteousness.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> The lot is cast into the lap; but the
whole decision is of Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Better is a dry morsel, and quietness
therewith, than a house full of feasting \[with\] strife.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> A wise servant shall rule over a son that
causeth shame, and shall have part in the inheritance among the
brethren.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The fining-pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; but Jehovah trieth the hearts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> The evil-doer giveth heed to iniquitous
lips; the liar giveth ear to a mischievous tongue.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Whoso mocketh a poor \[man\] reproacheth
his Maker; he that is glad at calamity shall not be held innocent.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Children's children are the crown of old
men; and the glory of children are their fathers.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Excellent speech becometh not a vile
\[man\]; how much less do lying lips a noble!

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> A gift is a precious stone in the eyes of
the possessor: whithersoever it turneth it prospereth.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He that covereth transgression seeketh
love; but he that bringeth a matter up again separateth very friends.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> A reproof entereth more deeply into him
that hath understanding than a hundred stripes into a fool.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> An evil \[man\] seeketh only rebellion;
but a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a
man rather than a fool in his folly.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The beginning of contention is \[as\]
when one letteth out water; therefore leave off strife before it become
vehement.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He that justifieth the wicked, and he
that condemneth the righteous, even they both are abomination to
Jehovah.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> To what purpose is there a price in the
hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing \[he\] hath no sense?

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> The friend loveth at all times, and a
brother is born for adversity.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> A senseless man striketh hands,
becoming surety for his neighbour.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> He loveth transgression that loveth a
quarrel; he that maketh high his gate seeketh destruction.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> He that hath a perverse heart findeth
no good; and he that shifteth about with his tongue falleth into evil.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> He that begetteth a fool \[doeth it\]
to his sorrow, and the father of a vile \[man\] hath no joy.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> A joyful heart promoteth healing; but a
broken spirit drieth up the bones.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> A wicked \[man\] taketh a gift out of
the bosom, to pervert the paths of judgment.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Wisdom is before him that hath
understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> A foolish son is a grief to his father,
and bitterness to her that bore him.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> To punish a righteous \[man\] is not
good, nor to strike nobles because of \[their\] uprightness.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> He that hath knowledge spareth his
words; and a man of understanding is of a cool spirit.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Even a fool when he holdeth his peace
is reckoned wise, \[and\] he that shutteth his lips, intelligent.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> He that separateth himself seeketh
\[his\] pleasure, he is vehement against all sound wisdom.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> A fool hath no delight in understanding,
but only that his heart may reveal itself.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> When the wicked cometh, there cometh also
contempt, and with ignominy reproach.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The words of a man's mouth are deep
waters, \[and\] the fountain of wisdom is a gushing brook.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> It is not good to accept the person of
the wicked, to wrong the righteous in judgment.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> A fool's lips enter into contention, and
his mouth calleth for stripes.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> A fool's mouth is destruction to him, and
his lips are a snare to his soul.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The words of a talebearer are as dainty
morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He also who is indolent in his work is
brother of the destroyer.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The name of Jehovah is a strong tower:
the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city, and as a high wall in his own imagination.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Before destruction the heart of man is
haughty; and before honour \[goeth\] humility.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> He that giveth answer before he
heareth, it is folly and shame unto him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The spirit of a man sustaineth his
infirmity; but a broken spirit who can bear?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The heart of an intelligent \[man\]
getteth knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> A man's gift maketh room for him, and
bringeth him before great men.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> He that is first in his own cause
\[seemeth\] just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The lot causeth contentions to cease,
and parteth between the mighty.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> A brother offended is \[harder to be
won\] than a strong city; and contentions are as the bars of a palace.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> A man's belly is satisfied with the
fruit of his mouth; with the increase of his lips is he satisfied.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the
tongue, and they that love it shall eat the fruit thereof.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Whoso hath found a wife hath found a
good thing, and hath obtained favour from Jehovah.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> He that is poor speaketh with
supplications, but the rich answereth roughly.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> A man of \[many\] friends will come to
ruin but there is a friend \[that\] sticketh closer than a brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Better is a poor \[man\] that walketh in
his integrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fool.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Also that a person be without knowledge
is not good; and he that hasteth with his feet maketh false steps.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The folly of man distorteth his way, and
his heart is irritated against Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Wealth addeth many friends; but the poor
is separated from his friend.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> A false witness shall not be held
innocent, and he that uttereth lies shall not escape.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Many court the favour of a noble; and
every one is friend to a man that giveth.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> All the brethren of a poor \[man\] hate
him; how much more do his friends go far from him: he pursueth \[them\]
with words, -- they are not \[to be found\].

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He that getteth sense loveth his own
soul; he that keepeth understanding shall find good.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> A false witness shall not be held
innocent, and he that uttereth lies shall perish.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Good living beseemeth not a fool; how
much less for a servant to have rule over princes.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The discretion of a man maketh him slow
to anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> The king's displeasure is as the
roaring of a lion; but his favour is as dew upon the grass.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> A foolish son is the calamity of his
father; and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> House and wealth are an inheritance
from fathers; but a prudent wife is from Jehovah.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep,
and the idle soul shall suffer hunger.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> He that keepeth the commandment keepeth
his soul; he that is careless of his ways shall die.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He that is gracious to the poor lendeth
unto Jehovah; and what he hath bestowed will he repay unto him.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Chasten thy son, seeing there is hope;
but set not thy soul upon killing him.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> A man of great wrath shall suffer
punishment; for if thou deliver \[him\], yet thou must do it again.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Hear counsel, and receive instruction,
that thou mayest be wise in thy latter end.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Many are the thoughts in a man's heart,
but the counsel of Jehovah, that doth stand.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> The charm of a man is his kindness; and
a poor \[man\] is better than a liar.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The fear of Jehovah \[tendeth\] to
life, and he \[that hath it\] shall rest satisfied without being visited
with evil.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> A sluggard burieth his hand in the
dish, and will not even bring it to his mouth again.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Smite a scorner, and the simple will
beware; reprove the intelligent, and he will understand knowledge.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He that ruineth \[his\] father and
chaseth away \[his\] mother is a son that causeth shame and bringeth
reproach.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Cease, my son, to hear the instruction
which causeth to stray from the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> A witness of Belial scorneth judgment,
and the mouth of the wicked swalloweth down iniquity.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Judgments are prepared for scorners,
and stripes for the back of the foolish.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Wine is a scorner, strong drink is
raging; and whoso erreth thereby is not wise.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The terror of a king is as the roaring of
a lion: he that provoketh him to anger sinneth against his own soul.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It is an honour for a man to cease from
strife; but every fool rusheth into it.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The sluggard will not plough by reason of
the winter; he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Counsel in the heart of man is deep
water, and a man of understanding draweth it out.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Most men will proclaim every one his own
kindness; but a faithful man who shall find?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> The righteous walketh in his integrity:
blessed are his children after him!

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> A king sitting on the throne of judgment
scattereth away all evil with his eyes.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Who can say, I have made my heart clean,
I am pure from my sin?

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Divers weights, divers measures, even
both of them are abomination to Jehovah.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Even a child is known by his doings,
whether his work be pure, and whether it be right.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye,
Jehovah hath made even both of them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Love not sleep, lest thou come to
poverty; open thine eyes, \[and\] thou shalt be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Bad! bad! saith the buyer; but when he
is gone his way, then he boasteth.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> There is gold, and a multitude of
rubies; but the lips of knowledge are a precious Jewel.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Take his garment that is become surety
\[for\] another, and hold him in pledge for strangers.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Bread of falsehood is sweet to a man,
but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Plans are established by counsel; and
with good advice make war.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> He that goeth about talebearing
revealeth secrets; therefore meddle not with him that openeth his lips.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Whoso curseth his father or his mother,
his lamp shall be put out in the blackest darkness.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> An inheritance obtained hastily at the
beginning will not be blessed in the end.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Say not, I will recompense evil: wait
on Jehovah, and he shall save thee.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Divers weights are an abomination unto
Jehovah; and a false balance is not good.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> The steps of a man are from Jehovah;
and how can a man understand his own way?

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is a snare to a man rashly to say,
It is hallowed, and after vows to make inquiry.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A wise king scattereth the wicked, and
bringeth the wheel over them.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Man's spirit is the lamp of Jehovah,
searching all the inner parts of the belly.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Mercy and truth preserve the king; and
he upholdeth his throne by mercy.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The glory of young men is their
strength; and the beauty of old men is the grey head.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Wounding stripes purge away evil, and
strokes \[purge\] the inner parts of the belly.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The king's heart in the hand of Jehovah
is \[as\] brooks of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Every way of a man is right in his own
eyes; but Jehovah weigheth the hearts.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> To exercise justice and judgment is more
acceptable to Jehovah than sacrifice.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Lofty eyes, and a proud heart, the lamp
of the wicked, is sin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The thoughts of the diligent \[tend\]
only to plenteousness; but of every one that is hasty, only to want.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> The getting of treasures by a lying
tongue is a fleeting breath of them that seek death.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The devastation of the wicked sweepeth
them away, because they refuse to do what is right.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Very crooked is the way of a guilty man;
but as for the pure, his work is upright.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> It is better to dwell in a corner of the
housetop, than with a contentious woman, and a house in common.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The soul of the wicked desireth evil:
his neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> When the scorner is punished, the
simple becometh wise; and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth
knowledge.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> One that is righteous wisely
considereth the house of the wicked: he overthroweth the wicked to
\[their\] ruin.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of
the poor, he also himself shall cry, and shall not be heard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> A gift in secret pacifieth anger; and a
present in the bosom, vehement fury.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It is joy to a righteous \[man\] to do
what is right; but it is ruin for the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The man that wandereth out of the way
of wisdom shall abide in the congregation of the dead.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He that loveth mirth shall be a poor
man; he that loveth wine and oil shall not be rich.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The wicked is a ransom for the
righteous, and a treacherous \[man\] in the stead of the upright.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It is better to dwell in a desert land.
than with a contentious and irritable woman.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There is costly store and oil in the
dwelling of a wise \[man\]; but a foolish man swalloweth it up.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> He that followeth after righteousness
and mercy findeth life, righteousness, and honour.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> A wise \[man\] scaleth the city of the
mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue
keepeth his soul from troubles.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Proud, arrogant, scorner is his name
who dealeth in proud wrath.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The desire of the sluggard killeth him;
for his hands refuse to work:

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> He coveteth greedily all the day long;
but the righteous giveth and spareth not.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is
abomination: how much more when they bring it with a wicked purpose!

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> A lying witness shall perish; and a man
that heareth shall speak constantly.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> A wicked man hardeneth his face; but as
for the upright, he establisheth his way.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> There is no wisdom, nor understanding,
nor counsel against Jehovah.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The horse is prepared for the day of
battle; but safety is of Jehovah.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A \[good\] name is rather to be chosen
than great riches; loving favour rather than silver and gold.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The rich and poor meet together; Jehovah
is the maker of them all.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> A prudent \[man\] seeth the evil, and
hideth himself; but the simple pass on, and are punished.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> The reward of humility \[and\] the fear
of Jehovah is riches, and honour, and life.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Thorns \[and\] snares are in the way of
the perverse: he that keepeth his soul holdeth himself far from them.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Train up the child according to the tenor
of his way, and when he is old he will not depart from it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The rich ruleth over the poor; and the
borrower is servant to the lender.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He that soweth unrighteousness shall reap
iniquity, and the rod of his wrath shall have an end.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He that hath a bountiful eye shall be
blessed, for he giveth of his bread to the poor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Cast out the scorner, and contention
will depart, and strife and ignominy shall cease.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He that loveth pureness of heart, upon
whose lips is grace, the king is his friend.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> The eyes of Jehovah preserve knowledge;
but he overthroweth the words of the unfaithful.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The sluggard saith, There is a lion
without, I shall be killed in the streets!

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The mouth of strange women is a deep
ditch: he with whom Jehovah is displeased shall fall therein.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Folly is bound in the heart of a child;
the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He that oppresseth the poor, it is to
enrich him; he that giveth to the rich, \[bringeth\] only to want.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Incline thine ear, and hear the words
of the wise, and apply thy heart unto my knowledge.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep
them within thee: they shall be together fitted on thy lips.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> That thy confidence may be in Jehovah,
I have made \[them\] known to thee this day, even to thee.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Have not I written to thee excellent
things, in counsels and knowledge,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> that I might make thee know the
certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest carry back words of
truth to them that send thee?

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Rob not the poor, because he is poor,
neither oppress the afflicted in the gate;

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> for Jehovah will plead their cause, and
despoil the soul of those that despoil them.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Make no friendship with an angry man,
and go not with a furious man;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> lest thou learn his paths, and get a
snare to thy soul.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Be not of them that strike hands, of
them that are sureties for debts:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> if thou hast nothing to pay, why should
he take away thy bed from under thee?

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Remove not the ancient landmark which
thy fathers have set.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Hast thou seen a man diligent in his
work? He shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before the mean.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> When thou sittest to eat with a ruler,
consider well who is before thee;

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> and put a knife to thy throat, if thou be
a man given to appetite.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Be not desirous of his dainties; for they
are deceitful food.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Weary not thyself to become rich; cease
from thine own intelligence:

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> wilt thou set thine eyes upon it, it is
gone; for indeed it maketh itself wings and it flieth away as an eagle
towards the heavens.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Eat thou not the food of him that hath an
evil eye, neither desire thou his dainties.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> For as he thinketh in his soul, so is he.
Eat and drink! will he say unto thee; but his heart is not with thee.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Thy morsel which thou hast eaten must
thou vomit up, and thou wilt have wasted thy sweet words.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Speak not in the ears of a foolish
\[man\], for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Remove not the ancient landmark; and
enter not into the fields of the fatherless:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> for their redeemer is mighty; he will
plead their cause against thee.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Apply thy heart unto instruction, and
thine ears to the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Withhold not correction from the child;
for \[if\] thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not die:

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> thou shalt beat him with the rod, and
shalt deliver his soul from Sheol.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart
shall rejoice, even mine;

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> and my reins shall exult, when thy lips
speak right things.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Let not thy heart envy sinners, but
\[be thou\] in the fear of Jehovah all the day;

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> for surely there is a result, and thine
expectation shall not be cut off.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Thou, my son, hear and be wise, and
direct thy heart in the way.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Be not among winebibbers, among riotous
eaters of flesh.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> For the drunkard and the glutton shall
come to poverty; and drowsiness clotheth with rags.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Hearken unto thy father that begat
thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Buy the truth, and sell it not; wisdom,
and instruction, and intelligence.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> The father of a righteous \[man\] shall
greatly rejoice, and he that begetteth a wise \[son\] shall have joy of
him:

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> let thy father and thy mother have joy,
and let her that bore thee rejoice.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> My son, give me thy heart, and let
thine eyes observe my ways.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> For a whore is a deep ditch; and a
strange woman is a narrow pit.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> She also lieth in wait as a robber, and
increaseth the treacherous among men.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Who hath woe? Who hath sorrow? Who
contentions? Who complaining? Who wounds without cause? Who redness of
eyes?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> -- They that tarry long at the wine;
they that go to try mixed wine.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Look not upon the wine when it is red,
when it sparkleth in the cup, and goeth down smoothly:

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> at the last it biteth like a serpent,
and stingeth like an adder.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thine eyes shall behold strange women,
and thy heart shall speak froward things;

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> and thou shalt be as he that lieth down
in the midst of the sea, and as he that lieth down upon the top of a
mast:

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> -- ''They have smitten me, \[and\] I am
not sore; they have beaten me, \[and\] I knew it not. When shall I
awake? I will seek it yet again.''

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Be not thou envious of evil men, neither
desire to be with them;

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> for their heart studieth destruction, and
their lips talk of mischief.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Through wisdom is a house built, and by
understanding it is established;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> and by knowledge are the chambers filled
with all precious and pleasant substance.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A wise man is strong, and a man of
knowledge increaseth strength.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For with good advice shalt thou make thy
war; and in the multitude of counsellors there is safety.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Wisdom is too high for a fool: he will
not open his mouth in the gate.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> He that deviseth to do evil shall be
called a master of intrigues.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The purpose of folly is sin, and the
scorner is an abomination to men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> \[If\] thou losest courage in the day
of trouble, thy strength is small.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Deliver them that are taken forth unto
death, and withdraw not from them that stagger to slaughter.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not,
will not he that weigheth the hearts consider it? And he that preserveth
thy soul, he knoweth it; and he rendereth to man according to his work.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Eat honey, my son, for it is good; and
a honeycomb is sweet to thy taste:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> so consider wisdom for thy soul; if
thou hast found it, there shall be a result, and thine expectation shall
not be cut off.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Lay not wait, O wicked \[man\], against
the dwelling of the righteous; lay not waste his resting-place.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> For the righteous falleth seven times,
and riseth up again; but the wicked stumble into disaster.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth,
and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> lest Jehovah see it, and it be evil in
his sight, and he turn away his anger from him.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Fret not thyself because of evil-doers,
\[and\] be not envious of the wicked:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> for there shall be no future to the
evil \[man\]; the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> My son, fear Jehovah and the king:
meddle not with them that are given to change.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> For their calamity shall rise suddenly;
and who knoweth the ruin of them both?

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> These things also come from the wise.
It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> He that saith unto the wicked, Thou art
righteous, peoples shall curse him, nations shall abhor him;

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> but to them that rebuke \[him\] shall
be delight, and a good blessing cometh upon them.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> He kisseth the lips who giveth a right
answer.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Prepare thy work without, and put thy
field in order, and afterwards build thy house.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Be not a witness against thy neighbour
without cause; and wouldest thou deceive with thy lips?

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Say not, I will do so to him as he hath
done to me, I will render to the man according to his work.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> I went by the field of a sluggard, and
by the vineyard of a man void of understanding;

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> and lo, it was all grown over with
thistles, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and its stone wall
was broken down.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Then I looked, I took it to heart; I
saw, I received instruction:

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> -- A little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to rest!

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> So shall thy poverty come \[as\] a
roving plunderer, and thy penury as an armed man.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> These are also proverbs of Solomon, which
the men of Hezekiah king of Judah transcribed.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to conceal a
thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a thing.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> The heavens for height, and the earth for
depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Take away the dross from the silver, and
there cometh forth a vessel for the refiner:

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> take away the wicked from before the
king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Put not thyself forward in the presence
of the king, and stand not in the place of the great;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> for better it is that it be said unto
thee, Come up hither, than that thou shouldest be put lower in the
presence of the prince whom thine eyes see.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Go not forth hastily to strive, lest
\[thou know not\] what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath
put thee to shame.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Debate thy cause with thy neighbour, but
reveal not the secret of another;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> lest he that heareth \[it\] disgrace
thee, and thine evil report turn not away.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> \[As\] apples of gold in pictures of
silver, is a word spoken in season.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> An ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of
fine gold, is a wise reprover upon an attentive ear.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, \[so\] is a faithful messenger to them that send him: for he
refresheth the soul of his masters.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Clouds and wind without rain, \[so\] is
a man that boasteth himself of a false gift.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> By long forbearing is a ruler
persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Hast thou found honey? Eat so much as
is sufficient for thee, lest thou be surfeited therewith, and vomit it.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Let thy foot be seldom in thy
neighbour's house; lest he be weary of thee and hate thee.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> A maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow,
is a man that beareth false witness against his neighbour.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> A broken tooth, and a tottering foot,
is confidence in an unfaithful \[man\] in the day of trouble.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> \[As\] he that taketh off a garment in
cold weather, \[and as\] vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs
to a sad heart.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> If thine enemy be hungry, give him
bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink:

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> for thou shalt heap coals of fire upon
his head, and Jehovah shall reward thee.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> The north wind bringeth forth rain, and
the angry countenance a backbiting tongue.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> It is better to dwell in a corner of
the housetop, than with a contentious woman, and a house in common.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> \[As\] cold waters to a thirsty soul,
so is good news from a far country.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> A troubled fountain, and a defiled
well, is a righteous \[man\] that giveth way before the wicked.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> It is not good to eat much honey; and
to search into weighty matters is \[itself\] a weight.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> He that hath no rule over his own
spirit is \[as\] a city broken down, without walls.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> As snow in summer, and as rain in
harvest, so honour beseemeth not a fool.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> As the sparrow for flitting about, as the
swallow for flying, so a curse undeserved shall not come.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A whip for the horse, a bridle for the
ass, and a rod for the back of fools.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Answer not a fool according to his folly,
lest thou also be like unto him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own eyes.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He that sendeth a message by the hand of
a fool cutteth off \[his own\] feet, \[and\] drinketh damage.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The legs of the lame hang loose; so is a
proverb in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> As a bag of gems in a stoneheap, so is he
that giveth honour to a fool.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> \[As\] a thorn goeth up into the hand of
a drunkard, so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> A master roughly worketh every one: he
both hireth the fool and hireth passers-by.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> As a dog turneth back to its vomit,
\[so\] a fool repeateth his folly.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Hast thou seen a man wise in his own
eyes? There is more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> The sluggard saith, There is a fierce
lion in the way; a lion is in the midst of the streets!

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> \[As\] the door turneth upon its
hinges, so the sluggard upon his bed.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The sluggard burieth his hand in the
dish: it wearieth him to bring it again to his mouth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> A sluggard is wiser in his own eyes
than seven \[men\] that answer discreetly.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> He that passing by vexeth himself with
strife belonging not to him, is \[like\] one that taketh a dog by the
ears.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> As a madman who casteth firebrands,
arrows, and death,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> so is a man that deceiveth his
neighbour, and saith, Am I not in sport?

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Where no wood is, the fire goeth out;
and where there is no talebearer, the contention ceaseth.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> \[As\] coals for hot coals, and wood
for fire, so is a contentious man to inflame strife.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> The words of a talebearer are as dainty
morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Ardent lips, and a wicked heart, are
\[as\] an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> He that hateth dissembleth with his
lips, but he layeth up deceit within him:

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> when his voice is gracious, believe him
not, for there are seven abominations in his heart.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> Though \[his\] hatred is covered by
dissimulation, his wickedness shall be made manifest in the
congregation.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein;
and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> A lying tongue hateth those that are
injured by it, and a flattering mouth worketh ruin.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Boast not thyself of to-morrow, for thou
knowest not what a day will bring forth.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Let another praise thee, and not thine
own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty;
but a fool's vexation is heavier than them both.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Fury is cruel, and anger is outrageous;
but who is able to stand before jealousy?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Open rebuke is better than hidden love.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but
the kisses of an enemy are profuse.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The full soul trampleth on a honeycomb;
but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> As a bird that wandereth from her nest,
so is a man that wandereth from his place.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart;
and the sweetness of one's friend is \[the fruit\] of hearty counsel.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Thine own friend, and thy father's
friend, forsake not; and go not into thy brother's house in the day of
thy calamity: better is a neighbour that is near than a brother far off.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Be wise, my son, and make my heart
glad, that I may have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> A prudent \[man\] seeth the evil,
\[and\] hideth himself; the simple pass on, \[and\] are punished.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Take his garment that is become surety
\[for\] another, and hold him in pledge for a strange woman.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He that blesseth his friend with a loud
voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be reckoned a curse to him.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> A continual dropping on a very rainy
day and a contentious woman are alike:

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> whosoever will restrain her restraineth
the wind, and his right hand encountereth oil.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Iron is sharpened by iron; so a man
sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat
the fruit thereof; and he that guardeth his master shall be honoured.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> As \[in\] water face \[answereth\] to
face, so the heart of man to man.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Sheol and destruction are insatiable;
so the eyes of man are never satisfied.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The fining-pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; so let a man be to the mouth that praiseth him.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> If thou shouldest bray a fool in a
mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not his folly depart from
him.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Be well acquainted with the appearance
of thy flocks; look well to thy herds:

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> for wealth is not for ever; and doth
the crown \[endure\] from generation to generation?

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The hay is removed, and the tender
grass sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered in.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> The lambs are for thy clothing, and the
goats are the price of a field;

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> and there is goats' milk enough for thy
food, for the food of thy household, and sustenance for thy maidens.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The wicked flee when no man pursueth; but
the righteous are bold as a lion.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> By the transgression of a land many are
the princes thereof; but by a man of understanding \[and\] of knowledge,
\[its\] stability is prolonged.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A poor man who oppresseth the helpless is
a sweeping rain which leaveth no food.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> They that forsake the law praise the
wicked; but such as keep the law contend with them.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Evil men understand not judgment; but
they that seek Jehovah understand everything.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Better is the poor that walketh in his
integrity, than he that is perverse, double in ways, though he be rich.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Whoso observeth the law is a son that
hath understanding; but he that is a companion of profligates bringeth
shame to his father.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> He that by usury and unjust gain
increaseth his substance gathereth it for him that is gracious to the
poor.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He that turneth away his ear from hearing
the law, even his prayer is an abomination.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Whoso causeth the upright to go astray
in an evil way, shall himself fall into his own pit; but the perfect
shall inherit good.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> A rich man is wise in his own eyes; but
the poor that hath understanding searcheth him out.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When the righteous triumph, there is
great glory; but when the wicked rise, men conceal themselves.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> He that covereth his transgressions
shall not prosper; but whoso confesseth and forsaketh \[them\] shall
obtain mercy.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Happy is the man that feareth always;
but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into evil.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> A roaring lion, and a ranging bear, is
a wicked ruler over a poor people.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> The prince void of intelligence is also
a great oppressor: he that hateth covetousness shall prolong \[his\]
days.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> A man laden with the blood of \[any\]
person, fleeth to the pit: let no man stay him.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Whoso walketh in integrity shall be
saved; but he that is perverted in \[his\] double ways, shall fall in
one \[of them\].

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> He that tilleth his land shall be
satisfied with bread; but he that followeth the worthless shall have
poverty enough.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> A faithful man aboundeth with
blessings; but he that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> To have respect of persons is not good;
but for a piece of bread will a man transgress.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> He that hath an evil eye hasteth after
wealth, and knoweth not that poverty shall come upon him.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> He that rebuketh a man shall afterwards
find more favour than he that flattereth with the tongue.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Whoso robbeth his father and his
mother, and saith, It is no transgression, the same is the companion of
a destroyer.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> He that is puffed up in soul exciteth
contention; but he that relieth upon Jehovah shall be made fat.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> He that confideth in his own heart is a
fool; but whoso walketh wisely, he shall be delivered.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> He that giveth unto the poor shall not
lack; but he that withdraweth his eyes shall have many a curse.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> When the wicked rise, men hide
themselves; but when they perish, the righteous increase.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> He that being often reproved hardeneth
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and without remedy.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> When the righteous increase, the people
rejoice; but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father;
but he that is a companion of harlots destroyeth \[his\] substance.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> A king by just judgment establisheth the
land; but he that taketh gifts overthroweth it.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> A man that flattereth his neighbour
spreadeth a net for his steps.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> In the transgression of an evil man there
is a snare; but the righteous shall sing and rejoice.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> The righteous taketh knowledge of the
cause of the poor; the wicked understandeth not knowledge.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Scornful men set the city in a flame; but
the wise turn away anger.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> If a wise man contendeth with a fool,
whether he rage or laugh, \[he\] hath no rest.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The bloodthirsty hate the perfect, but
the upright care for his soul.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> A fool uttereth all his mind; but a
wise \[man\] keepeth it back.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> If a ruler hearken to lying words, all
his servants are wicked.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The indigent and the oppressor meet
together; Jehovah lighteneth the eyes of them both.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> A king that faithfully judgeth the
poor, his throne shall be established for ever.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> The rod and reproof give wisdom; but a
child left \[to himself\] bringeth his mother to shame.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> When the wicked increase, transgression
increaseth; but the righteous shall see their fall.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Chasten thy son, and he shall give thee
rest, and shall give delight unto thy soul.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Where there is no vision the people
cast off restraint; but happy is he that keepeth the law.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> A servant is not corrected by words: he
understandeth indeed, but he will not answer.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Hast thou seen a man hasty in his
words? there is more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> He that delicately bringeth up his
servant from a child, shall in the end have him as a son.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> An angry man exciteth contention; and a
furious man aboundeth in transgression.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> A man's pride bringeth him low; but the
humble in spirit shall obtain honour.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Whoso shareth with a thief hateth his
own soul: he heareth the adjuration, and declareth not.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> The fear of man bringeth a snare; but
whoso putteth his confidence in Jehovah is protected.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Many seek the ruler's face; but a man's
right judgment is from Jehovah.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> An unjust man is an abomination to the
righteous; and he that is of upright way is an abomination to the wicked
\[man\].

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The words of Agur the son of Jakeh; the
prophecy uttered by the man unto Ithiel, \[even\] unto Ithiel and Ucal:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Truly \*I\* am more stupid than any one;
and I have not a man's intelligence.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> I have neither learned wisdom, nor have I
the knowledge of the Holy.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who hath ascended up into the heavens,
and descended? Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound
the waters in a mantle? Who hath established all the ends of the earth?
What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou knowest?

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Every word of +God is pure: he is a
shield unto them that put their trust in him.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Add thou not unto his words, lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Two things do I ask of thee; deny me
\[them\] not before I die:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Remove far from me vanity and lies; give
me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the bread of my daily need:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> lest I be full and deny \[thee\], and
say, Who is Jehovah? or lest I be poor and steal, and outrage the name
of my God.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Speak not too much about a servant to
his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be held guilty.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> There is a generation that curseth
their father, and doth not bless their mother;

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> there is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, yet are not washed from their filthiness;

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> there is a generation, -- how lofty are
their eyes, how their eyelids are lifted up!

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> -- a generation whose teeth are swords,
and their jaw-teeth knives, to devour the afflicted from off the earth,
and the needy from \[among\] men.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The leech hath two daughters: Give,
give. There are three \[things\] never satisfied; four which say not, It
is enough:

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> -- Sheol, and the barren womb; the
earth which is not filled with water, and the fire which saith not, It
is enough.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The eye that mocketh at a father, and
despiseth to obey a mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out,
and the young eagles shall eat it.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> There are three \[things\] too
wonderful for me, and four that I know not:

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> The way of an eagle in the heavens, the
way of a serpent upon a rock, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea,
and the way of a man with a maid.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Such is the way of an adulterous woman:
she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Under three \[things\] the earth is
disquieted, and under four it cannot bear up:

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Under a servant when he reigneth, and a
churl when he is filled with meat;

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> under an odious \[woman\] when she is
married, and a handmaid when she is heir to her mistress.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> There are four \[things\] little upon
the earth, and they are exceeding wise:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> The ants, a people not strong, yet they
provide their food in the summer;

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> the rock-badgers are but a feeble folk,
yet they make their house in the cliff;

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> the locusts have no king, yet they go
forth all of them by bands;

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> thou takest hold of the lizard with the
hands, yet is she in kings' palaces.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> There are three \[things\] which have a
stately step, and four are comely in going:

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> The lion, mighty among beasts, which
turneth not away for any;

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> a \[horse\] girt in the loins; or the
he-goat; and a king, against whom none can rise up.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> If thou hast done foolishly in lifting
up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, \[lay\] the hand upon thy
mouth.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For the pressing of milk bringeth forth
butter, and the pressing of the nose bringeth forth blood; and the
pressing of anger bringeth forth strife.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy
that his mother taught him:

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> What, my son? and what, O son of my womb?
and what, O son of my vows?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy
ways to them that destroy kings.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> It is not for kings, Lemuel, it is not
for kings to drink wine, nor for rulers \[to say\], Where is the strong
drink?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> -- lest they drink and forget the law,
and pervert the judgment of any of the children of affliction.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Give strong drink unto him that is ready
to perish, and wine unto the bitter of soul:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> let him drink, and forget his poverty,
and remember his misery no more.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Open thy mouth for the dumb, for the
cause of all those that are left desolate.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and
minister justice to the afflicted and needy.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Who can find a woman of worth? for her
price is far above rubies.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The heart of her husband confideth in
her, and he shall have no lack of spoil.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> She doeth him good, and not evil, all
the days of her life.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> She seeketh wool and flax, and worketh
willingly with her hands.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> She is like the merchants' ships: she
bringeth her food from afar;

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And she riseth while it is yet night,
and giveth meat to her household, and the day's work to her maidens.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> She considereth a field, and acquireth
it; of the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> She girdeth her loins with strength,
and maketh strong her arms.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> She perceiveth that her earning is
good; her lamp goeth not out by night.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> She putteth her hands to the distaff,
and her hands hold the spindle.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> She stretcheth out her hand to the
afflicted, and she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> She is not afraid of the snow for her
household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> She maketh herself coverlets; her
clothing is byssus and purple.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Her husband is known in the gates, when
he sitteth among the elders of the land.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> She maketh body linen and selleth it,
and delivereth girdles unto the merchant.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Strength and dignity are her clothing,
and she laugheth \[at\] the coming day.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and
upon her tongue is the law of kindness.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> She surveyeth the ways of her
household, and eateth not the bread of idleness.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Her children rise up and call her
blessed; her husband \[also\], and he praiseth her:

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Many daughters have done worthily, but
thou excellest them all.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Gracefulness is deceitful and beauty is
vain; a woman \[that\] feareth Jehovah, she shall be praised.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands, and
let her own works praise her in the gates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes](ecc.md)
