[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jdg)  [Next](sa1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Ruth

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And it came to pass in the days when the
judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man
went from Bethlehem-Judah, to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and
his wife, and his two sons.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the name of the man was Elimelech, and
the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and
Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem-Judah. And they came into the country
of Moab, and continued there.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she
was left, and her two sons.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And they took them Moabitish wives; the
name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the second Ruth: and they
abode there about ten years.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And Mahlon and Chilion died also, both of
them; and the woman was left of her two children and of her husband.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And she arose, she and her
daughters-in-law, and returned from the fields of Moab; for she had
heard in the fields of Moab how that Jehovah had visited his people to
give them bread.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Wherefore she went forth out of the place
where she had been, and her two daughters-in-law with her; and they went
on the way to return to the land of Judah.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law,
Go, return each to her mother's house. Jehovah deal kindly with you, as
ye have dealt with the dead and with me.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Jehovah grant you that ye may find rest,
each in the house of her husband. And she kissed them; and they lifted
up their voice and wept.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And they said to her, We will certainly
return with thee to thy people.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And Naomi said, Return, my daughters: why
will ye go with me? Are there yet sons in my womb, that they could be
your husbands?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Return, my daughters, go; for I am too
old to have a husband. If I should say, I have hope, should I even have
a husband to-night, and should I also bear sons,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> would ye wait on that account till they
were grown? Would ye stay on that account from having husbands? No, my
daughters, for I am in much more bitterness than you; for the hand of
Jehovah is gone out against me.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And they lifted up their voice and wept
again. And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth clave to her.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And she said, Behold, thy sister-in-law
is gone back to her people and to her gods: return after thy
sister-in-law.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Ruth said, Do not intreat me to leave
thee, to return from \[following\] after thee; for whither thou goest I
will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge: thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> where thou diest will I die, and there
will I be buried. Jehovah do so to me, and more also, if aught but death
part me and thee!

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And when she saw that she was stedfastly
minded to go with her, she left off speaking to her.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they two went until they came to
Bethlehem. And it came to pass, when they came to Bethlehem, that all
the city was moved about them, and the \[women\] said, Is this Naomi?

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And she said to them, Call me not Naomi
-- call me Mara; for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> I went out full, and Jehovah has brought
me home again empty. Why do ye call me Naomi, seeing Jehovah has brought
me low, and the Almighty has afflicted me?

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> So Naomi returned, and Ruth the
Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, who returned out of the fields
of Moab; and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of the
barley-harvest.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Naomi had a relation of her husband's,
a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and his name was
Boaz.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, Let
me, I pray, go to the field and glean among the ears of corn after
\[him\] in whose sight I shall find favour. And she said to her, Go, my
daughter.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And she went; and she came and gleaned in
the fields after the reapers; and she chanced to light on an allotment
of Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem; and
he said to the reapers, Jehovah be with you! And they said to him,
Jehovah bless thee!

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And Boaz said to his servant that was set
over the reapers, Whose maiden is this?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish maiden who came back with
Naomi out of the fields of Moab;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> and she said, I pray you, let me glean and
gather among the sheaves after the reapers. And she came, and has
continued from the morning until now: her sitting in the house has been
little as yet.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Boaz said to Ruth, Hearest thou not, my
daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from here, but
keep here with my maidens.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Let thine eyes be on the field which is
being reaped, and go thou after them; have I not charged the young men
not to touch thee? And when thou art athirst, go to the vessels and
drink of what the young men draw.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Then she fell on her face, and bowed
herself to the ground, and said to him, Why have I found favour in thine
eyes, that thou shouldest regard me, seeing I am a foreigner?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And Boaz answered and said to her, It has
fully been shewn me, all that thou hast done to thy mother-in-law since
the death of thy husband; and how thou hast left thy father and thy
mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come to a people that thou
hast not known heretofore.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Jehovah recompense thy work, and let thy
reward be full from Jehovah the God of Israel, under whose wings thou
art come to take refuge.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And she said, Let me find favour in thine
eyes, my lord; for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast
spoken kindly to thy handmaid, though I am not like one of thy
handmaidens.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Boaz said to her at mealtime, Come
hither and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she
sat beside the reapers; and he reached her parched corn, and she ate and
was sufficed, and reserved \[some\].

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And when she rose up to glean, Boaz
commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves,
and ye shall not reproach her.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And ye shall also sometimes draw out for
her \[some ears\] out of the handfuls, and leave them that she may
glean, and rebuke her not.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And she gleaned in the field until even,
and beat out what she had gleaned; and it was about an ephah of barley.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And she took \[it\] up, and came into the
city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned; and she brought
forth and gave to her that which she had reserved after she was
sufficed.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And her mother-in-law said to her, Where
hast thou gleaned to-day? and where hast thou wrought? Blessed be he
that did regard thee! And she told her mother-in-law with whom she had
wrought, and said, The man's name with whom I wrought to-day is Boaz.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law,
Blessed be he of Jehovah, who has not left off his kindness to the
living and to the dead! And Naomi said to her, The man is near of kin to
us, one of those who have the right of our redemption.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said to
me also, Thou shalt keep with my young men until they have ended all my
harvest.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And Naomi said to Ruth her
daughter-in-law, It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his
maidens, that they meet thee not in any other field.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> So she kept with the maidens of Boaz to
glean, until the end of the barley-harvest and of the wheat-harvest. And
she dwelt with her mother-in-law.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Naomi her mother-in-law said to her, My
daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And now, is not Boaz of our kindred, with
whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he is winnowing barley in the
threshing-floor to-night.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thyself,
and put thy raiment upon thee, and go down to the floor; make not
thyself known to the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And it shall be, when he lies down, that
thou shalt mark the place where he shall have lain down, and thou shalt
go in, and uncover his feet, and lay thyself down; and he will shew thee
what thou shalt do.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And she said to her, All that thou sayest
will I do.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And she went down to the floor, and did
according to all that her mother-in-law had bidden her.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And Boaz ate and drank, and his heart was
merry, and he went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn. Then she
went softly, and uncovered his feet, and laid herself down.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And it came to pass at midnight, that the
man was startled, and turned himself; and behold, a woman lay at his
feet.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he said, Who art thou? And she
answered, I am Ruth, thy handmaid: spread thy skirt over thy handmaid;
for thou hast the right of redemption.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said, Blessed be thou of Jehovah,
my daughter! Thou hast shewn more kindness at the end than at the first,
inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And now, my daughter, fear not: all that
thou sayest will I do to thee; for all the gate of my people knows that
thou art a woman of worth.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And now, truly I am one that has the
right of redemption, yet there is one that has the right of redemption
who is nearer than I.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Stay over to-night, and it shall be in
the morning, if he will redeem thee, well -- let him redeem; but if he
like not to redeem thee, then will I redeem thee, \[as\] Jehovah liveth.
Lie down until the morning.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And she lay at his feet until the
morning; and she rose up before one could know another. And he said, Let
it not be known that a woman came into the threshing-floor.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And he said, Bring the cloak that thou
hast upon thee, and hold it. And she held it, and he measured six
\[measures\] of barley, and laid \[it\] on her; and he went into the
city.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And she came to her mother-in-law; and
she said, Who art thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man
had done to her.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And she said, These six \[measures\] of
barley gave he me; for he said to me, Go not empty to thy mother-in-law.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Then she said, Be still, my daughter,
until thou know how the matter will fall; for the man will not rest
until he have completed the matter this day.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Boaz went up to the gate, and sat down
there. And behold, he that had the right of redemption, of whom Boaz had
spoken, came by. And he said, Thou, such a one, turn aside, sit down
here. And he turned aside and sat down.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he took ten men of the elders of the
city, and said, Sit down here. And they sat down.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he said to him that had the right of
redemption: Naomi, who is come back out of the country of Moab, sells
the allotment that was our brother Elimelech's.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And I thought I would apprise thee of it
and say, Buy \[it\] in the presence of the inhabitants, and in the
presence of the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem \[it\], redeem;
but if thou wilt not redeem, tell me, that I may know; for there is none
to redeem besides thee; and I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem
\[it\].

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And Boaz said, On the day thou buyest the
field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy \[it\] also of Ruth the
Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon
his inheritance.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And he that had the right of redemption
said, I cannot redeem \[it\] for myself, lest I mar mine own
inheritance. Redeem thou for thyself what I should redeem, for I cannot
redeem \[it\].

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Now this \[was the custom\] in former time
in Israel concerning redemption and concerning exchange, to confirm the
whole matter: a man drew off his sandal, and gave it to his neighbour,
and this was the \[mode of\] attestation in Israel.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And he that had the right of redemption
said to Boaz, Buy for thyself; and he drew off his sandal.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And Boaz said to the elders and all the
people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was
Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of
Naomi;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of
Mahlon, have I purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead
upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut off from
among his brethren and from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this
day.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And all the people that were in the gate
and the elders said, \[We are\] witnesses. Jehovah make the woman that
cometh into thy house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the
house of Israel; and acquire power in Ephratah, and make thyself a name
in Bethlehem;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> and let thy house become like the house
of Pherez, whom Tamar bore to Judah, of the seed which Jehovah shall
give thee of this young woman.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And Boaz took Ruth, and she became his
wife; and he went in unto her, and Jehovah gave her conception, and she
bore a son.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the women said to Naomi, Blessed be
Jehovah who hath not left thee this day without one that has the right
of redemption, and may his name be famous in Israel!

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he shall be to thee a restorer of thy
life, and a nourisher of thine old age; for thy daughter-in-law who
loves thee, who is better to thee than seven sons, has borne him.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Naomi took the child, and laid it in
her bosom, and became nurse to it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the women \[her\] neighbours gave it
a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi. And they called his name
Obed. He is the father of Jesse, the father of David.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Now these are the generations of Pherez.
Pherez begot Hezron,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> and Hezron begot Ram, and Ram begot
Amminadab,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and Amminadab begot Nahshon, and Nahshon
begot Salmon,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and Salmon begot Boaz, and Boaz begot
Obed,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and Obed begot Jesse, and Jesse begot
David.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Samuel](sa1.md)
