[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th1)  [Next](ti1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 2 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus to the
assembly of Thessalonians in God our Father and \[the\] Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace from God our
Father, and \[the\] Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We ought to thank God always for you,
brethren, even as it is meet, because your faith increases exceedingly,
and the love of each one of you all towards one another abounds;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> so that we ourselves make our boast in you
in the assemblies of God for your endurance and faith in all your
persecutions and tribulations, which ye are sustaining;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> a manifest token of the righteous judgment
of God, to the end that ye should be counted worthy of the kingdom of
God, for the sake of which ye also suffer;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> if at least \[it is a\] righteous thing
with God to render tribulation to those that trouble you,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and to you that are troubled repose with
us, at the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with \[the\] angels
of his power,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> in flaming fire taking vengeance on those
who know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings of our Lord
Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> who shall pay the penalty \[of\]
everlasting destruction from \[the\] presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of his might,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> when he shall have come to be glorified
in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed, (for our
testimony to you has been believed,) in that day.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To which end we also pray always for you,
that our God may count you worthy of the calling, and fulfil all \[the\]
good pleasure of \[his\] goodness and \[the\] work of faith with power,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> so that the name of our Lord Jesus
\[Christ\] may be glorified in you and \*ye\* in him, according to the
grace of our God, and of \[the\] Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now we beg you, brethren, by the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> that ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor
troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as \[if it
were\] by us, as that the day of the Lord is present.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let not any one deceive you in any manner,
because \[it will not be\] unless the apostasy have first come, and the
man of sin have been revealed, the son of perdition;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> who opposes and exalts himself on high
against all called God, or object of veneration; so that he himself sits
down in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Do ye not remember that, being yet with
you, I said these things to you?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And now ye know that which restrains, that
he should be revealed in his own time.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the mystery of lawlessness already
works; only \[there is\] he who restrains now until he be gone,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and then the lawless one shall be revealed,
whom the Lord Jesus shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and
shall annul by the appearing of his coming;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> whose coming is according to the working of
Satan in all power and signs and wonders of falsehood,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and in all deceit of unrighteousness to
them that perish, because they have not received the love of the truth
that they might be saved.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And for this reason God sends to them a
working of error, that they should believe what is false,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that all might be judged who have not
believed the truth, but have found pleasure in unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But we ought to give thanks to God always
for you, brethren beloved of \[the\] Lord, that God has chosen you from
\[the\] beginning to salvation in sanctification of \[the\] Spirit and
belief of \[the\] truth:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> whereto he has called you by our glad
tidings, to \[the\] obtaining of \[the\] glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So then, brethren, stand firm, and hold
fast the instructions which ye have been taught, whether by word or by
our letter.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
our God and Father, who has loved us, and given \[us\] eternal
consolation and good hope by grace,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> encourage your hearts, and establish you
in every good work and word.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For the rest, brethren, pray for us, that
the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, even as also with you;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and that we may be delivered from bad and
evil men, for faith \[is\] not \[the portion\] of all.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But the Lord is faithful, who shall
establish you and keep \[you\] from evil.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But we trust in the Lord as to you, that
the things which we enjoin, ye both do and will do.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But the Lord direct your hearts into the
love of God, and into the patience of the Christ.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Now we enjoin you, brethren, in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw from every brother walking
disorderly and not according to the instruction which he received from
us.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For ye know yourselves how ye ought to
imitate us, because we have not walked disorderly among you;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> nor have we eaten bread from any one
without cost; but in toil and hardship working night and day not to be
chargeable to any one of you:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not that we have not the right, but that we
might give ourselves as an example to you, in order to your imitating
us.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For also when we were with you we
enjoined you this, that if any man does not like to work, neither let
him eat.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For we hear that \[there are\] some
walking among you disorderly, not working at all, but busybodies.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Now such we enjoin and exhort in \[the\]
Lord Jesus Christ, that working quietly they eat their own bread.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But \*ye\*, brethren, do not faint in
well-doing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But if any one obey not our word by the
letter, mark that man, and do not keep company with him, that he may be
ashamed of himself;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and do not esteem him as an enemy, but
admonish \[him\] as a brother.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> But the Lord of peace himself give you
peace continually in every way. The Lord \[be\] with you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The salutation by the hand of me, Paul,
which is \[the\] mark in every letter; so I write.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ \[be\]
with you all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy](ti1.md)
