[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti1)  [Next](tit) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: 2 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by God's
will, according to promise of life, the \[life\] which \[is\] in Christ
Jesus,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to Timotheus, \[my\] beloved child: grace,
mercy, peace, from God \[the\] Father, and Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I am thankful to God, whom I serve from
\[my\] forefathers with pure conscience, how unceasingly I have the
remembrance of thee in my supplications night and day,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> earnestly desiring to see thee, remembering
thy tears, that I may be filled with joy;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> calling to mind the unfeigned faith which
\[has been\] in thee, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in
thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For which cause I put thee in mind to
rekindle the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For God has not given us a spirit of
cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not therefore ashamed of the testimony
of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but suffer evil along with the glad
tidings, according to the power of God;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> who has saved us, and has called us with a
holy calling, not according to our works, but according to \[his\] own
purpose and grace, which \[was\] given to us in Christ Jesus before
\[the\] ages of time,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but has been made manifest now by the
appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who has annulled death, and
brought to light life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> to which \*I\* have been appointed a
herald and apostle and teacher of \[the\] nations.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For which cause also I suffer these
things; but I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded that he is able to keep for that day the deposit I have
entrusted to him.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Have an outline of sound words, which
\[words\] thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which \[are\] in
Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in
us, the good deposit entrusted.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Thou knowest this, that all who \[are\]
in Asia, of whom is Phygellus and Hermogenes, have turned away from me.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The Lord grant mercy to the house of
Onesiphorus, for he has often refreshed me, and has not been ashamed of
my chain;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> but being in Rome sought me out very
diligently, and found \[me\] --

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> the Lord grant to him to find mercy from
\[the\] Lord in that day -- and how much service he rendered in Ephesus
\*thou\* knowest best.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the
grace which \[is\] in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the things thou hast heard of me in the
presence of many witnesses, these entrust to faithful men, such as shall
be competent to instruct others also.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Take thy share in suffering as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> No one going as a soldier entangles himself
with the affairs of life, that he may please him who has enlisted him as
a soldier.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And if also any one contend \[in the
games\], he is not crowned unless he contend lawfully.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The husbandman must labour before partaking
of the fruits.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Think of what I say, for the Lord will give
thee understanding in all things.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Remember Jesus Christ raised from among
\[the\] dead, of \[the\] seed of David, according to my glad tidings,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> in which I suffer even unto bonds as an
evil-doer: but the word of God is not bound.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For this cause I endure all things for
the sake of the elect, that \*they\* also may obtain the salvation which
\[is\] in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The word \[is\] faithful; for if we have
died together with \[him\], we shall also live together;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> if we endure, we shall also reign
together; if we deny, \*he\* also will deny us;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> if we are unfaithful, \*he\* abides
faithful, for he cannot deny himself.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Of these things put in remembrance,
testifying earnestly before the Lord not to have disputes of words,
profitable for nothing, to the subversion of the hearers.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Strive diligently to present thyself
approved to God, a workman that has not to be ashamed, cutting in a
straight line the word of truth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But profane, vain babblings shun, for
they will advance to greater impiety,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> and their word will spread as a gangrene;
of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> \[men\] who as to the truth have gone
astray, saying that the resurrection has taken place already; and
overthrow the faith of some.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Yet the firm foundation of God stands,
having this seal, \[The\] Lord knows those that are his; and, Let every
one who names the name of \[the\] Lord withdraw from iniquity.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But in a great house there are not only
gold and silver vessels, but also wooden and earthen; and some to
honour, and some to dishonour.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> If therefore one shall have purified
himself from these, \[in separating himself from them\], he shall be a
vessel to honour, sanctified, serviceable to the Master, prepared for
every good work.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But youthful lusts flee, and pursue
righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord
out of a pure heart.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> But foolish and senseless questionings
avoid, knowing that they beget contentions.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And a bondman of \[the\] Lord ought not
to contend, but be gentle towards all; apt to teach; forbearing;

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> in meekness setting right those who
oppose, if God perhaps may sometime give them repentance to
acknowledgment of \[the\] truth,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> and that they may awake up out of the
snare of the devil, \[who are\] taken by him, for \*his\* will.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> But this know, that in \[the\] last days
difficult times shall be there;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> for men shall be lovers of self, lovers of
money, boastful, arrogant, evil speakers, disobedient to parents,
ungrateful, profane,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> without natural affection, implacable,
slanderers, of unsubdued passions, savage, having no love for what is
good,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> traitors, headlong, of vain pretensions,
lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> having a form of piety but denying the
power of it: and from these turn away.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For of these are they who are getting into
houses, and leading captive silly women, laden with sins, led by various
lusts,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> always learning, and never able to come to
\[the\] knowledge of \[the\] truth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now in the same manner in which Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, thus these also withstand the truth; men
corrupted in mind, found worthless as regards the faith.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But they shall not advance farther; for
their folly shall be completely manifest to all, as that of those also
became.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But \*thou\* hast been thoroughly
acquainted with my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering,
love, endurance,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> persecutions, sufferings: what
\[sufferings\] happened to me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra; what
persecutions I endured; and the Lord delivered me out of all.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And all indeed who desire to live piously
in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But wicked men and juggling impostors
shall advance in evil, leading and being led astray.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But \*thou\*, abide in those things which
thou hast learned, and \[of which\] thou hast been fully persuaded,
knowing of whom thou hast learned \[them\];

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and that from a child thou hast known the
sacred letters, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which \[is\] in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Every scripture \[is\] divinely inspired,
and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> that the man of God may be complete,
fully fitted to every good work.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I testify before God and Christ Jesus, who
is about to judge living and dead, and by his appearing and his kingdom,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> proclaim the word; be urgent in season
\[and\] out of season, convict, rebuke, encourage, with all
longsuffering and doctrine.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the time shall be when they will not
bear sound teaching; but according to their own lusts will heap up to
themselves teachers, having an itching ear;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and they will turn away their ear from the
truth, and will have turned aside to fables.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But \*thou\*, be sober in all things, bear
evils, do \[the\] work of an evangelist, fill up the full measure of thy
ministry.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For \*I\* am already being poured out, and
the time of my release is come.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> I have combated the good combat, I have
finished the race, I have kept the faith.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Henceforth the crown of righteousness is
laid up for me, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will render to me
in that day; but not only to me, but also to all who love his appearing.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Use diligence to come to me quickly;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> for Demas has forsaken me, having loved
the present age, and is gone to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus
to Dalmatia.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Luke alone is with me. Take Mark, and
bring \[him\] with thyself, for he is serviceable to me for ministry.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> The cloak which I left behind \[me\] in
Troas at Carpus's, bring when thou comest, and the books, especially the
parchments.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Alexander the smith did many evil things
against me. The Lord will render to him according to his works.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Against whom be \*thou\* also on thy
guard, for he has greatly withstood our words.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> At my first defence no man stood with me,
but all deserted me. May it not be imputed to them.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But the Lord stood with \[me\], and gave
me power, that through me the proclamation might be fully made, and all
\[those of\] the nations should hear; and I was delivered out of the
lion's mouth.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The Lord shall deliver me from every
wicked work, and shall preserve \[me\] for his heavenly kingdom; to whom
\[be\] glory for the ages of ages. Amen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the house
of Onesiphorus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Erastus remained in Corinth, but
Trophimus I left behind in Miletus sick.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Use diligence to come before winter.
Eubulus salutes thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and the
brethren all.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The Lord Jesus Christ \[be\] with your
spirit. Grace \[be\] with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus](tit)
