[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hab)  [Next](hag) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Darby Bible: Zephaniah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Jehovah that came unto
Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the
son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> I will utterly take away everything from
off the face of the ground, saith Jehovah:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I will take away man and beast; I will take
away the fowl of the heavens and the fishes of the sea, and the
stumbling-blocks with the wicked, and I will cut off mankind from off
the face of the ground, saith Jehovah.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And I will stretch forth my hand upon
Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the
remnant of Baal from this place, the name of the Chemarim with the
priests;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and them that bow down to the host of the
heavens upon the housetops; and them that bow down to Jehovah, that
swear by \[him\], and swear by Malcham;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> and them that turn back from after Jehovah,
and that do not seek Jehovah, nor inquire for him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Be silent at the presence of the Lord
Jehovah; for the day of Jehovah is at hand; for Jehovah hath prepared a
sacrifice, he hath hallowed his guests.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And it shall come to pass in the day of
Jehovah's sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the king's
sons, and all such as are clothed with foreign apparel.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And in that day will I punish all those
that leap over the threshold, who fill their master's house with
violence and deceit.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And in that day, saith Jehovah, there
shall be the noise of a cry from the fish-gate, and a howling from the
second \[quarter\], and a great crashing from the hills.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh; for all
the people of Canaan are cut down, all they that are laden with silver
are cut off.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And it shall come to pass at that time,
\[that\] I will search Jerusalem with lamps, and punish the men that are
settled on their lees, that say in their heart, Jehovah will not do
good, neither will he do evil.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And their wealth shall become a booty,
and their houses a desolation; and they shall build houses, and not
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and not drink the wine
thereof.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The great day of Jehovah is near, it is
near, and hasteth greatly. The voice of the day of Jehovah: the mighty
man shall cry there bitterly.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> That day is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of ruin and desolation, a day of darkness
and gloom, a day of clouds and gross darkness,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> a day of the trumpet and alarm, against
the fenced cities and against the high battlements.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I will bring distress upon men, and
they shall walk like blind men; for they have sinned against Jehovah;
and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as dung:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> their silver and their gold shall not be
able to deliver them, in the day of Jehovah's wrath; but the whole land
shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for a full end, yea, a
sudden \[end\], shall he make of all them that dwell in the land.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Collect yourselves and gather together, O
nation without shame,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> before the decree bring forth, \[before\]
the day pass away as chaff, before the fierce anger of Jehovah come upon
you, before the day of Jehovah's anger come upon you.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Seek Jehovah, all ye meek of the land, who
have performed his ordinance; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may
be ye shall be hid in the day of Jehovah's anger.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For Gazah shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon
shall be a desolation; they shall drive out Ashdod at noonday, and Ekron
shall be rooted up.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea-coast,
the nation of the Cherethites! The word of Jehovah is against you, O
Canaan, land of the Philistines: I will destroy thee, that there shall
be no inhabitant;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> and the sea-coast shall be cave-dwellings
for shepherds, and folds for flocks.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the coast shall be for the remnant of
the house of Judah; they shall feed thereon: in the houses of Ashkelon
shall they lie down in the evening: for Jehovah their God shall visit
them, and turn again their captivity.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the
revilings of the children of Ammon, wherewith they have reproached my
people, and magnified themselves against their border.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore, \[as\] I live, saith Jehovah of
hosts, the God of Israel, Moab shall certainly be as Sodom, and the
children of Ammon as Gomorrah, a possession of nettles, and salt-pits,
and a perpetual desolation; the remnant of my people shall spoil them,
and the residue of my nation shall possess them.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> This shall they have for their pride,
because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people
of Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Jehovah will be terrible unto them; for
he will famish all the gods of the earth; and all the isles of the
nations shall worship him, every one from his place.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be the slain
of my sword.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he will stretch out his hand against
the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, a
place of drought like the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And flocks shall lie down in the midst of
her, all the crowd of beasts; both the pelican and the bittern shall
lodge in the chapiters thereof; a voice shall sing in the windows;
desolation shall be on the thresholds: for he hath laid bare the cedar
work.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> This is the rejoicing city that dwelt in
security, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none else beside
me: how is she become a desolation, a couching-place for beasts! Every
one that passeth by her shall hiss, shall wave his hand.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Woe to her that is rebellious and
corrupted, to the oppressing city!

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> She hearkened not to the voice; she
received not correction; she confided not in Jehovah; she drew not near
her God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Her princes in the midst of her are roaring
lions; her judges are evening wolves, that leave nothing for the
morning.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Her prophets are vain-glorious, treacherous
persons; her priests profane the sanctuary, they do violence to the law.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> The righteous Jehovah is in the midst of
her: he doeth no wrong. Every morning doth he bring his judgment to
light; it faileth not: but the unrighteous knoweth no shame.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I have cut off nations: their battlements
are desolate; I made their streets waste, that none passeth by; their
cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, so that there is no
inhabitant.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I said, Only fear me, receive correction;
so her dwelling shall not be cut off, howsoever I may punish her. But
they rose early, they corrupted all their doings.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Therefore wait ye for me, saith Jehovah,
until the day that I rise up to the prey; for my determination is to
assemble the nations, that I may gather the kingdoms together, to pour
upon them mine indignation, -- all my fierce anger: for all the earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For then will I turn to the peoples a pure
language, that they may all call upon the name of Jehovah, to serve him
with one consent.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> From beyond the rivers of Cush my
suppliants, the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine oblation.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> In that day thou shalt not be ashamed for
all thy doings wherein thou hast transgressed against me; for then I
will take away out of the midst of thee them that exult in thy pride,
and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy mountain.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And I will leave in the midst of thee an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of Jehovah.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The remnant of Israel shall not work
unrighteousness, nor speak lies; neither shall a deceitful tongue be
found in their mouth: but \*they\* shall feed and lie down, and none
shall make them afraid.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Exult, O daughter of Zion; shout, O
Israel; rejoice and be glad with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Jehovah hath taken away thy judgments, he
hath cast out thine enemy; the King of Israel, Jehovah, is in the midst
of thee; thou shalt not see evil any more.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> In that day it shall be said to
Jerusalem, Fear not; Zion, let not thy hands be slack.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Jehovah thy God is in thy midst, a mighty
one that will save: he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in
his love; he will exult over thee with singing.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I will gather them that sorrow for the
solemn assemblies, who were of thee: the reproach of it was a burden
\[unto them\].

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Behold, at that time I will deal with all
them that afflict thee; and I will save her that halted, and gather her
that was driven out; and I will make them a praise and a name in all the
lands where they have been put to shame.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> At that time will I bring you, yea, at
the time that I gather you; for I will make you a name and a praise,
among all the peoples of the earth, when I shall turn again your
captivity before your eyes, saith Jehovah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai](hag)
