[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hc01)  [Next](hc03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486444015/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of My Misfortunes*, by Peter Abelard, tr. Henry Adams
Bellows, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER I

#### OF THE BIRTHPLACE OF PIERRE ABELARD AND OF HIS PARENTS

    KNOW, then, that I am come from a certain town which was built on
the way into lesser Brittany, distant some eight miles, as I think,
eastward from the city of Nantes, and in its own tongue called Palets.
Such is the nature of that country, or, it may be, of them who dwell
there—for in truth they are quick in fancy—that my mind bent itself
easily to the study of letters. Yet more, I had a father who had won
some smattering of letters before he had girded on the soldier's belt.
And so it came about that long afterwards his love thereof was so strong
that he saw to it that each son of his should be taught in letters even
earlier than in the management of arms. Thus indeed did it come to pass.
And because I was his first born, and for that reason the more dear to
him, he sought with double diligence to have me wisely taught. For my
part, the more I went forward in the study of letters, and ever more
easily, the greater became the ardour of my devotion to them, until in
truth I was so enthralled by my passion for learning that, gladly
leaving to my brothers the pomp of glory in arms, the right of heritage
and all the honours that should have been mine as the eldest born, I
fled utterly from the court of Mars that I might win learning in the
bosom of Minerva. And—since I found the armory of logical reasoning more
to my liking than the other forms of philosophy, I exchanged all other
weapons for these, and to the prizes of victory in war I preferred the
battle of minds in disputation. Thenceforth, journeying through many
provinces, and debating as I went, going whithersoever I heard that the
study of my chosen art most flourished, I became such an one as the
Peripatetics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Of The Persecution He Had...](hc03)
