[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hc05)  [Next](hc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486444015/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of My Misfortunes*, by Peter Abelard, tr. Henry Adams
Bellows, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V

#### OF HOW HE RETURNED TO PARIS AND FINISHED THE GLOSSES WHICH HE HAD BEGUN AT LAON

    AND so, after a few days, I returned to Paris, and there for several
years I peacefully directed the school which formerly had been destined
for me, nay, even offered to me, but from which I had been driven out.
At the very outset of my work there, I set about completing the glosses
on Ezekiel which I had begun at Laon. These proved so satisfactory to
all who read them that they came to believe me no less adept in
lecturing on theology than I had proved myself to be in the field of
philosophy. Thus my school was notably increased in size by reason of my
lectures on subjects of both these kinds, and the amount of financial
profit as well as glory which it brought me cannot be concealed from
you, for the matter talked of. But prosperity always puffs up the
foolish and worldly comfort enervates the soul, rendering it an easy
prey to carnal temptations. Thus I who by this time had come to regard
myself as the only philosopher remaining in the whole world, and had
ceased to fear any further disturbance of my peace, began to loosen the
rein on my desires, although hitherto I had always lived in the utmost
continence. And the greater progress I made in my lecturing on
philosophy or theology, the more I departed alike from the practice of
the philosophers and the spirit of the divines in the uncleanness of my
life. For it is well known, methinks, that philosophers, and still more
those who have devoted their lives to arousing the love of sacred study,
have been strong above all else in the beauty of chastity.

    Thus did it come to pass that while I was utterly absorbed in pride
and sensuality, divine grace, the cure for both diseases, was forced
upon me, even though I, forsooth would fain have shunned it. First was I
punished for my sensuality, and then for my pride. For my sensuality I
lost those things whereby I practiced it; for my pride, engendered in me
by my knowledge of letters and it is even as the Apostle said:
"Knowledge puffeth itself up" (I Cor. viii. 1)—I knew the humiliation of
seeing burned the very book in which I most gloried. And now it is my
desire that you should know the stories of these two happenings,
understanding them more truly from learning the very facts than from
hearing what is spoken of them, and in the order in which they came
about. Because I had ever held in abhorrence the foulness of
prostitutes, because I had diligently kept myself from all excesses and
from association with the women of noble birth who attended the school,
because I knew so little of the common talk of ordinary people, perverse
and subtly flattering chance gave birth to an occasion for casting me
lightly down from the heights of my own exaltation. Nay, in such case
not even divine goodness could redeem one who, having been so proud, was
brought to such shame, were it not for the blessed gift of grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of How, Brought Low By His Love For Heloise, He Was
Wounded In Body And Soul](hc07)
