[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap01) [Next](chap03)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER II. </span>

ABRAHAM'S EARLY LIFE IN UR.-- HUMAN SACRIFICES.--CAUSES WHICH LED
ABRAHAM TO LEAVE CHALDEA.--CONFIRMATORY TESTIMONY OF JOSHUA, JOSEPHUS,
THE BOOK OF JUDITH, ETC.

OF the early history of Abraham's life very little is said in the Book
of Genesis. The mere fact is stated that his father's dwelling place was
in Ur of the Chaldees, where the patriarch married his kinswoman Sarai,
where also his brother Haran died.\[<a href="#foot1" id="text1">1</a>\]
After these events, it is recorded, Terah, his father, took a portion of
the family and removed to Haran, where he dwelt until the day of his
death, but the causes that led to his removal are not given. The next
chapter opens with the command of God to Abraham, "Get thee out of thy
country, and from thy kindred," etc., but the reasons why God gave him
that command are not mentioned, not even hinted at. The Book of Abraham
supplies many interesting details on this point not to be found in the
history given by Moses, and that the details thus supplied are
consistent with the condition of life in Egypt and Chaldea at that time,
and in many respects corroborated by the writings and sayings of men
living in later ages, it now becomes our business to prove.

Abraham states, in the second paragraph, into which his book has been
divided, that his fathers had "turned from their righteousness and from
the holy commandments which the Lord their God had given unto them, unto
the worship of the gods of the heathens," and that "they turned their
hearts to the sacrifice of the heathen in offering up their children
unto their dumb idols." In the next paragraph it is written, "Now at
this time it was the custom of the priest of Pharaoh, the king of Egypt,
to offer up upon the altar which had been built in the land of Chaldea,
for the offering unto these strange gods, men, women and children." A
little further on Abraham writes, "And it came to pass that the priests
laid violence upon me that they might slay me also. \* \* \* And as they
lifted up their hands upon me that they might offer me up and take away
my life, behold, I lifted up my voice unto the Lord my God, and the Lord
hearkened and heard, and he filled me with a vision of the Almighty, and
the angel of his presence stood by me, and immediately unloosed my
bands, and his voice was unto me, Abraham! Abraham! behold, my name is
Jehovah, and I have heard thee, and I have come down to deliver thee,
and to take thee away from thy father's house, and from all thy
kinsfolk, into a strange land that thou knowest not of, and this because
they have turned their hearts away from me, to worship the god of
Elkenah, and the god of Lebnah, and the god of Mahmack-rah, and the god
of Korash, and the god of Pharaoh, king of Egypt; therefore I am come
down to visit them, and to destroy him who hath lifted up his hand
against thee, Abraham, my son, to take away thy life."

To substantiate the truthfulness of the above statements, we ought to be
able to bring testimony in favor of four points:

1st, That human sacrifice was practiced in Egypt and adjacent countries
in Abraham's day.

2d, That Abraham's fathers were idolaters.

3d, That he was persecuted by his fellow countrymen because he opposed
their idolatry.

4th, That God commanded Abraham to leave Chaldea, because his father's
house had turned their hearts away from him to the worship of strange
gods.

If the above points can be proven by other testimony than that of the
Book of Abraham, we think we have strong evidence that the record is
historically correct. Admit this, and we have taken a very decided step
towards acknowledging the authenticity of the entire work. For it is
very improbable, nay, almost absurd, to imagine that Joseph Smith, with
his limited range of ancient historical knowledge, could have produced a
work of this kind that would be historically correct. Had the work been
a forgery, that is, had it originated with Joseph Smith, the
probabilities are overwhelming that he would have made some egregious
blunders, which could easily have been detected, and the whole affair,
from beginning to end, proven a tissue of falsehoods.

Firstly, then, we have to show that human sacrifices were offered to the
strange gods of the heathen in Abraham's day; more particularly in
Egypt, as it is represented that it was the priest of Pharaoh who
officiated on the occasions mentioned by the patriarch.

To substantiate this point we shall make but one quotation, as its
author mentions so many other historians, ancient and modern, as his
authorities, that in quoting it we call upon them to become our
witnesses also. It is taken from Dissertation II, Whiston's Josephus,
and is as follows: "It is evident from Sanchoniatho, Manetho, Pausanias,
Diodorus, Siculus, Philo, Plutarch and Porphyry, that such \[human\]
sacrifices were frequent both in Phoenicia and Egypt, and that long
before the days of Abraham, as Sir John Marsham and Bishop Cumberland
have fully proved: nay, that in other places (though not in Egypt) this
cruel practice continued long after Abraham."

We may here draw attention to the statement that this cruel practice did
not continue in Egypt after Abraham's day, owing, we doubt not, as will
hereafter be shown, to the great influence that that patriarch wielded
in later life with Pharaoh and his subjects, in favor of a more perfect
way of serving heaven.

Again, that Abraham's fathers were idolaters, though the book of Genesis
carries no such inferences, as also that Abraham was commanded by
Jehovah to leave his father's house because of this idolatry, is proven,
we consider, by the following extracts. We will first turn to the Book
of Judith, in the Apocrypha (chap, v, verses 6 to 9). It is there
represented that when the invading hosts of the king of Nineveh were
approaching the land of Israel, the commanding general made some
inquiries with regard to the history of its people. Then Achior, the
captain of all the sons of Ammon, in answer to his inquiries, replied:
"This people are descended of the Chaldeans, and they sojourned
heretofore in Mesopotamia, because they would not follow the gods of
their fathers which were in the land of Chaldea. For they left the way
of their ancestors, and worshiped the God of heaven, the God whom they
knew, so they cast them out from the face of their gods, and they fled
into Mesopotamia and sojourned there many days."

From the above it is very evident that the facts relating to the "call
of Abraham" were not only well known to the Hebrews, but to the people
of the surrounding nations also. As Achior was one in high authority
among the sons of Ammou, his words under the peculiar circumstances in
which they were uttered, would carry great weight, and if unauthorized
would meet with severe criticism and probable contradiction.

But the question is forever set at rest by the words of a greater than
Achior. Joshua, the valiant, God-fearing leader of Israel, shortly
before his death, gathered the people together and rehearsed in their
hearing the great things the Lord had beforetime done for them. It is
written that at this time\[<a href="#foot2" id="text2">2</a>\] "Joshua
said unto all the people, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Your
fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time, even Terah,
the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and they served other
Gods. And I took your father Abraham from the other-side of the flood
and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed."
And again,\[<a href="#foot3" id="text3">3</a>\] "Now, therefore, fear
the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in truth, and put away the gods
which your fathers served on the other side of the flood and in Egypt,
and serve ye the Lord. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord,
choose ye this day whom ye will serve, whether the gods your fathers
served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the
Amorites, in whose land ye dwell; but as for me and my house, we will
serve the Lord." Further evidence than this we deem unnecessary, as here
we have the end of all controversy, even the word of the Lord on the
matter.

We cannot prove, directly from the writings of any authors at our
disposal, that an attempt was made to take Abraham's life for
righteousness' sake; but we can show from the "Antiquities" of Josephus
that he was maltreated for that cause. This historian, after referring
to the doctrines taught by Abraham, regarding God, writes, "for which
doctrines, when the Chaldeans and other people of Mesopotamia raised a
tumult against him, he thought fit to leave that country; and at the
command and by the assistance of God, he came and lived in the land of
Canaan."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text1" id="foot1">1</a>\] Genesis, chap. xi.

\[<a href="#text2" id="foot2">2</a>\] Joshua, chap, xxiv, v. 2, 3.

\[<a href="#text3" id="foot3">3</a>\] Joshua, xxiv, v. 14, 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](chap03)
