[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap04) [Next](chap06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER V. </span>

THE ANCIENT PAGAN MYSTERIES.--THEIR HISTORY AND INTENT.--THE CIRCULAR
PLATE IN THE BOOK OF ABRAHAM.--ITS PUPORT AND USE.

WE now turn to another interesting feature of this phase of the subject.

In the explanation given by the Prophet Joseph of the disc or circu­lar
cut accompanying the Book of Abraham, he states: "Fig. 3 is made to
represent God sitting upon his throne, clothed with power and
author­ity, with a crown of eternal light upon his head, representing,
also, the grand key words of the holy priesthood, as revealed to Adam in
the Gar­den of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchisedek, Abraham, and
all to whom the priesthood was revealed." Fig. 7 also contains "the
grand key words of the Priesthood." God having delivered these powers of
the heavenly kingdom to "all to whom the priesthood was revealed," until
Abraham's day, it would be but natural to suppose that as men gradual­ly
departed from the truth they would still endeavor to retain these sacred
trusts in their midst; and however much they might depart from the
purity of the faith proclaimed and practised by the ancient patri­archs
they would still strive to perpetuate the knowledge these "keys"
conveyed, that they might have a claim on the blessings of the world to
come. It is so natural to humanity to claim the blessings of God's word
long after they have ceased to regard its obligations.

The fact of these things appearing in the Book of Abraham, written in
hieroglyphics, renders it very supposable that at one time the import of
these revelations was comprehended by those among the Egyptians who
received the teachings of Abraham; and so far as Jewish tradition is
concerned, it is full of references to these matters, though these
latter, perhaps, more directly centre in the rites of the temples at
Jerusalem. It is our province to show that the recollection of these
things was sought to be perpetuated amongst the heathen--originating, as
usual, in Egypt long after the greater portion of that which was pure
and holy in the principles with which these things had been associated,
by the ministers of the word of Jehovah, was lost sight of in the
teachings and practices of these gentile nations. To do this we must
call attention to the so-called secret "mysteries" of the ancients,
which, to us, seem clearly, in their origin, to have been attempts to
imitate the administrations of the holy priesthood, in the sacred rites
appertoining to the fulness of the Gospel. In the investigation of this
point we are greatly indebted to M. Faber's researches into the
"Mysteries of the Cabiri," and to other authors who have enlarged upon
his researches.

According to one of the gentlemen above referred to, "some of these
mysteries were expressly instituted, as there is good reason to believe,
to preserve in remembrance the remains of pure primeval faith and
worship." Another states, "every ancient people possessed its mysteries,
which had for their object to uphold the religious truths that animate
the hope of immortality, or in which were observed rites intended to
explain and enforce the conduct suitable to those who cherished and
wished to realize that hope." What took place in the administration of
these mysteries is very difficult for the inquirer to discover, for they
were "conducted in secret, and those who were permitted to take part in
them were solemnly obliged not to divulge what they had seen and
learned," the word mystery itself being derived from a Greek word
signifying to "shut the lips." However, from what can be learned it is
believed that the initiated were "powerfully appealed to by scenic or
other modes of representing the condition of the good and bad."
According to a writer in the American Cyclopaedia, "they consisted, in
general, of rites of purification and expiation, of sacrifices and
processions, of ecstatic or orgiastic songs and dances, of nocturnal
festivals fit to impress the imagination, and of spectacles designed to
excite the most diverse emotions, terror and trust, and sorrow and joy,
hope and despair. The celebration was chiefly by symbolical acts and
spectacles, yet sacred mystical words, formulas, fragments of liturgies
or hymns were also employed. There were likewise certain objects with
which occult meanings, that were imparted to the initiated, were
associated, or which were used in the various ceremonies in the
ascending scale of initiation. The sacred phrases, concerning which
silence was imposed, were themselves symbolical legends, and probably
not statements of speculative truths." St. Croix, on this subjects,
writes: "The germ of the mysteries is lustration," (or purification by
water) "and expiation. The doctrines taught were the necessity of
repentance and confession, the immortality of the soul, and a future
state of rewards and punishments." The Sr. De Sacy adds, "certain rites
and symbols were secret, and these it was sacrilege to reveal." Baur
states, "the fundamental idea of the mysteries is that of a god who
suffers and dies and afterwards triumphs over death, and has a glorious
resurrection.'' Regarding the Persian mysteries of Mythras, it has been
written: "The initiation was protracted and severe. The neophyte was
baptized, anointed on the forehead and received bread and wine; a crown
was placed on his head."

With regard to the preparation needed from those who asked admission to
these rites the very remarkable statement is made: "It is quite
undoubted respecting them, that as a necessary condition to admission,
and as an important part of initiation, two things were imperatively
necessary, namely a confession of sins, a promise of amendment of life,
followed by baptism in some form more or less complete." Faber states
"baptism continued to be handed down in all the mysteries," whilst
another writer affirms that "continence, fasting and lustrations" were
necessary pre-requisites before the applicant could enter the sacred
doors. It is also a fact worthy of consideration that in a list of
forty-five sacred Greek words gathered by M. Faber, there is scarcely
one which does not resemble the Hebrew term for the same or a similar
object.

As the ages roll round these mysteries degenerated into the most
licentious orgies, where excesses of a disgraceful character were so
shamelessly practiced that in some cases they fell under the ban of the
law, though presumedly a portion of the worship of the gods. As an
example of this we will take the mysteries of Dionysus. These were
originally celebrated by women alone, in the temple of Dionysus. They
were presided over by the wife of the Archon king (Basilissa), assisted
by fourteen priestesses, to whom she took an oath that she was pure and
unpolluted, and with whom she offered mystic sacrifices for the welfare
of the city. When these mysteries were introduced into Rome, they
speedily degenerated into shameful immoralities; men, as well as women
were initiated; and such were the crimes and excesses committed that
they were at length suppressed by a *senatus consult,* B. 0. 186 (Livy,
xxxix, 8 to 18).

It has been urged as an argument against the veracity of the translation
by the Prophet Joseph Smith, of the circular cut or disc, but why, we
cannot comprehend, that numerous copies of it exist, scattered among the
museums of Europe. These copies have been found buried with mummies in
the same way as the one that fell into the Prophet's hands. Instead of
being an argument against the truthfulness of the translation given by
Joseph Smith, we consider it a very strong one in its favor. For this
reason, Egyptiologists acknowledge that some peculiar potency was
ascribed to it by the ancient Egyptians, but their ideas are very vague
as to in what that power consisted. It was customary with the ancient
inhabitants of Egypt, to enshroud their dead in hieroglyphic wrappings,
on which various facts relating to the life of the deceased were
narrated. This writing was addressed to Osiris, the chief lord of Amend,
the land of the departed, and amongst other things it stated that the
acts of the Osir, the deceased, had been scrutinized by the seven
inquisitors appointed to investigate the lives of men, and that he was
found worthy to pass by those who guarded the gates of the eternal
worlds, and partake of the blessings of the saved. Accompanying the
mummy is also often found this sacred disc, or hypociphilas, as the
learned term it, which, if we mistake not, was usually placed under or
near the head of the mummy. The translations given by the professedly
learned convey no idea why this was so placed, but the revelation
through our martyred Prophet, that it contains the key words of the holy
priesthood, at once makes the reason plain. The Egyptians buried this
disc containing these sacred words with their dead, for very much the
same reason that the Saints bury their dead in the robes of the holy
priesthood. No doubt the true meaning of these key words was soon lost
from amongst the Egyptians, but they knew enough to understand something
of their value, and as ages rolled on, their apostate priesthood
doubtlessly invented some myth to take their place. That these priests
did claim to hold such keys, is clearly shown in a photograph in the
Deseret Museum, of the walls of the Temple at Karnac, on which the gods
are represented, each holding a key in his hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](chap06)
