[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index.md)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap06) [Next](chap08.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER VII. </span>

THE MEANS BY WHICH ABRAHAM WAS TAUGHT ASTRONOMY.--THE ABRAHAMIC SYSTEM
OF ASTRONOMY.--FROM THE EARTH TO KOLOB.--THE SYSTEM PROVEN TRUE BY
RECENT RESEARCH.--TESTIMONY OR VARIOUS AUTHORS.--ALCYONE.--MR. PETRIE'S
TESTIMONY.--ADMISSIONS THAT THE ANCIENTS WERE TAUGHT SCIENTIFIC TRUTHS
BY DIVINE REVELATION.

A BRAHAM tells us that there were three ways by which he received his
knowledge of astronomy.

1st. Through the records handed down to him from the antediluvian
patriarchs.

2d. By the use of the Urim and Thummim, which he received from the Lord
in Ur of Chaldea.

3d. By direct communication with the Almighty, who, face to face, and
with His own voice, explained to him the laws that govern His countless
creations.

The system of astronomy revealed by God to Abraham is so vast, so grand,
so comprehensive, that no uninspired man ever searched out its depths or
ascended its heights. Occasionally a patient searcher after truth caught
a faint glimmer of its glory, but that was all. But they none learned as
Abraham learned, nor did the profoundest astronomers of forty years ago
have aught but the most meagre and vain conception of the truths given
to the world by Joseph Smith in his inspired translation of Abraham's
record. Indeed, the truths there set forth are, today, scarcely
recognized by the more conservative schools of astronomy, it is only the
more daring minds that accept them, even in part.

The great truths told by Abraham regarding the starry hosts of heaven
are recorded thus: "I saw the stars that they were very great, and that
one of them was nearest unto the throne of God; and there were many
great ones that were near it; and the Lord said unto me, These are the
governing ones: and the name of the great one is Kolob, because it is
near unto me, for I am the Lord thy God; I have set this one to govern
all those which belong to the same order of that upon which thou
standest. And the Lord said unto me, by the Urim and Thummim, that Kolob
was after the manner of the Lord, according to its times and seasons in
the revolution thereof, that one revolution was a day unto the Lord,
after his manner of reckoning, it being one thousand years according to
the time appointed unto that whereon thou standest. This is the
reckoning of the Lord's time, according to the reckoning of Kolob."

In other words these great, governing planets control all others in
their revolutions, or are the centres around which the others revolve.
As the moon revolves around the earth, and the earth with the other
primary and secondary planets belonging to this solar system revolve
around the sun, so has the sun a centre around which it, with all its
earths and moons, revolves, while this grand centre has a governing
planet also, a sun or world around which it, with its attendant systems
of suns and worlds, revolves, and so on until we come to Kolob, the
"nearest to the celestial or the residence of God," which is the grand
centre which governs all the suns and systems of suns "which belong to
the same order" as our earth and those that move with it.

Still further than this the Book of Abraham teaches us:

1st. That Kolob is the greatest of all the stars seen by that patriarch.

That it is so because it is nearest to the celestial, or residence of
God.

That it is nigh unto the throne of God.

That it governs all the planets which belong to the same order as this
earth.

That it is after the reckoning of the Lord's time.

That it is after the manner of the Lord according to its times and
seasons and the revolutions thereof.

That one revolution is a day unto the Lord.

That one day, in Kolob, is equal to a thousand years, according to the
measurement of this earth.

That Kolob signifies first creation.

That it is the first in government, and last pertaining to the
measurement of time. The measurement according to celestial time; which
celestial time signifies one day to a cubit.

2d. That Oliblish stands next to Kolob.

That it is the next grand governing creation.

That it is equal to Kolob in its revolution and in its measurement of
time.

That it holds the key of power as pertaining to other planets.

3d. That Enish-go-on-dosh is also a governing planet, which was said, by
the ancient Egyptians, to be the sun, and to borrow (receive) its light
from Kolob through the medium of Kae-e-vanrash.

4th. That Kae-e-vanrash is the grand key, or governing power, which
governs fifteen other fixed planets or stars, as also the moon
(Floeese), the earth and the sun in their annual revolutions. That
Kae-e-vanrash receives its power through Kli-flos-is-es or
Hah-ko-kau-beam.

5th. Kli-flos-is-es and

6th. Hah-ko-kau-beam receive their light from the revolutions of Kolob.

To summarize: That this solar system is governed by Kae-e-vanrash, which
is governed by Kli-flos-is-es or Hah-ko-kau-beam, which are governed by
Kolob. Whether Oliblish belongs to the same order of systems as this
earth, or simply holds the keys of power-pertaining to other planets, is
not so apparent.

When Joseph Smith enunciated the sublime truths above noticed no such
thoughts were prevalent amongst the students of astronomy. The Herschels
had some inkling of the facts, but their ideas were crude and
undeveloped. It was not until the Book of Abraham had been published in
America, and if we mistake not in England also, that Sir Wm. G.
Hamilton, of the Dublin University, advanced the idea that our solar
system had a centre around which the sun and all its attendant planets
moved. To-day the scholars in the most radical school of astronomy will
only admit that our system has a centre, and that the probabilities are
that that centre has a centre also round which it and all its satellites
move. Further than this they cannot go. However, the little they do
admit, confirms the mighty truths revealed to Abraham of old and Joseph
of today. On the other hand, the followers of the more conservative
schools will simply acknowledge that our solar system has a proper
motion of its own, independent of its relative or apparent motions with
regard to other stars. They admit that "relative to the general mass of
stars, our sun is moving in the direction of the constellation of
Hercules." They have come to this conclusion, because they find that the
stars in that part of the heavens are continually growing brighter,
(thus showing they are coming nearer,) whilst those in exactly the

opposite direction are as continually growing more dim. They have also
discovered that "there are in the heavens several cases of widely
extended groups of stars, having a common proper motion entirely
different from that of She stars around and among them. Such groups they
say "must form connected systems,"\[<a href="#foot1" id="text1">1</a>\]
or in other words, are all controlled by one and the same governing
planet. It is also admitted that "the stars in all parts of the heavens
move in all directions with all sorts of
velocities;\[<a href="#foot2" id="text2">2</a>\] but they claim that the
distances of the stars from the earth are so immense, and so short a
period of time has elapsed since they first began to notice these
movements, that they cannot with certainty say whether they are moving
in circles or straight lines, it is only by analogy that they reason
that they are moving around a centre. So little are some of these
observers willing to admit, that Prof. Newcomb simply allows that "as
our sun is merely one of the stars, and rather a small one too, it may
have a proper motion as well as other stars." The Smithsonian report for
1871, speaking of Herschel, says: "The world can afford to wait.
Astronomy advances. It may be, in the distant future, that the
mysterious centre around which our sun and his worlds revolve, may be
detected and afford a solution for other mysteries as well as these. The
greatest astronomer is equipped for no more than a Sabbath-day's
journey." Another writer remarks, "Madler attempted to show, from an
examination of the proper motions of the stars, that the whole stellar
universe was revolving around Alcyone, of the Pleiades (or 'seven
stars') as a centre--a theory, the grandeur of which led to its wide
diffusion in popular writing." Mr. Wm. Petrie, of London, writing with
regard to this same star says: "Alcyone, a primeval name of the star,
means *the centre,* and has quite recently been discovered to be really
the centre around which even our whole solar system, amongst others,
revolves."

Short as is this last quotation, it testifies to three things
confirmatory of the divine inspiration that gave to the world the Book
of Abraham.

1st. That this solar system has a central or governing sun or planet.

2d. That this fact was known to the ancients, who gave to this
particular star the name of *the centre.*

3d. That in modern times this truth has only been "quite recently
discovered." That is to say; Joseph Smith could not have learned it from
living men or modern books, but only through the revelations of God.

And here let us observe that the word planet, as given by Joseph Smith
to the suns, in common parlance called fixed stars, is scientifically
correct, as a planet is a world that moves or wanders through space, and
the common nomenclature of fixed stars is untruthful and scientifically
incorrect, as none are absolutely at a standstill or fixed immovably in
one place.

Elder Joseph L. Barfoot affords us the following additional particulars
with regard to the revolution of the solar system around Alcyone. He
states: "The entire march of our sun and its system around its centre is
25,868 years. (The period of the precession of the equinoxes.) I believe
this to be the period of the solar orbit, and that there is some
relation to this period and the sacred cubit (25.025) which may yet be
discovered. The change of 50.1" per annum in the appearance of the stars
as seen from the earth results from the orbital motion around Kolob or
some other large body. This would be a degree in seventy-two years. Of
course the orbit would be immense; the Lord evidently gave the Prophet
Joseph an insight into the order of this grand eternal round, which I
think is really pictured in the Hypocephalus.

"The earth rotates on its axis, and moves in its orbit by the power
imparted to its mass by the solar forces; the deflective force from the
line of the sun's motion, produced by the sun's rotation on its axis,
and its progression around the centre of momentum of the system to which
it belongs. And, since neither the earth, nor any other body of matter,
has power without motion, so, in the sun's great power, we have evidence
of its great progressive motion. The rotation of the sun of more than
6,500 feet per second would demand a velocity of progression of over
26,000 feet per second. Herschel, by observation, was led to conclude
that 'the sun somehow moved towards Hercules with the velocity of the
earth, or 100,000 feet per second,' and to infer that the sun actually
describes 'a great orbit around some undiscriminated centre.' Sir R.
Phillips analogically estimated the size of this orbit, and announced
that with equal centripetal and centrifugal force, it would require an
orbit of 162,885 millions of miles, performed in exactly 25,868 years,
the period of the precession of the equinoxes.

"And as the earth and the other planets of this system rotate by reason
of the central solar motion, and turn on their axis by being deflected
from a right line in their respective orbits, Philips has shown that the
sun and all other planets rotate, as a result of the operation of the
same law of motion, and the fact that its satellites move in elliptical
(egg-shaped, to be exact) orbits shows that the solar centre is
advancing.

"That this earth is part of a system that suffers no permanent change,
is seen in the unvarying order of the eclipses, which return in periods
of eighteen years and eleven days, if there are four leap years, and in
eighteen years and ten days, if there are five leap years in the period.
And although astronomy does not yet recognize the different orders of
planets alluded to in the Book of Abraham, the teachings of science are
all tending to show that there are great governing, central forces and
periodic cycles."

Having thus shown that present research and investigation are proving
the astronomical truths first given to this generation by that unlearned
but heaven-inspired man, the Prophet Joseph Smith, we have next to show
that the Egyptians were familiar with them, and that they learned them
through the teachings of Abraham. To have done this some fifteen or
twenty years ago would have been next to an impossibility; but to-day,
through the researches of various talented and earnest men, it can be
demonstrated with comparative ease.

But before we attempt to prove that Abraham was actually the instrument
used of God to instruct the Egyptians in the mysteries of the starry
worlds, we will present a few extracts, from various writers, to
manifest that even the scientific world is beginning to admit that the
Egyptians obtained their knowledge of astronomy through divine agency or
revelation, as it was entirely out of their power in those early
postdiluvian days to make such stupendous advances in this science with
the instruments and learning then at their disposal, without they
received such aid from records, etc., of antediluvian times.

Rev. Mr. Mackay, referring to some of the astronomical truths known to
the ancient inhabitants of the land of the Pharaohs, states that he
believes they were *"revealed* to man, ages and generations before
science had any existence," and strange to say, the truths to which this
gentleman refers have a direct relation to those contained in the Book
of Abraham. Mr. Wm. Osborn, in a sketch of the history of ancient Egypt,
remarks: "According to Moses, moreover, the age that produced by far the
most remarkable of those monuments (the pyramids) was one in which the
Almighty had frequent and familiar intercourse with man, as in the case
of the patriarchs, Abraham, Melchizedek and Job; while the monument
itself evinces innumerable evidences of a knowledge and wisdom to which
unaided humanity has *nowhere ever attained*."

Rev. Mr. Goodsir, from the demonstration of facts akin to the foregoing,
remarks: "The conclusion that some men in primeval times were taught by
God, for important religious and moral purposes, scientific truths which
modern men of science are only now discovering, is maintained on the
strength of two lines of evidence--first, the freedom of scripture
rightly interpreted from scientific error, and from the religious and
moral errors witnessed among the pagans as the result of ignorance and
errors in science: and second, the possession by primeval man of such
scientific knowledge *as we are only now reaching,* as demonstrated by
the great pyramid. Certain things render it extremely probable that this
knowledge was imparted to the Ethnics \[the gentiles\] (who employed it
in constructing the great pyramid) by *servants of God, whom He had
taught;* and though ultimately corrupted and obscured by the pagans,
still it is highly probable that, evincing its truth even from the midst
of enveloping error, this scientific knowledge continued to stimulate
the Egyptian, and afterwards the Greek, mind to scientific inquiry. \*
\* \* For as there is the clearest evidence that a revelation of
religious truth existed in primeval times, and continued to benefit men,
even when it became more or less corrupted, so is there as clear
evidence that men were primevally instructed in the most important
cosmologic and scientific truths. \* \* \* The extreme probability is
that a true scientific conception of the Kosmos in general would be at
first conveyed to man directly by God, to guard his intelligent and
highly-favored child from nature worship."

That God did use Abraham, as stated in his book, to convey astronomical
knowledge to the Egyptians, is, we think, fully demonstrated by the
following: Josephus (book 1, chapter viii,) states that Abraham
"communicated to them (the Egyptians) arithmetic, and delivered to them
the science of astronomy, for before Abraham came into Egypt they were
unacquainted with those parts of learning, for that science came by the
Chaldeans into Egypt, and from them to the Greeks also."

This is very strong corroborative testimony, but modern research
actually claims to have discovered the year in which Abraham did this.
The British text book already referred to, entitled "Facts and Dates,"
published in 1870 by the well-known firm of Wm. Blackwood & Sons, of
Edinburgh (we are particular in giving details, to show that it proceeds
from a reliable and highly respectable firm), in its history of ancient
Egypt, gives the following:

"B.C. 1980. Abraham teaches the king of Egypt the true chronology, after
which the inscriptions bear the name of the year and month."

So far as the actual year is concerned, we deem it a matter of minor
importance, so that the fact is acknowledged, and the truth of modern
revelation vindicated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text1" id="foot1">1</a>\] " Popular Astronomy, 1878," by
'Professor 8. Newcomb, of the United States Naval Observatory.

\[<a href="#text2" id="foot2">2</a>\] Ibid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](chap08.md)
