[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap07) [Next](chap09)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER VIII. </span>

ABRAHAM AS A PYRAMID BUILDER.--PHILITION.--THE USES OF THE
PYRAMIDS.--THE COFFER A BAPTISMAL FONT.-- SYMBOLISM IN BAPTISM FRO THE
DEAD.--THE SACRED CUBIT.--"ONE DAY TO A CUBIT."--ALCYONE.--THE SUN'S
DISTANCE.--PYRAMID REFERENCES TO ASTRONOMICAL TRUTHS.--SUMMARY OF
PYRAMID REFERENCES.

T'HE next task which we have assigned ourselves, is to show from the
ancient pyramid of Cheops that the true system of astronomy, as taught
by God to Abraham, was known to those who raised this mighty structure.
To do this we desire to draw attention and consider separately three
points.

1st. The historical reasons we have for believing that Abraham
superintended the erection of this pyramid.

2d. The reasons why this vast structure was built, and the uses for
which it was designed.

3d. The direct evidences from the dimensions, form, etc., of the pyramid
of Cheops, that tend to prove that its builders were acquainted with the
laws that govern the starry worlds.

The Pharaoh, or king of Egypt, who is generally regarded as the builder
of the first pyramid, is known to secular history by the name of Cheops.
To him and his actions in closing the idolatrous temples of Egypt, we
have referred in a previous chapter, as well as to the statement of
Herodotus, that the Egyptians so detested his memory that they would not
even mention his name. Hence he states, "they commonly call the pyramids
after Philition,\[<a href="#foot1" id="text1">1</a>\] a shepherd, who at
that time fed his flocks about the place." Remarking upon the above
statement, Mr. Proctor, the celebrated astronomer, writes: "The mention
of the shepherd Philition, who fed his flocks about the place where the
great Pyramid was built, is a singular feature of Herodotus' narrative.
It reads like some strange misinterpretation of the story related to him
by the Egyptian priests. It is obvious if the word Philition did not
represent a people, but a person, this person must have been very
eminent and distinguished--a shepherd king--not a mere shepherd.
Rawlinson suggests that Philitis was probably a shepherd prince from
Palestine, perhaps of Philistine descent. Prof. Smyth comes to the
conclusion that some She-mite prince, 'a contemporary of, but rather
older than the patriarch Abraham,' visited Egypt at this time and
obtained such influence over the mind of Cheops as to persuade him to
erect the pyramid. According to Smyth, the prince was no other than
Melchizedek, king of Salem, and the influence he exerted was
supernatural. \* \* \* It seems tolerably clear that certain shepherd
chiefs who came into Egypt during Cheops' reign were connected in some
way with the designing of the great pyramid. It is clear also that they
were men of a different religion from the Egyptians, and persauded
Cheops to abandon the religion of his people."

If Josephus be correct, Professor Smyth's deductions regarding
Melchizedek are wrong, for the former says that the Egyptians were
taught astronomy by Abraham; without Melchizedek followed Abraham into
Egypt instead of preceding him, which, though possible, we have no
account of in any of the sacred writings.

Mr. Proctor further writes: "In the first place, the history of the
pyramids shows that the erection of the first great pyramid was in all
probability either suggested to Cheops by wise men who visited Egypt
from the east, or else some important information conveyed to him by
such visitors caused him to conceive the idea of building the pyramid.
In either case we may suppose, as the history indeed suggests, that
these learned men, whoever they may have been, remained in Egypt to
superintend the erection of the structure. \* \* \* The astronomical
peculiarities which form so significant a portion of the great pyramid
were probably provided for entirely under the direction of the shepherd
chiefs who had exerted so strange an influence upon the mind of king
Cheops. \* \* \* It is certain in any case that they \[the shepherd
chiefs\] were opposed to idolatry; and we have thus some means of
inferring who they were or whence they came. We know that one particular
branch of one particular race in the east was characterized by a most
marked hatred of idolatry in all its forms. \* \* \* And the Bible
record shows that members of this Chaldean family visited Egypt from
time to time. They were shepherds too, which accords with the account of
Herodotus. \* \* \* But having formed the opinion on grounds
sufficiently assured, that the strangers who visited Egypt and
superintended the building of the great pyramid were kinsmen of the
patriarch Abraham, it is not very difficult to decide what was the
subject respecting which they had such exact information. They or their
parents had come from the land of the Chaldeans, and they were doubtless
learned in all the wisdom of their Chaldean kinsmen. They were masters,
in fact, of the astronomy of their day, a science for which the
Chaldeans had shown, from the earliest ages, the most remarkable
aptitude. \* \* \* It is highly probable that the astronomical knowledge
of the Chaldeans in the days of Terah and Abraham was much more accurate
than that possessed by the Greeks in the time of Hipparchus." Mr.
Proctor ultimately comes to the conclusion that "the stranger called
Philition by Herodotus, may, for aught that appears, have been Abraham
himself." It is a matter of secondary moment, in this consideration,
whether Abraham himself or some other divinely inspired man, was the
actual) architect of the great pyramid; it is sufficient to know, which
it itself testifies, that whoever that builder was, he was acquainted
with the same grand astronomical truths that the Book of Abraham states
the Lord revealed to that patriarch, and which, at the time Joseph Smith
translated the papyrus, were unknown to modern scientists.

Our next inquiries are, with regard to the causes or reasons that led to
the erection of the pyramids, and to the purposes for which they were
used.

Various theories have been advanced on these points. Some have supposed
that these vast structures were associated with the religious rites of
the ancient Egyptians; others have suggested that they combined the
purposes of tombs and temples; again, that they were astronomical
observatories; also that they had primarily astrological import. It has
also been argued that they were defences against the sands of the great
desert, or places of refuge during the excessive overflows of the Nile;
the idea has also been advanced that they were granaries, somewhat after
the manner of those erected under the direction of Joseph, the
Israelite. A very little reflection will manifest that some of the
suggestions are entirely untenable. Take for instance the notion that
they were granaries. If so, what a vast waste of material, how entirely
does their structure and form unsuit them for such a purpose. As wise a
people as their builders must have been would scarcely have constructed
a mountain of masonry, with two or three relatively small rooms therein,
for such a purpose. There is some show of reason for believing that some
of them were tombs and temples combined, but this will not hold good
with regard to the pyramid of Cheops. Nothing found therein has given
the least ground-work for the supposition that it was used for
sepulchral purposes. In what is called the king's chamber was found an
empty stone chest or coffer, without a lid; but in form, ornament and
material it is entirely different to the usual sarcophagus used by the
ancient Egyptians for the reception of the embalmed dead.

Two of the reasons advanced above, as applied to the pyramids of Cheops,
are worthy of our consideration.

1st. That it was an astronomical observatory.

2d. That it was associated with the religion of the ancient Egyptians.

The reasons for believing it to have been built as an observatory are
cogent and numerous. There can be no doubt that in many respects it was
intended by its builders to typify astronomical truths; evidence in
proof of which will be hereafter adduced. It has been suggested that the
granite coffer found in what is now called the king's chamber (simply
that it may have a distinctive name) was filled, in whole or in part, as
circumstances required, with water, and that the face of the heavens was
reflected therein, through the slanting passages that pointed directly
to the polar star. That this coffer was used as a receptacle for water
is highly probable, from the fact that a well tapping the waters of the
Nile is found in the pyramid.\[<a href="#foot2" id="text2">2</a>\] In
this inner chamber, surrounded by this vast mass of masonry, removed as
far as possible from the atmospheric and electric perturbations existing
on the earth's surface, it is argued that using the water in the coffer
as a mirror, the most accurate observations could be taken that were
then possible. This idea we deem untenable, as it appears to us that the
inclines and angles in the passages would render such reflection next to
impossible. According to certain Arabian historians "there were placed
in the great pyramid divers celestial spheres and stars, and what they
severally operate in their aspects, and the perfumes which are to be
used to them, and the books which treat of these matters."

The evidences that it was an edifice erected for sacred purposes are not
so strong as those that can be brought forward in favor of its
astronomical uses. We incline to the opinion that it combined both
purposes; but we are scarcely willing to admit that if it was a temple,
it was erected by a believer in the faith that looked upon Osiris and
associate deities as the true Gods. The style of this vast structure and
the temples erected by the followers of that faith are the antipodes of
each other. The perfect purity of the pyramid from every idolatrous
ornament and reference as well as of all attempts to glorify the wealth,
might or wisdom of its human builders, makes it differ entirely,
generically and radically from all ordinary Egyptian temples, pictured
from top to bottom with the praises of their false gods. Besides, it is
asserted, as before shown that the man who built this pyramid shut up
the temples, a very inconsistent act, if he were a worshiper at their
shrines. We hold the opinion that if this pyramid was used for religious
purposes at all, it was in connection with the doctrines taught by
Abraham, and if the Lord permitted the patriarch to preach to the
Egyptians that principle of the Gospel known to us as baptism for the
dead, we can well imagine the use to which the coffer in the king's
chamber was applied. Indeed, the idea that the coffer was a baptismal
font has been suggested by more than one Gentile
writer,\[<a href="#foot3" id="text3">3</a>\] but if it were used
especially in the ordinances for the salvation of those who had passed
from this sphere of action the symbolism would be almost perfect; for we
have here a font enshrined in the heart of an artificial mountain, that
could be reached only through a straight, stony gate and by a long,
narrow and mysterious passage. How accurately these typify the valley of
the shadow of death, and the grave, and how perfect the imagery of going
into the heart of this solid mountain to act for those who had been laid
away in the sepulchre. There is one thing that greatly strengthens the
idea that if its uses were religious, they were Abrahamic. It is that
this very coffer is of the exact capacity of the ark of the covenant of
Moses' day, also that an originally marked oft portion of the chamber in
which the coffer stands is of the exact capacity of the brazen sea, or
baptismal font, in Solomon's Temple. Surely there is something more than
a mere coincidence in this.

We next desire to draw attention to some of the important truths
relating to the earth and the heavens, revealed by God to Abraham (as
stated in part in his book), of which the generality of mankind of that
and every succeeding age have remained in ignorance, even to the day in
which we live, but with which the builders of the great pyramid were
evidently acquainted. Amongst these and kindred truths, as manifested in
the construction of this vast artificial mountain, we may mention the
law of planetary and solar motion, the distance of the earth from its
centre--the sun, the exact size, shape and density of our terraquous
globe, the precise length of its solar orbit, as also the value of the
sacred cubit as the unit of measurement. Writing on this subject, in a
recent number of the *Juvenile Instructor,* Elder Joseph L. Barfoot
(Beth) remarks: "There has been a great deal of guess-work heretofore
about the use of the great pyramid at Geezah. The prevailing opinion was
that it had been intended for a tomb for one of the ancient kings of
Egypt, Discoveries have recently been made which have led to the
inference that it had far more important uses, in fact that it was an
observatory, built upon mathematical principles, and designed to
perpetuate, through all succeeding time, a correct knowledge of the
heavens and the earth. \* \* \* It is found that the measure by which
the proportions of the great pyramid were determined is an exact
proportional to the axis of the earth itself. This is a very important
thing, for it is thus in harmony with natural standards of measure, such
as used by Deity. This pyramid standard measure is called the sacred
cubit, as it is found that the standard divinely recognized through
Moses was the same as that of the pyramid. The sacred cubit was the
pyramid cubit."

Now then, with this fact before our eyes, let us turn to the Book of
Abraham. The explanation of Fig. 1, of the circular disc, reads thus:
"Kolob, signifying the first creation, nearest to the celestial, or the
residence of God. First in government, the last pertaining to the
measurement of time. *The measurement, according to celestial time;
which celestial time signifies one day to a cubit. One day in Kolob is
equal to a thousand years,* according to the measurement of this earth,
which is-called by the Egyptians Jah-oh-eh."

If we understand the above aright it means that with the Gods the unit
of the measurement of time is one of the days of Kolob, or one thousand
of our years, "which celestial time signifies one day to a cubit," or,
that as one of Kolob's days is the unit of celestial time, so the cubit
is the unit of celestial measurement, by which the size of the worlds
are measured when the foundations thereof are laid; by which the
distances of the suns and planets are regulated, and all the creations
of the Holy Ones controlled. That this cubit, which was the unit of
measurement of holy things on this earth--the ark of the tabernacle, the
temple, etc., was also the unit of measurement when this earth was
created, is further proven by the following extract from Elder Barfoot's
writings: "The sacred cubit is in length rather more than twenty-five
(25.025) inches of English measure. *It is one ten-millionth part of the
radius of the axis of the earth at the poles;"* that is, it is
10,000,000 sacred cubits from the centre of the earth to either the
north or south pole, or 20,000,000 through the earth from pole to pole.
Brother Barfoot continues: "No higher or more reliable standard of
extreme precision could be given to man than the measure of the polar
radius, for all other terrestrial and celestial things relating to the
earth are in proportion to this natural standard. So important are the
discoveries made recently by means of the sacred cubit that men are
surprised to think that the uses of the great pyramid have been so long
concealed." To this remark of our esteemed brother we answer, the Lord
had not turned the key; and here we pause for a moment to ask, and ask
of all the world, how could Joseph Smith have possibly become acquainted
with this great truth if God had not revealed it unto him. This one
truth alone of which all the world was ignorant, of itself, in its
revelation by him, proves him to have been a prophet of the Most High
God.

We now turn to some of the peculiarities of the great pyramid, to which
passing reference has before been made, gleaning our information from
the writings of Petrie, Osborn, Smyth, Mackay, and others. We would
observe, however, that our space prevents us from giving any but the
more prominent references.

1st. For parts cosmocally and symbolically significant, the metric
standard of the great pyramid is the sacred cubit, exactly one
ten-millionth of the earth's polar radius, the only natural standard of
both unique and extreme precision; a standard of divine origination,
primeval, and preserved in the least disturbed line of Abraham's family
(the Arabs) to the present day. (Mr. Wm. Petrie.)

Does not this testimony almost word for word confirm the statements of
the Book of Abraham?

2d. The direction of the strait entrance passage, inclining at 26° 20'
into the north side of the pyramid, was such that at the reputed date of
its establishment\[<a href="#foot4" id="text4">4</a>\] this direction
was that of the primeval pole star, then at its lower culmination, while
Alcyone\[<a href="#foot5" id="text5">5</a>\] (the centre of, or
governing planet which controls our solar system) then near the
celestial equator, was at its upper culmination, or on the same meridian
at midnight of the autumnal equinox. This definite combination cannot
recur for 25,898 years; it marked the date of the pyramid, and of the
year of the Pleiades," a commencement of a natural chronologic era,
traditions of which have remained in most times and countries, or to put
it in another shape, "the meridian of the primeval pole star became
rigidly stationary on Alcyone at the date of the great pyramid, after
which it commenced to retrograde."

3d. A thousand billion times the pyramid's weight, carefully computed,
is the mass of the whole earth, namely, six thousand and fifty trillions
of British tons.

4th. The annual circuit of the earth--that is, one year, is represented
by the length of the base circuit of the pyramid, and each day of
twenty-four hours by four cubits. Or *each day* of our year is
represented by *one cubit* on each of the four sides of the pyramid,
each side representing in its whole length one year of this earth. Or
*one day to a cubit* as stated in the Book of Abraham. Can any one
explain to us why this pyramid were so built that *one cubit* should
represent *one day* exactly, if Abraham did not teach this to them? and
if he did, then we have called the pyramids to bear witness to the truth
of his book, which they most assuredly do, and at the same time to the
truth of its translation by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Napoleon
Bonaparte, when he gathered his armies in Egypt, pointing to the
pyramids, told his legions that forty centuries looked down upon them.
We have also called these mighty monuments of the past to bear record to
the unity of revealed truth. Admit the above to be facts, and how is it
possible to deny that Joseph Smith received his wisdom from a divine
source, and consequently was a prophet of God.

Mr. Mackay, writing (1870) on facts in astronomy, states that the great
pyramid has been "investigated and explored as no other monument,
ancient and modern, ever was; and the indefatigable explorers have been
rewarded with an abundant harvest of the most brilliant discoveries. One
of these, discovered by Mr. Petrie, is the clear indication that the
architect of this pyramid knew the mean distance of the sun from the
earth with an exactitude to which modern science never approached till
within the last seven years. \* \* \* The best lineal and angular
measurements have been combined by W. Petrie, who shows therefrom that
the original height of the great pyramid, from the pavement to its base,
was 486.25 British feet; this multiplied by the ninth power of
*ten--i.e.*, 1,000,000,000 gives a result of 92,093,000 British miles,
for the mean distance of the sun. The latest collective result of
science reckons the probable truth to be between 91,970,000, and
92,150,000; while the great pyramid gives 92,093,000
miles,\[<a href="#foot6" id="text6">6</a>\] being completely within
these minimum uncertainties of science." This, by other references, has
been proven to have been no accident, but intended by the builders, as
it constitutes but a small part of the evidence discovered in this
direction.

Here, then, we have evidence that the ancient Egyptians had a knowledge
of the true distance from the sun. That they obtained this knowledge
only by divine light is evidenced by the abortive attempts of other
ancient investigators to determine this question. For instance, in the
days of Herodotus, (B. C. 500,) it was thought that the sun was distant
only some eight or ten miles; fifty years later it was estimated by
Anaxagoras at 1800; 150 years later, 5,300,000 was the computed
distance; 1900 years later, Kepler calculated the distance at 26,400,000
miles; in A. D. 1750 the supposed distance was increased to 81,650,000,
and so, from the dawn of creation until now, uninspired men have been
groping after this truth, and even to-day they are not entirely
satisfied that the exact measurement has been obtained.

It is unnecessary, for our present purpose, to enter into all the
details of the varied geometrical, metrical, mechanical, geographical,
astronomical and cosmical references found in the great pyramid, all of
which, it is vigorously asserted, have been tested and proven correct by
the very best scientific ability; nor will space permit us to follow a
rapidly-increasing class of writers who find in its lines, angles and
markings a prophetic history of the world; but we should scarcely feel
satisfied if we did not summarize a few of its leading characteristics.
"We find,"\[<a href="#foot7" id="text7">7</a>\] to use the language of
Dr. J. A. Seiss, of Philadelphia," a perfect geometric figure, so framed
that the four sides of its base bear the same proportion to its vertical
height as the circumference of a circle to its radius; that each of its
base lines measures the even ten-millionth part of the semi-axis of the
earth just as many times as there are days in the year; that its height
multiplied by the ninth power of ten gives the mean distance between the
earth and its great centre of light; that its unit of length is the even
five hundredth millionth part of the polar diameter of the globe we
inhabit; that its two diagonals of base measure in inches the precise
number of years in the great processional cycle; that its bulk of
masonry is an even proportion of the weight of the earth itself, and
that its setting and shaping are squared and
oriented\[<a href="#foot8" id="text8">8</a>\] with microscopic
accuracy." Regarding the coffer in the king's chamber he continues: "We
perceive in it a most accurately-shaped standard of measures and
proportions, its sides and bottom cubically identical with its internal
space, the length of its two sides to its height as a circle to its
diameter, its exterior volume just twice the dimension of its bottom,
and its whole measure just the fiftieth part of the chamber in which it
was put when the edifice was built," for it could not have been gotten
into the chamber after the building was finished, by reason of the size
and angles of the entrance passages. Now, then, let us add to these
facts a statement by the same author, and we think our position
regarding the veracity of the portion of the Book of Abraham we have
lastly been commenting upon is amply vindicated. "Everywhere do we
encounter the traditions of Abraham's skill in the knowledge of the
heavens, how he argued from his observation of the heavenly orbs, and
how he occupied himself in Egypt teaching the priests of Heliopolis in
the lore of the skies. Doubtless this was not the naked science of
astronomy as the schools conceive of it, but as respected the
theological and Messianic truths symbolized in these celestial
hieroglyphics, in which, as in the more literal promises, he rejoiced to
see Christ's day, and saw it and was glad. (John, viii, 56.)" Which
testimony of the Savior's is in direct accord with the statements of the
Book of Abraham; nor need we be surprised thereat, when revelation,
ancient and modern, states that Enoch, and indeed other antediluvian
patriarchs, saw not only "Christ's day," but the world's history, even
to the winding up scene.

Admitting that the shape of the pyramid, in connection with its other
references, has a prophetic import, it becomes a remarkable fact that
this stupendous four-sided monument, in this particular phase of its
construction, typifies the number of days, according to the reckoning of
the Lord and of Kolob, between the fall of man and the incarnation of
our Savior (4000 years), and the time between the date of its own
construction and the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ in the
last days (also 4000 years), Two of the most important events then in
the future of the world's history, and known in the economy of God, the
first as the ushering in of "the dispensation of the fulness of time,"
the second as the ushering in of "the dispensation of the fulness of
times."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text1" id="foot1">1</a>\] It is worthy of note that the root
of the name Philition or Philitis signifies a lover of truth, a most
appropriate name for Abraham.

\[<a href="#text2" id="foot2">2</a>\] The assertion that this well
connected with the Nile, is denied by Prof. Smyth and other explorers.

\[<a href="#text3" id="foot3">3</a>\] Bryant, Faber, Goodsir and others.

\[<a href="#text4" id="foot4">4</a>\] B. C. 2170, or exactly 4000 years
before 1830, the date of the organization of the Church of Jesus Cfhrist
in this dispensation.

\[<a href="#text5" id="foot5">5</a>\] "The Pleiades are the seven stars,
called *cemah,* which means an *axle,* that on or around which something
turns. Now, a few years ago, Prof. Madler, the German astronomer, was
awarded a gold medal by the scientific societies of Europe. And why?
Because he was the first to advance the hypothesis of the existence of a
central body in the stellar universe, about which all in our system
revolved. He fixed, as that preponderating mass, upon the Pleiades, and
upon the brightest star in the group, namely, Alcyone, as the very
centre. Yet from Job we learn this scientific fact, and Prof. Madler had
no special claim for such a discovery, nor had he any right to such a
medal, unless he was a lineal descendant and heir of Job."--Dr. *Wild,
of New York.*

\[<a href="#text6" id="foot6">6</a>\] The most recent scientific
estimate of the sun's distance from the earth actually places it within
270 miles of the exact pyramid figures.

\[<a href="#text7" id="foot7">7</a>\] Miracle in Stone.

\[<a href="#text8" id="foot8">8</a>\] Oriented--situated with respect to
the four cardinal points.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](chap09)
