[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Mormonism](../index)
[Index](index) [Previous](chap08)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# <span style="font-weight: 400">CHAPTER IX. </span>

SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIONS TO THE PROPHET'S TRANSLATION OF THE BOOK OF
ABRAHAM.--F. DEVERIA'S TRANSLATION.--SAMPLES OF ANCIENT LANGUAGES IN THE
BOOK OF ABRAHAM.--WORD ROOTS.--LACK OF CHRONOLOGIC
SEQUENCE.--CONCLUSION.

IN the year 1855, Messrs. Remy and Brenchly, two French travelers,
visited Utah. On their return to Paris they carried with them a copy of
the Book of Abraham, which they placed in the hands of "a young savant
of the Museum of the Louvre, M. Theodule Deveria," with the request that
he would translate it. This he attempted to do. Messrs. Remy and
Brenchly afterwards published an account of their travels, and embodied
therein M. Deveria's soi-disant translation. They pretend to consider
that the disclosures made by the scientific translation should place the
Book of Abraham in the catalogue of the pious frauds that have so often
disgraced the history of religion. We come to an entirely opposite
conclusion, and claim that so far as M. Deveria's translation is
concerned, if it does anything, it substantiates the statements of the
Prophet Joseph with regard to the true meaning of the papyri. Two
things, however, have to be remembered--the first, that the Egyptian
hieroglyphics had at least two (but more probably three) meanings, the
one understood by the masses--the other comprehended only by the
initiated, the priesthood and others; which latter conveyed the true
though hidden intent of the writer. The second consideration is that
when M, Deveria made his translation, Egyptiology, as a science, was in
its babyhood. Since then highly important discoveries have been made in
this branch of literature, which have greatly changed the con. elusions
of earlier students. But even to-day the science is so inexact that but
a few weeks ago the *Deseret News* published an anecdote of two eminent
Egyptiologists, who unitedly came to the conclusion that the
hieroglyphics on the wrappings of a mummy they were examining proved the
deceased to have been a great warrior or king among the ancient
Egyptians. On removing the inner bandages, the body proved to be that of
a woman. If the scientists of today make such egregious blunders, what
may we expect from Messrs. Remy and Brenchly's young savant of twenty
years ago, before Osborn, Smyth, and others, had made the important
discoveries that are almost revolutionizing the ideas of the learned on
ancient Egypt and its literature.

We will now draw attention to a few of the differences between the two
translations.

The Prophet Joseph Smith states that Plate I represents an idolatrous
priest attempting to offer up Abraham as a sacrifice to his gods. M. D.
affirms that it represents the resurrection of Osiris. We ask, if it is
a representation of a resurrection, what is the priest doing with a
knife in his hand? Osiris was not resurrected with a knife, but Abraham
would have been slain with one if God had not delivered him. And it is a
somewhat remarkable fact that the original Egyptian hieroglyphic for the
verb Nohem, to rescue, to deliver, was a bedstead-shaped altar with a
bird flying above it, just as represented in Plate I, of the angel of
the Lord rescuing Abraham. Is it not probable that the hieroglyphic had
its origin in this very circumstance?

Joseph the Prophet says Fig. 1 represents "the angel of the Lord." M. D.
states that it is "the soul of Osiris under the form of a hawk (which
should have a human head)." Fig. 3, the Prophet states, is "the
idolatrous priest of Elkenah." M. D. says it is "the god Anubis (who
should have a jackal's head)," and in other places he makes
substantially the same statement, that a certain figure represents
somebody or something, or would do so if it were different. This puts us
in mind of a little story. A certain clergyman was visiting the home of
one of his parishoners, when he noticed a little son of his host very
busily engaged, first intently eyeing him and then working away at a
slate he held in his hand. Suspecting what he was doing, the clergyman
asked the boy if he was not drawing his portrait, and finding his
suspicions were correct, he asked to see it. With some reluctance the
boy consented. After looking at it a moment, the clergyman exclaimed:
"Why, this is not like me!" and received in reply the very consoling
answer, "Well, I guess it's not; suppose I put a tail on it and call it
a dog." So M. Deveria wants to put a head or a tail on some of these
characters and then call them Osiris, Anubis, or some other God!
Anything to beat revelation.

In a great many instances, though the wording in the inspired
translation varies greatly from the scientific attempt, yet the idea is
almost identical. Placed together, they substantiate the statement of an
eminent modern writer on Egyptian literature, who declares that at first
sight the religious branch of this literature "seems to proclaim the
Egyptians the most polytheistic of men, but a more careful examination
leads to the supposition that the various gods were only intended to
bring out in symbol and in allegory the various qualities and
manifestations of one great God, incarnate, eternal and omnipotent."
Joseph's translation conveying the higher though hidden meaning, and M.
D. the presumedly literal intent of the hieroglyphics. For instance,
Pig. 9, Plate I, is stated by the prophet to represent "the idolatrous
god of Pharaoh;" M. D. calls it "the sacred crocodile, symbolic of the
god Sebat." Sebat was certainly a god to Pharaoh, so wherein lies the
difference? Again, Fig. 3, Plate II, "is made to represent God sitting
upon his throne, clothed with power and authority, with a crown of
eternal light upon his head." The scientist says it is "the god Ra, the
sun, with a hawk's head, seated in his boat." What great difference is
there in the idea? and how did Joseph Smith know that it represented God
(call him by what typical name you like) if not by revelation ? What is
there in the figure of a cow (Fig. 6) to convey the idea to an unlearned
man that it had reference to the hosts of heaven? yet both translations
distinctly convey that idea. Figs. 12 to 20 (Plate II), Joseph says will
be given in the own due time of the Lord. M, D. does not attempt to
translate them, he says they are "illegibly copied," "cannot be
deciphered," "illegible in the copy," etc., and so gets out of the
difficulty, but not without insinuating that the MSS. have been
"intentionally altered." But what earthly reason there could be for the
"Mormons" attempting to alter them, is beyond our comprehension. At any
rate he does not translate them. . As a sample of how M. D. twists
definitions on purpose to give a different translation from that of the
prophet, we have an instance in Plate I, in the figures representing the
gods of Elkenah, Libnah, Mahmackrah and Korash, which our French savant
states represent the Canopian vessels or jars. And what are the Canopian
jars? Certain jars first found at Canopus, a city at the mouth of the
Nile, and because the learned did not, nor do not now know, with
certainty, their intent,\[<a href="#foot1" id="text1">1</a>\] they
called them after the place where they were found. But because they were
found at Canopus is it any reason that they should net be the gods
Joseph Smith represents them to be ? The learned believe them to be
gods, but their researches result in no definite conclusions. The
Prophet Joseph associates them with the god of the ruler of Egypt, which
statement placed along side of the fact that they were found in Egypt,
gives strength and consistency to his translation. M. D.'s translation
is simply begging the question so far as attempting to prove the
inaccuracy of Joseph's translation is concerned.

Exceptions are taken by M. Deveria to some of the proper names that
appear in the Book of Abraham, and which our martyred prophet informs us
were Egyptian. Messrs. Remy and Brenchly apply the word "gibberish" to
certain portions of the book, which we suppose must relate to such
words, as the English portion is plain enough and gibberish means
senseless or unmeaning talk or gabble. To enter into a detailed account
of the root of each Egyptian or Chaldean word given in the book would be
very tedious to the most of our readers; we shall therefore simply
summarize by saying, that so far as we have been able to trace through
the authorities at our disposal, which are very meagre, three things are
evident:

1st. That the words given by Joseph have true roots.

2d. That these roots are from the languages of the countries known to
Abraham.

3d. That the meanings of these roots are consistent with the meanings of
the words as translated by Joseph Smith.

All of which proves that they are not gibberish.

As an instance of how far M. D. goes out of his way to attack these
words, he remarks on the statement of Abraham that this earth was by the
Egyptians called Jah-oh-eh; that "the word Jah-oh-eh has nothing
Egyptian in it, it resembles the Hebrew word Jehovah badly translated.''
If it has nothing Egyptian in it how does it happen that the word
Jehovah itself has been claimed by many to be an Egyptian and not a
Hebrew word? With regard to which see Dr. Smith's Dictionary of the
Bible. It is also positive that this sacred word was known to other
nations as well as the covenant people of God, as it is to be found, in
its exact form, and applied to the God of the Hebrews, on line eighteen
of the Moabite stone, lately translated by Sir Henry Rawlinson.

There are other words that are objected to as not being Egyptian. In
reply we ask, How can M. Deveria or any one else, at the present stage
of Egyptiology, tell whether a word was Egyptian or not? Joseph has
undoubtedly written the word in the English characters that best
represented the actual sound of the word in ancient Egyptian. Scientists
know nothing positive of those sounds; they knew that certain
hieroglyphics form certain words with certain supposed meaning, but for
the sounds they have to rely on the language of the modern Copts, basing
their theory on the slender foundation that the sounds of words in Egypt
are the same to-day as they were 4000 years ago. We well know that
customs, habits, etc., change but little in the stagnant lives of the
inhabitants of Egypt, Canaan, and kindred nations, but it is almost too
great a stretch on our credulity to ask us to accept as definite the
assumed sound of a word in Abraham's day, because it is pronounced in
that way now. For instance, who can, with certainty, assert how the
ancient Egyptians pronounced the name of their own country? Was it
Kham-to, or Gyp-to, or Egyptos, or indeed Ghubsi?

There are certainly some words in the record that are evidently
Egyptian. Such as Kli-flos-is-es, the name of one of the stars. All
Egyptiologists admit that Isis relates to the moon. But it may be urged
that Joseph Smith obtained these words from some Egyptian work. Not so;
for the first grammar and dictionary of ancient Egyptian published in
modern times (between 1836 and 1844)--those of M. Champollion-- were not
published until after the translation of the papyrus by the Prophet
Joseph. So that objection falls to the ground.

In the word Kolob we have another instance of a word whose roots are to
be frequently found in the languages of Phoenicia and the neighboring
nations, and the word\[<a href="#foot2" id="text2">2</a>\] itself
appears in the languages of some of the descendants of Abraham (certain
tribes of the American Indians) at the present time. But probably this
is enough on the subject of language.

There are two other points to which we win allude, that are strong
internal evidence of the genuineness of the Book of Abraham. One is,
that in its historical portion no reference, however slight, is made to
events that occurred after its assumed date of composition. Had Joseph
Smith been its author, the probabilities are strongly in favor of
circumstances being mentioned therein that did not take place until
after the time that the book claims to have been written. Had Joseph
been a man well versed in the history of the world in Abraham's day, the
probabilities would not have been so great; but ignorant as he was, so
far as book learning is concerned, of ancient history, this simple
circumstance alone is strong evidence in favor of its authenticity.

The other point to which we wish to draw attention is the lack of
chronological sequence in the historical portions of the book, a trait
manifested in the writings of many of the patriarch's descendants, and
which we believe to have been general with the writers living in the
early age of the world. Chronologic accuracy, in the writers of personal
or historical narratives, appears to have been the outgrowth of a later
age.

The concluding portions of the Book of Abraham are mainly historical,
and relate to circumstances that occurred in the heavens in man's
pre-existent state, and at the creation of the world. These subjects
have been so ably handled by others that we shall not attempt to treat
upon them here. Besides, they are somewhat foreign to our subject, and
directly have no bearing on the truth of the Abrahamic record, having
been made plain in other revelations of God's word. We shall therefore,
with this chapter, conclude our review of the Book of Abraham, but
before doing so must acknowledge the aid we have received from many wise
suggestions and valuable information afforded us by President John
Taylor, Elders Franklin D. Richards, Joseph L. Barfoot, John R. Howard,
David McKenzie and others.

In conclusion we would say, that we believe that those who have
carefully followed us through this inquiry must be satisfied that the
Abrahamic record is genuine. We have appealed to ancient historians and
modern scientists, and they have not failed us; we have called to our
aid the monuments of ancient Egypt, and they have borne unequivocal
testimony; we have examined the glorious system of astronomy advanced in
its pages, and find it is being substantiated by modern research;
internally we have found its unities well preserved, nor have we
discovered a contradiction within its pages. As with the Book of Mormon,
so with the Book of Abraham, we feel fully assured, that every day as it
passes, every new discovery that has a bearing on its statements, will
increasingly vindicate its truthfulness, and bear united testimony that
Joseph Smith Was indeed and of a truth a Prophet, Seer and Revelator,
inspired by the Spirit of Jehovah, the mighty god of Jacob.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[<a href="#text1" id="foot1">1</a>\] See article "Canopus," in American
Cyclopaedia.

\[<a href="#text2" id="foot2">2</a>\] Kolob signifies in their language
the eye (or light) of the world.
