[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ros03)  [Next](ros05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

# CHAPTER II.

ORDINANCES ABOUT THE WITNESSES CONCERNING THE NEW MOON, THE HOISTING OF
THE FLAGS AND HOW IT WAS CONSECRATED BY THE BETH DIN.

MISHNA: If the witness was unknown another was sent with him to testify
to his character. In former times they would receive evidence (about the
appearance of the moon) from any one; but when the Boëthusians commenced
to corrupt the witnesses the rule was made, that evidence would only be
received from those who were known (to be reputable).

GEMARA: What is meant by "another" (in the above Mishna)? Another pair
(of witnesses). It seems also to be so from the statement of the Mishna.
"If the witness was unknown? Shall we assume that it means one
(witness)? Surely the evidence of one was not received, for this
transaction was called "judgment" \[Psalms, lxxxi.\] (and two witnesses
are necessary)? What, then, does "the witness" mean? That pair; so also
here, "another" means another pair. Is, then, the evidence of one not
accepted? Have we not learned in a Boraitha: It once happened that R.
Neherai went to Usha on the Sabbath to testify (to the character) of one
witness? He knew that there was one witness in Usha, and he went to add
his evidence (and thus make two witnesses). If that is so, what does it
tell us? One might suppose that, as there was a doubt (that he might not
meet the other witness), he ought not to have profaned the Sabbath (by
travelling to Usha as a single witness); therefore he comes to teach us
(that even in such a case of doubt the Sabbath might be violated).

When Ula came (to Babylon, from Palestine), he said: They have already
consecrated the new moon in Palestine. Said R. Kahana: (In such a case)
not only Ula, who is a great man, is to be believed, but even an
ordinary man. Why so? Because men will not lie about a matter that will
become known to every one.

"*In former times they would receive evidence from any one, etc.*" The
rabbis taught: How did the Boëthusians corrupt the

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

witnesses? They once sought to deceive the sages, and they bribed, with
four hundred zuz (silver coins), two men, one belonging to their party
and one to ours. The former gave his evidence and went out, to the
latter they (the Beth Din) said, "Tell us what was the appearance of the
moon?" "I went up," replied he, "to Maale Adumim, <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_43) and I saw it crouching between two rocks.
Its head was like a calf, its cars like a goat, its horns like a stag,
and its tail was lying across its thigh. I gazed upon it and shuddered,
and fell backwards; and if you do not believe me, behold, here I have
two hundred zuz bound up in my cloth." "Who induced you to do this?"
they asked. "I heard," he replied, "that the Boëthusians wished to
deceive the sages; so I said to myself, I will go and inform them, lest
some unworthy person may (accept their bribe), and come and deceive the
sages." Then said the sages: "The two hundred zuz may be retained by you
as a reward, and he who bribed you shall be taken to the whipping-post
(and be punished)." Then and there they ordained that testimony should
be received only from those who were known (to be of good character).

MISHNA: Formerly bonfires were lighted (to announce the appearance of
the new moon); but when the Cutheans <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_44)
practised their deceit, it was ordained that messengers should be sent
out. How were these bonfires lighted? They brought long staves of cedar
wood, canes, and branches of the olive tree, and bundles of tow which
were tied on top of them with twine; with these they went to the top of
a mountain, and lighted them, and kept waving them to and fro, upward
and downward, till they could perceive the same repeated by another
person on the next mountain, and thus, on the third mountain, etc.
Whence did these bonfires commence? From the Mount of Olives to
Sartabha, from Sartabha to Grophinah, from Grophinah to Hoveran, from
Hoveran to Beth Baltin; they did not cease waving the burning torches at
Beth Baltin, to and fro, upward and downward, until the whole country of
the captivity appeared like a blazing fire.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: Bonfires were only lighted to announce the
new moon that appeared and was consecrated at the proper time (after
twenty-nine days). And when were they lighted? On the evening of the
thirtieth day. Does this

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

mean to say that for a month of twenty-nine days the bonfires were
lighted, but not for a month of thirty days? It should have been done
for a month of thirty days, and not at all for a month of twenty-nine
days. Said Abayi: That would cause the people a loss of work for two
days (because they would wait to see if the bonfires would be lit or not
and thus lose a second day). <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_45)

"*How were these bonfires lighted? They brought long staves of cedar
wood*," etc. R. Jehudah says: There are four kinds of cedars: the common
cedar, the Qetros, the olive tree, and the cypress. Qetros says Rabh is
(in Aramaic) Adara or a species of cedar. Every cedar, said R. Johanan,
that was carried away from Jerusalem, God will in future times restore,
as it is written \[Isa. xli. 19\]: "I will plant in the wilderness the
cedar tree," and by "wilderness" He means Jerusalem, as it is written
\[Isa. lxiv. 19\]: "Zion is (become) a wilderness." R. Johanan says
again: Who studies the law, and teaches it in a place where there is no
other scholar, is equal to a myrtle in the desert, which is very dear.
The same says again: "Woe to the Romans, for whom there will be no
substitution," as it is written \[Isa. lx. 17\]: "Instead of the copper,
I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood,
copper, and for stones, iron." But what can He bring for R Aqiba and his
comrades (who were destroyed by Rome)? Of them it is written \[Joel, IV.
21\]: "I will avenge (but for) *their* (Aqiba's and his comrades') blood
I have not yet avenged."

"*And whence did these bonfires commence?*" From Beth Baltin. What is
Beth Baltin? "Biram," answered Rabh. What (does the Mishna) mean by the
captivity? Said R. Joseph, "Pumbeditha." And how was it that the whole
country looked like a blazing fire? We learn that each Israelite took a
torch in his hand and ascended to the roof of his house.

MISHNA: There was a large court in Jerusalem called Beth

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ya'azeq, where all
the witnesses met, and where they were examined by the Beth Din. Great
feasts were made there for (the witnesses) in order to induce them to
come frequently. At first they did not stir from there all day (on the
Sabbath), <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_46) till R. Gamaliel, the
elder, ordained that they might go two thousand ells on every side; and
not only these (witnesses) but also a midwife, going to perform her
professional duties, and those who go to assist others in case of
conflagration, or against an attack of robbers, or in case of flood, or
(of rescuing people) from the ruins (of a fallen building) are
considered (for the time being) as inhabitants of that place, and may go
(thence on the Sabbath) two thousand ells on every side. How were the
witnesses examined? The first pair were examined first. The elder was
introduced first, and they said to him: Tell us in what form thou sawest
the moon; was it before or behind the sun? Was it to the north or the
south (of the sun)? What was its elevation on the horizon? Towards which
side was its inclination? What was the width of its disk? If he answered
before the sun, his evidence was worthless. After this they introduced
the younger (witness) and he was examined; if their testimony was found
to agree, it was accepted as valid; the remaining pairs (of witnesses)
were asked leading questions, not because their testimony was necessary,
but only to prevent them departing, disappointed, and to induce them to
come again often,

GEMARA: Do not the questions (asked by the Mishna), "was it before or
behind the sun?" and "was it to the north or to the south?" mean the
same thing? Answered Abayi: (The Mishna asks) whether the concave of the
crescent was before or behind the sun, and if (the witness said) it was
before the sun, his evidence was worthless, for R. Johanan says: What is
the meaning of the passage \[Job, xxv. 2\]: "Dominion and fear are with
him; he maketh peace in his high places?" It means that the sun never
faces the concave of the crescent or the concave of a rainbow.

"*What was its elevation on the horizon? Towards which side was its
inclination?*" In one Boraitha we have learned: If (the witness) said
"towards the north," his evidence was valid, but if he said, "towards
the south," it was worthless; in another Boraitha we have learned the
reverse. It presents no difficulty;

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

in the latter case it speaks of the summer, while in the former it
refers to the winter.

The rabbis taught: If one (witness) said its elevation appeared about as
high as two ox-goads and another said about as high as three, their
testimony was invalid, but either might be taken in conjunction with a
subsequent witness (who offered similar testimony). The rabbis taught
(If the witnesses say): "We have seen the reflection (of the moon) in
the water, or through a metal mirror, or in the clouds," their testimony
is not to be accepted; or (if they say we have seen) "half of it in the
water, and half of it in the heavens, or half of it in the clouds,"
their evidence carries no weight. Must they then see the new moon again
(before their testimony can be accepted)? Said Abayi: "By this is meant
that if the witnesses testify that they saw the moon accidentally, and
they then returned purposely and looked for it, but they saw it not,
their evidence is worthless." Why so? Because one might say they saw a
patch of white clouds (and they thought it was the moon).

MISHNA: The chief of the Beth Din then said: "It (the new moon) is
consecrated," and all the people repeated after him: "It is consecrated;
it is consecrated." Whether the new moon was seen at its proper time
(after twenty-nine days) or not, they used to consecrate it. R. Elazar
b. Zadok said: If it had not been seen at its proper time it was not
consecrated, because it had already been consecrated in heaven (*i.e.*,
of itself).

GEMARA: Whence do we deduce this? Said R. Hyya b. Gamda quoting Rabbi,
in the name of R. Jose b. Saul: It is written \[Lev. xxiii. 44\]: "Moses
declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the Lord," from which
we deduce that (as Moses, who was the chief in Israel, declared the
feasts to Israel, so also) the chief of the Beth Din should announce the
words, "It is consecrated."

"*All the people repeated after him: It is consecrated; it is
consecrated*." Whence do we deduce this? Said R. Papa: It is written
\[Lev. xxiii. 2\]: "Shall proclaim." "Othom" (them). Do not read
"Othom," but Athem (ye)--*i.e.*, which ye, all the people, shall
proclaim. R. Na'hman b. Itz'hak, however, said: We know it from the
words \[ibid.\]: "*These* are my feasts," *i.e.*, (*these people*) shall
announce my feasts. Why are the words "It is consecrated" repeated?
Because in the scriptural verse just quoted we find it written "holy
convocations"

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

(*literally*, announcements, and the minimum of the plural expression is
two).

"*R. Elazar b. Zadok said: If it had not been seen at its proper time it
was not consecrated*," etc. We have learned in a Boraitha, Pelimo <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_47) said: If the new moon appear at its proper
time it was not customary to consecrate it, but if it appeared out of
its proper time they used to consecrate it. R. Eliezer, however, said:
In neither case would they consecrate it, for it is written \[Lev. xxv.
10\]: "And ye shall consecrate the fiftieth year;" *years* should be
consecrated, but not *months*. Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel:
"The halakha prevails according to R. Elazer b. Zadok. Said Abayi: There
can be a support to this from the following Mishna, viz.: "If the Beth
Din and all Israel saw the new moon (on the thirtieth day) and if the
examination of the witnesses bad already taken place, and it had become
dark before they had time to announce 'It is consecrated,' the month
(just passing) is intercalary." That (the month) is intercalary is
mentioned (by the Mishna), but not that they said "It is consecrated."
It is not clear that this is a support for Abayi's argument, for it was
necessary to say that it was intercalary, or we would not have known
that the next day was the intercalary day. One might have thought that,
since the Beth Din and all Israel saw the new moon, it was apparent to
all, and that the month does not become intercalary; therefore he
teaches us that (nevertheless the month becomes intercalary).

MISHNA: R. Gamaliel had on a tablet, and on a wall of his upper room,
illustrations of the various phases of the moon, which he used to show
to the common people, saying: "Did you see the moon like this figure or
like this?"

GEMARA: Is this permitted? Have we not learned in a Boraitha that the
words "Ye shall not make anything with me" \[Ex. xx. 20\] mean, ye shall
not make pictures of my ministers that minister before me, such as the
sun, moon, stars or planets? It was different with R. Gamaliel, for
others made it for him. But others made one for R. Jehudah, yet Samuel
said to him: "Thou, sagacious one, destroy that figure!" <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_48) In the latter case the figure was
embossed, and he was afraid that one might suspect the owner (of using
it as an idol). Need one be

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

afraid of such suspicion? Did not that synagogue in Shephithibh of
Neherdai have a statue (of the king), yet Rabh, Samuel and Samuel's
father and Levi went there to pray and were not afraid of being
suspected (of idolatry)? It is a different case where there are many.
Yet R. Gamaliel was only one. Yea, but he was a prince, and there were
always many with him; And if you wish you may say that he had them made
for the purpose of instruction, and that which is written \[Deut. xviii.
9\], "thou shalt not learn to do," means but thou mayest learn, in order
to understand and to teach.

MISHNA: It happened once that two witnesses came and said: We saw the
moon in the eastern part of the heavens in the morning, and in the
western part in the evening. R. Jo'hanan b. Nouri declared them to be
false witnesses; but when they came to Yamnia, Rabbon Gamaliel received
their evidence as valid. (On another occasion) two other witnesses came
and said: We saw the moon on its proper day, but could not see it on the
next evening of the intercalary day. R. Gamaliel accepted their
testimony, but R. Dosa b. Harkhenas said: They are false witnesses; for
how can they testify of a woman being delivered (on a certain day) when
on the next day she appears to be pregnant? Then R. Jehoshua said unto
him: I approve your opinion. Upon this R. Gamaliel sent him (R.
Jehoshua) word, saying: "I order thee to appear before me on the Day of
Atonement, according to *your* computation, with your staff and with
money." R. Aqiba went to him (R. Jehoshua) and found him grieving. He
then said to him: I can prove that all which R. Gamaliel has done is
proper, for it is said: "These are the feasts of the Lord, holy
convocations which ye shall proclaim," either at their proper time, or
not at their proper time, only *their* convocations are to be considered
as holy festivals. When he (R. Jehoshua) came to R. Dosa b. Harkhinas,
the latter told him: "If we are to reinvestigate the decisions of the
Beth Din of R. Gamaliel, we must also reinvestigate the decisions of all
the tribunals of justice which have existed from the time of Moses till
the present day; for it is said \[Ex. xxiv. 9\] Moses, Aaron, Nadab,
Abihu, and seventy elders went up (to the Mount)." Why were not the
names of the elders also specified? To teach us that every three men in
Israel that form a Beth Din are to be respected in an equal degree with
the Beth Din of Moses. Then did R. Jehoshua take his staff and money in
his hand, and went to Yamnia, to

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

R. Gamaliel, on the very day on which the Day of Atonement would have
been according to his computation, when R. Gamaliel arose and kissed him
on the forehead, saying: "Enter in peace, my master and disciple! My
master--in knowledge; my disciple--since thou didst obey my injunction."

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha that R. Gamaliel said to the
sages: "Thus it has been handed down to me from the house of my
grandfather (Zamalill the elder) that sometimes the new moon appears
elongated and sometimes diminished. R. Hyya saw the old moon yet on the
morning of the twenty-ninth day, and threw clods of earth at it, saying:
'We should consecrate thee in the evening, and thou art seen now? Go,
hide thyself!'"

Said Rabbi to R. Hyya: "Go to Entob and consecrate the month and send
back to me as a password <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_49) 'David, the
King of Israel, still lives.'"

The rabbis taught: Once it happened that the heavens were thick with
clouds and the form of the moon was seen on the twenty-ninth of the
month (of Elul), so that the people thought that New Year's Day should
be then proclaimed, and they (the Beth Din) were about to consecrate it.
Said R. Gamaliel to them: Thus it has been handed down to me by
tradition, from the house of my grandfather, the consecration of the
moon cannot take place at a period less than twenty-nine and a half
days, two-thirds and .0052 (*i.e.*, seventy-three 'Halaqim),of an hour.
On that self-same day the mother of Ben Zaza died and R. Gamaliel
delivered a great funeral oration, <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_50)
not because she specially deserved it, but in order that the people
might know that the new moon had not yet been consecrated by the Beth
Din.

"*R. Aqiba went to him, and found him grieving*." The schoolmen
propounded a question: "Who found whom grieving?" Come and hear. We have
learned in a Boraitha: "R. Aqiba went to R. Jehoshua and found him
grieving, so he asked him: 'Rabbi, why art thou grieving?' And he
answered: 'Aqiba, I would rather lie sick for twelve months than to have
this order issued for my appearance.' Rejoined R. Aqiba: 'Rabbi, permit
me to say one thing in thy presence which thou thyself hast taught me.'
R. Jehoshua granted him permission,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

and R. Aqiba proceeded: 'It is written \[Lev. xxiii. 2, 4 and 37\]:
Three times 'shall proclaim Othom (them), which should, however, not be
read Othom (them), but Athem (ye), which would make the verse read, "Ye
shall proclaim." Now the threefold "*ye*" signifies that even if *ye*
were deceived by false pretences and changed the day of the festivals,
or even if *ye* did it purposely, or even if *ye* were held to be in
error by others--once the dates had been established they must so
remain.' With the following words R. Jehoshua answered R. Aqiba: Aqiba,
thou hast comforted me; Aqiba, thou hast comforted me.'"

"*When he (Rabbi Jehoshua) came to R. Dosa b. Harkhenas*," etc. The
rabbis taught: The reason that the names of those elders are not
mentioned, is, in order that one should not say: Is So-and-so like Moses
and Aaron? Is So-and-so like Nadabh and Abihu? Is So-and-so like Eldad
and Medad? (And how do we know that one should not ask thus?) Because,
it is written \[i Sam. xii. 6\]: "And Samuel said unto the people the
Lord that appointed Moses and Aaron "and in the same connection it is
written \[ibid. 11\]: "And the Lord sent Jerubaal and Bedan and Jephtha
and Samuel." \[Jerubaal is Gideon; and why is he named Jerubaal? Because
he strove against Baal. Bedan is Sampson; and why is he named Bedan?
Because he came from Dan. Jephtha means just what it is (*i.e.*, he had
no surname or attribute).\] And it is also written \[Ps. xcix. 6\]:
"Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who called
upon his name." The sacred text regards the three common people equal
with the three noblest, to teach us that Jerubaal was in his generation
like Moses in his; Bedan in his generation was like Aaron in his;
Jephtha in his generation was like Samuel in his generation. From all
this one must learn that if even the commonest of the commoners is
appointed leader by a community, he must be considered as the noblest of
the nobility, for it is said \[Deut. xvii. 9\]: "And thou shalt come
unto the priests, the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in his
days." (Why does the passage say "in those days"?) Can you imagine that
one could go to a judge who was not in his days? (Surely not! But by
these words Scripture teaches us that a judge is to be held "in his
days" equal in authority with the greatest of his predecessors.) We find
a similar teaching in Eccles. vii. 10: "Say not thou that the former
days were better than these!

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

"*He took his staff*," etc. The rabbis taught: (R. Gamaliel said to R.
Jehoshua): Happy is the generation in which the leaders listen to their
followers, and through this the followers consider it so much the more
their duty (to heed the teachings of the leaders).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[42:1](ros04.htm#fr_45) The name of a place
between Jerusalem and Jericho.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[42:2](ros04.htm#fr_46) Samaritans.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[43:1](ros04.htm#fr_47) The thirtieth day from
the last New Moon was always New Moon, but in intercalary months the
thirty-first day was also New Moon (second day). In the latter case the
thirtieth day (first day of New Moon) belonged to the passing month, and
the second day of New Moon was the first day of the new month. Bonfires
were always lighted on the night of the thirtieth day, *i.e.*, on the
night after New Moon; and if no bonfires were lighted then there were
two days New Moon. In the case of the month of Elul they would, after
twenty-nine days, observe New Year's Day. Now, if that month happened to
be intercalary (*i.e.*, have thirty days) and bonfires would have been
lighted, the next day would have had to be observed as New Year's Day
again, and the people would consequently have lost a second
day.--*Rasht*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[44:1](ros04.htm#fr_48) For if they had already
traveled two thousand ells, they were prohibited from journeying more
than four cubits more.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[46:1](ros04.htm#fr_49) The name of a Tana, a
contemporary of Rabbi.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[46:2](ros04.htm#fr_50) Literally "put out the
eyes of that figure!"

<span id="fn_49"></span>[48:1](ros04.htm#fr_51) This device was resorted
to, because in the days of Rabbi, the Romans had prohibited the Jews,
under penalty of death, to consecrate the moon.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[48:2](ros04.htm#fr_52) No funerals or funeral
orations were or are permitted on the holidays.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](ros05)
