[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk03)  [Next](shk05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

#### SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

###### OF

## VOLUME IV.--TRACT SHEKALIM. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

### CHAPTER I.

MISHNA *a* treats of: What were the duties of the Beth Din in the month
of Adar in the time of the second Temple. When the Megillah (Book of
Esther) was to be read in the fortified cities. For what purpose
messengers were sent out, and what were the things to be heralded.

MISHNA *b* treats of: What was the punishment for not obeying the
commandments of Kelayim in the former times and later.

MISHNA *c* deals with: When the money-changers, with their tables, began
their work in the countries of Judea and in Jerusalem. The time for
pledges which were taken for not paying the Shekalim. From what persons
the pledges were to be taken. If a father might pay the Shekalim for his
children.

MISHNA *d* treats of: What ordinance Ben Buchri proclaimed in Jamnia in
behalf of the priests, and what R. Johanan b. Zakkai rejoined. The
defence of the priests, with their interpretation of biblical passages,
which was accepted only for the sake of peace.

MISHNA *e* treats of: The voluntary payment of Shekalim from women,
slaves, and minors being accepted, but not from the heathens or
Samaritans. Bird-offerings not accepted from persons affected with
venereal diseases or from women after confinement. Sin and vow
offerings, however, were accepted from the Samaritans. The vow-offerings
were also accepted from heathens. The general rule concerning this.

MISHNA *f* deals with: The premium one had to pay in addition to the
half-shekel. Who was obliged to do so? The different opinions of the
sages and R. Meir. How much one had to pay if given one Selah and taking
a shekel in exchange,

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

MISHNA *g* treats of: The law concerning one who pays for a poor man,
for a neighbor, and for a countryman. Law concerning brothers and
partners paying together; also, law regarding cattle-tithe. How much was
the premium.

### CHAPTER II.

MISHNA *a*. One may put together the Shekalim and exchange them for a
gold coin called Darkon. Concerning the chests which were given to the
collectors in the country and at Jerusalem. What is the law if money
were stolen or lost by the messengers of a city, when a portion of the
Shekalim was already expended; what is the law if not expended.

MISHNA *b*. Concerning the law when one gives his shekels to another to
pay his head-taxes for him; if he pays his shekels from the money of the
second tithes or from the money of the fruit of the Sabbatical year.
Concerning how he shall replace it and use it for the same purpose.

MISHNA *c*. The law concerning one who gathered single coins little by
little and said: "With this money I shall pay my shekels." The different
opinions of the schools of Hillel and Shamai in this matter. Concerning
the same case when one gathers money for sin-offerings. What shall be
done with the eventual remains of such money.

MISHNA *d*. Concerning the explanation of R. Simeon of the teachings of
the school of Hillel. The discussion of the former with R. Jehudah. The
claims of the latter that the coins of the Shekalim were also changed in
times and places. The rejoinder of R. Simeon to this.

MISHNA *e*. The law concerning the remainder of money intended for
Shekalim when considered to be ordinary. Regarding the remainder of the
tenth part of an ephah, bird-offerings, and guilt-offerings: what shall
be done with it. A rule concerning this matter. Also, regulations
concerning the remainder of Passover sacrifices, Nazarite offerings, the
remainder of moneys for the poor in general and individuals, of money
for prisoners, for burial of the dead, and R, Meir and R. Nathan's
opinions regarding this matter.

### CHAPTER III.

MISHNA *a*. Regarding the appointed periods of the year when the money
was drawn from the treasury. The different opinions, concerning this
matter, of R. Aqiba b. Asai, R. Eliezer, and R. Simeon. The same time
appointed for cattle-tithes.

MISHNA *b*. Concerning the ceremony of drawing the money at all periods
of the year. The law regarding measures of the boxes in which the coins
of the Shekalim were filled, and the numbers of the chests in which the
money was drawn from the boxes for the expenses of the Temple. Which box
must be opened first, and which last. What garments the person drawing
the money must wear. How a man must stand unblemished before his
fellow-man and before his God.

MISHNA *c*. Concerning the custom of the house of Rabban Gamaliel, when
the members of the house had paid their Shekalim. The law regarding

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

one who drew money did not commence until he had said to the bystanders,
"I will now draw," and they answered, "Draw, draw, draw," three times.

MISHNA *d*. Concerning the covering of the boxes after drawing the
money. For which countries the drawings were performed in the first
period, the second, and the third.

### CHAPTER IV.

MISHNA *a*. What was done with the money drawn? Concerning the watchmen
that were sent out to guard the after-growth of the Sabbatical year, of
which the Omer and two loaves were taken for sacrifice. The opinion of
R. Jose in this matter, and what the rabbis answered.

MISHNA *b*. Concerning the red heifer, the goat that was to be sent
away, the strip of scarlet, the bridge for the cow, the bridge for the
goat, the canal, the city wall, the towers, and other necessities of the
city: all were paid for out of the Shekalim money. What Abba Saul said.

MISHNA *c*. What was done with the balance of the money left over in the
treasury. The discussion of R. Ishmael and R. Aqiba in this matter. Some
of the many things which are enumerated in the Palestinian Talmud and
which were done with this money. Among them was the hiring of teachers
for priests to teach them the laws of the sacrifices.

MISHNA *d*. What was done with the remainder of the moneys of the chest.
The different opinions of R. Ishmael, R. Aqiba, and R. Hanina, the
assistant chief of the priests, concerning profit: if it might be raised
from the remaining money or not, and of what money the gold plates for
the decorations of the Holy of Holies were made. Also, concerning the
benefit of the altar.

MISHNA *e*. What was done with the remainder of the incense (as the
incense of the New Year must be bought with the new Shekalim money). The
sanctification of the incense on hand then transferred to that money,
and then redeemed with the money of the new revenue.

MISHNA *f*. Concerning the law when one devoted his entire possessions
in honor of the Lord: what should be done with them. The discussions of
R. Aqiba and Ben Asai regarding this matter.

MISHNA *g*. Concerning the law when one devoted his possessions, and
among them were cattle, male and female, fit for the altar. The
discussions of this matter between R. Eliezer and R. Jehoshua. R. Aqiba
is inclined to the opinion of R. Eliezer, which seems to him to be more
proper, but adds that he had heard that both opinions were right
according to circumstances.

MISHNA *h*. If one devote his possessions, and among them are things fit
for the altar, such as wines, oils, and birds, what should be done with
them. R. Eliezer decreed it, and no one opposed him.

MISHNA *i*. Contractors, for the delivery of all things for the altar
and the improvements of the Temple, were appointed every month; but if
the

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

prices changed during the thirty days, the Sanctuary must not suffer any
injury. Such was the agreement made between them. The illustration of
this.

### CHAPTER V.

MISHNA *a*. Concerning some names of the offices and the heads of them
in the Sanctuary during the entire period when the second Temple was in
existence. What were the officers' duties, and how they officiated.

MISHNA *b*. Concerning the order of the head officers; namely, the king,
the high priest, his assistant, two catholicoses, and seven
chamberlains, not less than two officers being put in charge of public
moneys.

MISHNA *c*. Regarding the seals that were in the Sanctuary, serving for
the beverages and meat-offerings which must be brought, according to the
Bible, with every sacrifice. Concerning the inscription on the seals and
their usage. Ben Azai added one seal for the poor sinner. The names of
the officers, of the seal-keeper and the officer who sells the above
offerings.

MISHNA *d*. The date must be put on every seal. The law regarding
surplus money being found in the treasury of the seal-keeper: to whom it
belongs; and if a deficit, who must supply it.

MISHNA *e*. The law concerning one who lost his seal; what must be done.

MISHNA *f*. Concerning the two chambers in the Sanctuary, of which one
was called "Chamber of Silence" and the other "Chamber of Utensils."
What was done there, during what time they were investigated, and what
was done with the presented utensils which were useless for the Temple.

### CHAPTER VI.

MISHNA *a*. Concerning the thirteen covered chests and thirteen tables
which were in the Sanctuary. How many prostrations took place in the
Sanctuary. How R. Gamaliel and R. Hanina, assistant chief of the high
priest, added one in the place where the ark was hidden.

MISHNA *b*. Relates how a blemished priest who was engaged in selecting
and peeling wood had noticed the place where the ark was hidden, but
before he had time to tell it to the others he expired.

MISHNA *c*. Concerning the directions where the prostrations were made.
How many gates were in the Temple: their names, and why they were so
named; also, different opinions of the sages concerning this. There were
two gates which were nameless.

MISHNA *d*. Of what material the thirteen tables were made, where they
stood, for what purpose they were used. Concerning the golden table in
the Temple itself, upon which the showbreads were constantly lying.

MISHNA *e*. Concerning the inscriptions on the thirteen covered chests
in the Sanctuary, and what was done with them. The different opinions of
R. Jehudah and the sages as to using certain money put in some chests.

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

MISHNA *f*. Concerning the amount of articles to be furnished in payment
of a vow one made, who did not explain how much he intended to give; for
instance, wood, incense, gold coins, etc. A rule that was made
concerning this. The hides of all sacrifices belong to the priest.

### CHAPTER VII.

MISHNA *a*. If money was found in between the differently marked chests,
to which chest the money belonged. Concerning this the rule was: One
must be guided by the proximity, even in the case of the less important,
etc.

MISHNA *b*. Concerning money found in Jerusalem, in the court of the
Temple, in the times of the Festivals and in the ordinary times'.

MISHNA *c*. Concerning meat found in the court of the Temple, in the
city, and any place where Israelites resided and where Gentiles and
Israelites together resided.

MISHNA *d*. Concerning cattle found between Jerusalem and Migdal Eder,
and in the vicinity of the city in all directions: what the law
prescribes. The different opinions of some sages.

MISHNA *e*. Relates how, in former days, the finder of such cattle was
pledged to bring drink-offerings, and how afterwards the high court
decreed to furnish them from the public moneys.

MISHNAS *f* and *g*. R. Simeon named seven decrees which were
promulgated by the high court, and the above decree was one of them. R.
Jehudah, however, does not agree on some points with him. R. Jose has
also something to say about this.

### CHAPTER VIII.

MISHNA *a*. Concerning streets in which people must walk during the time
of the Festival in Jerusalem, for, the sake of cleanness. The different
opinions, in this matter, of R. Meir and the sages.

MISHNA *b*. Regarding utensils found on the way towards the
plunge-baths: if they are clean or not, and the different opinions of R.
Meir and R. Jose.

MISHNA *c*. Regarding the butcher-knife, if it was found in the street
on the 4th of Nissan; and what is the case if the 14th falls on a
Sabbath.

MISHNA *d*. Concerning where the curtain of the Sanctuary must be
submerged if it become defiled. The first time it was submerged it was
spread out for the people to admire the beauty of the work.

MISHNA *e*. What Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel had to tell in the name of
Simeon, the son of the assistant high priest. How the curtain was made:
the great amount of the cost and how many hundred priests were required
to submerge it.

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

MISHNA *f*. If meat of the Holy of Holies became defiled, where it must
be burned. The different opinions of the schools of Shamai and Hillel on
this point.

MISHNA *g*. The different opinions of R. Eliezer and R. Aqiba concerning
anything that had become defiled through a principal uncleanness.

MISHNA *h*. The joints of the daily sacrifices, where they were laid
down; the sacrifices of the new moon, where they were placed, The
payment of Shekalim, if it was obligatory after the destruction of the
Temple. The same law regarding cattle-tithe, tithes of grain, and
deliverance of the firstlings. The law if one sanctified Shekalim or
firstlings after the destruction of the Temple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiii:1](shk04.htm#fr_0) See introduction to
synopsis in Tract Sabbath, Vol. I., p. xxix. This tract has no Gemara.
The synopsis contains the Mishnas, with their commentaries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I.](shk05)
