[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk07)  [Next](shk09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

MISHNA. (a) What was done with this money drawn? The daily sacrifices,
the additional sacrifices, and the drink-offerings belonging to them
were bought therewith; also the Omers <span
id="fr_36"></span>[a1](#fn_36) (sheaves), the two loaves, the
showbreads, and communal sacrifices in general. The watchmen who had to
guard the after-growth on the Sabbatical year were paid out of this
money. R. Jose says: "One who so desired could undertake the guarding
(of the after-growth on Sabbatical years) without pay." <span
id="fr_37"></span>[a2](#fn_37) The sages answered him: "Thou wilt admit
thyself, that the sacrifices (from the after-growth on Sabbatical years)
must be brought only from communal property." <span
id="fr_38"></span>[a3](#fn_38)

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

(*b*) The red heifer, the goat that was to be sent away (on the Day of
Atonement), the strip of scarlet, were paid for out of this money. The
bridge for the cow, the bridge for the goat that was to be sent away,
and the scarlet strip tied between the latter's horns, the canal (at the
Temple), the city wall, the towers and other necessities of the city,
are paid for out of the remainder of the treasury-money. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[b1](#fn_39) Abba Saul says: "The costs of the
building of the bridge for the red heifer were defrayed by the high
priests themselves."

(*c*) What was done with the balance left over in the treasury (after
all the things in the preceding Mishna had been procured)? Wines, oils,
and fine meal were bought with it to the profit of the sanctuary (for
the purpose of selling it again to those who brought sacrifices). <span
id="fr_40"></span>[c1](#fn_40) So said R. Ishmael. R. Aqiba, however,
says: "Sanctified moneys or contributions for the poor are not dealt
with for profit."

(*d*) What was done with the remainder of the money (taken from the
chests)? It is used for gold plate for the decoration of the Holy of
Holies. R. Ishmael says: "The mentioned fruit (profit of the wines,
oils, and fine meal sold in the Temple) was for the benefit of the
altar, and the remainder of the money drawn was for service-utensils."
R. Aqiba says: "The remainder of the money drawn was for the benefit of
the altar and that of the drink-offerings was for service-utensils." R.
Hanina, the assistant chief of priests, says: "The remainder of the
drink-offerings

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

was for the benefit of the altar and that of the money drawn was for
service-utensils." The two latter would not admit of the alleged gain
from fruit <span id="fr_41"></span>[d1](#fn_41) (profit).

(*e*) What was done with the remainder of the incense? <span
id="fr_42"></span>[e1](#fn_42) At first the remuneration of the
preparers of the incense was set aside from the treasury; the
sanctification of the incense on hand was then transferred to that
money, and the former was then given to the preparers in lieu of
compensation <span id="fr_43"></span>[e2](#fn_43); it is then bought
back from them with the money of the new revenue: providing the new
revenue was on hand in time, it was bought back with such money;
otherwise, the old revenue was used for that purpose.

(*f*) If one devote his entire possessions in honor of the Lord, and
among them are things which are fit for communal sacrifices (*e.g.*,
incense), the preparers of the incense should be paid therewith. So
teaches R. Aqiba. Ben Azai answered him <span
id="fr_44"></span>[f1](#fn_44): "Such is not the right mode of
procedure. The compensation

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of the preparers must first be separated from such possessions, then the
sanctification of those possessions transferred to money; then give the
separated things to the preparers for compensation; and, finally, buy
them back from them with money of the new revenue."

(*g*) If one devote his possessions, and there are among them cattle fit
for the altar, male or female, the male, according to R. Eliezer, shall
be sold for whole-offerings and the female for peace-offerings to such
as are in need of them; and the proceeds of such sale, together with the
other possessions, shall be devoted to the treasury for the maintenance
of the Temple. R. Jehoshua says: "The male are sacrificed as
whole-offerings, the female are sold to such as are in need of
peace-offerings, and the proceeds used for the sacrifice of
whole-offerings. The balance of the possessions is devoted to the
maintenance of the Temple." <span id="fr_45"></span>[g1](#fn_45) Said R.
Aqiba: "The opinion of R. Eliezer seems to me to be more proper than
that of R. Jehoshua; for R. Eliezer has an even procedure, whereas R.
Jehoshua divides it." <span id="fr_46"></span>[g2](#fn_46) R. Papeos
says: "I have heard that it is done according to both teachers; viz.:
According to R. Eliezer if the owner who devotes his possessions
explicitly mentions his cattle, and according to R. Jehoshua if he
silently includes his cattle in his possessions." <span
id="fr_47"></span>[g3](#fn_47)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

(*h*) If one devote his possessions, and there are among them things fit
for the altar, such as wines, oils, and birds, says R. Eliezer, the
latter things should be sold to such as need offerings of these kinds,
and the proceeds used for the sacrificing of whole-offerings; the
balance of the possessions goes toward the maintenance of the
Temple. <span id="fr_48"></span>[h1](#fn_48)

(*i*) Every thirty days the prices paid by the treasury are determined.
If one contract to furnish flour at the rate of four Saah (for one
Sela), and the price is raised to three, he must nevertheless furnish
the same at four Saah (for one Sela). <span
id="fr_49"></span>[i1](#fn_49) If he contract at the rate of three and
the price fall to four, he must in that case furnish four, for the
Sanctuary always has that prerogative. If the flour become wormy, it is
the loss of the contractor; and if the wine become sour it is also his
loss, and he does not receive the money for his wares until the
purchased wares have been favorably accepted as sacrifices at the
altar. <span id="fr_50"></span>[i2](#fn_50)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[15:a1](shk08.htm#fr_36)

# CHAPTER IV.

MISHNA *a*. 'The Omers and the two loaves, which had to be made of
Palestinian grain and of the new crop only, were bought out of the
Shekalim during the six ordinary years, but in the Sabbatical year,
where neither sowing nor reaping was done, where were they obtained? Men
were sent out to discover where grain was growing as an after-growth,
that had not been sown, and then watchmen were placed there to see that
no one disturbed the crop; for it being public property, the possessor
of the soil where the grain grew could not prevent its being taken. The
men who discovered the grain and the watchmen were paid for their
services out of the Shekalim, and such payment was regarded as the price
of the grain, so that the grain again became communal property.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[15:a2](shk08.htm#fr_37) R. Jose, in making this
statement, holds, that one may present the community with a thing
intended for a voluntary offering, and thus the man who guards the
after-growth gratuitously, thereby acquiring a right to it, may donate
it to the community for a communal sacrifice.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[15:a3](shk08.htm#fr_38) The sages mean to say
that the Omer, the two loaves, the showbreads, and the communal
sacrifices must be taken from articles that were communal property from
the beginning, while other sacrifices may be offered from things donated
by a man who does so with a good will. (See Rosh Hashana.)

<span id="fn_39"></span>[16:b1](shk08.htm#fr_39) MISHNA *b*. The
remainder of the Shekalim, left over after the three cases had been
filled, which was called "remainder of the room," was stored in a high
place, access to which was very difficult, no ladder being permitted to
be used. Out of this money all the accessories for the sacrifices, as
enumerated in the Mishna, were procured. The details of these
accessories are explained in Tracts Para and Yuma.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[16:c1](shk08.htm#fr_40) MISHNA *c*. It is known
that all those who brought sacrifices were obliged to purchase wine,
oil, and fine meal for meal-offerings, and all this was purchased in the
court of the Temple. In the Palestinian Talmud many things are
enumerated, for which purposes the balance of the money was used; for
instance, the hiring of teachers to instruct the priests in the art of
slaughtering, in the halakhas pertaining to such matters, etc., also for
the payment of those who investigated blemishes in the sacrifices, and a
great many other things to be found in that chapter (Halakha 4).

<span id="fn_41"></span>[17:d1](shk08.htm#fr_41) MISHNA *d*. In the
preceding Mishna, R. Ishmael declares, that the balance of the money in
the treasury is used to purchase wines, oils, and fine meal, to be
resold to those bringing sacrifices, and in this Mishna he relates what
is done with the profits accruing from such sales. R. Aqiba, however,
who would not permit of selling the things mentioned for profit,
declares that the money for the altar is taken directly from the balance
left over in the treasury; and R. Hanina holds, that the balance of the
money drawn is used for the service-utensils.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[17:e1](shk08.htm#fr_42) MISHNA *e*. The
remainder of the incense refers to the amount of incense left over at
the end of the year. A quantity of incense was prepared for the whole
year, and every priest would use a handful at a time; but, as handfuls
are not all alike, no fixed amount could be prepared: hence the
remainder.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[17:e2](shk08.htm#fr_43) Compensation for labor
must not be made with sacrificed articles, for the sanctification cannot
be transferred to labor that had already been performed; it can be
transferred, however, to actual money, and in consequence the subterfuge
for the payment of the preparers of the incense was resorted to as
stated in the Mishna.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[17:f1](shk08.htm#fr_44) MISHNA *f*. R. Aqiba
and Ben Azai differ in this Mishna as to whether sanctification can be
transferred to labor or not. R. Aqiba holds, that labor can be
compensated with sanctified articles; but Ben Azai holds, that it
cannot. According to Maimonides the Halakha prevails according to Ben
Azai, because in the previous Mishna there is a concurrent opinion.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[18:g1](shk08.htm#fr_45) MISHNA *g*. The point
of difference between R. Eliezer and R. Jehoshua is this: The former
holds, that if a man devoted all his possessions, his intention was to
devote them for the maintenance of the Temple only; while the latter
holds, that the intention was to devote the possessions according to
their adaptability. Hence if, among the possessions, there were objects
adapted for the altar, they should be devoted to the altar; if, however,
these were female cattle, which could not be brought as a
whole-offering, nor, by reason of the absence of the owner, even as a
peace-offering, such cattle should be sold and the proceeds applied to
the purchase of whole-offerings.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[18:g2](shk08.htm#fr_46) R. Aqiba holds with R.
Eliezer, because, in his opinion, a man who devotes all his possessions
does so with but a single intention; and this is what he terms an even
procedure.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[18:g3](shk08.htm#fr_47) R. Papeos said, that if
the man devoted all his possessions to the honor of the Lord, R.
Jehoshua would be correct, for his possessions can be used in honor of
the Lord in various ways; but if he explicitly stated that he devoted
his possessions for the maintenance of the Temple, R. Eliezer's opinion
is proper.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[19:h1](shk08.htm#fr_48) MISHNA *h*. The reason
that R. Eliezer decrees that wines, oils, and birds should be sold, and
whole-offerings brought in their stead, is because the articles
mentioned cannot be redeemed with money.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[19:i1](shk08.htm#fr_49) MISHNA *i*. Every
month, bids were received from contractors for the furnishing of the
necessaries for the Temple and altar for one month. The lowest bidder
received the contract, and it was distinctly understood that, even if
prices were raised during the month, his prices were to remain as
originally contracted for.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[19:i2](shk08.htm#fr_50) The Palestinian Talmud
states, that the money due the contractors was paid them by the priests
immediately upon the latter receiving the wares, for the priests were
very careful, and never allowed flour to become wormy or wine to spoil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](shk09)
