[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](shk10)  [Next](shk12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 2: Tracts Erubin, Shekalim, Rosh Hashana*, tr.
by Michael L. Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

# CHAPTER VII.

MISHNA: (*a*) If money is found between the chest marked "Shekalim" and
that marked "voluntary offerings," it belongs to the chest marked
"Shekalim" if it lies nearer to the same, and to the one marked
"voluntary offerings" if it be nearer *that*. So also does it belong to
the voluntary offerings if it be found midway between the two chests.
Money found lying between the chests marked "wood" and "incense"
belongs, if it be nearer the former, to the former; if nearer the latter
to the latter, and also to the latter if found midway between the two.
Money found lying between the chest marked "bird-offerings" and the one
marked "doves" for whole-offerings belongs to the former if it be nearer
the former; and if nearer the latter to the latter, and also to the
latter if midway between the two. Money found between ordinary moneys
and the moneys of the second tithes belongs, if nearer the former to the
former; if nearer the latter to the latter, and also to the latter if
found midway between the two. <span id="fr_80"></span>[a1](#fn_80) The
rule is: One must be guided by the proximity, even in the case of the
less important; but in the event of equidistance, (one must be guided)
by the greater importance (of the moneys).

(*b*) Money found (in Jerusalem) on the place of the cattle-dealers is
regarded as second tithe. <span id="fr_81"></span>[b1](#fn_81) Money
found on the Temple-mount

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

is ordinary. <span id="fr_82"></span>[b2](#fn_82) Other money found in
Jerusalem generally, during the festivals, is regarded as second tithe;
at other times of the year as ordinary. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[b3](#fn_83)

(*c*) Meat found in the outer court (of the Temple) is considered
whole-offering if in complete joints; if cut in pieces it is
sin-offering. <span id="fr_84"></span>[c1](#fn_84) Meat found in the
city is considered peace-offering. <span id="fr_85"></span>[c2](#fn_85)
All such meat must be laid aside for putrefaction, and then be burned in
the crematory. Meat found anywhere else in the land is prohibited (to be
used) as carrion, if found in whole joints; if found cut in pieces, it
may be eaten; and during the festivals, when a great deal of meat is on
hand, even whole joints may be eaten. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[c3](#fn_86)

(*d*) Cattle found all the way from Jerusalem to Migdal Eder, and in the
same vicinity in all directions, are considered, if male, as
whole-offerings, and if female as peace-offerings. R. Jehudah

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

says: "If they are fit for Passover-offerings they may be used for such
purpose, providing Passover is not more than thirty days off." <span
id="fr_87"></span>[d1](#fn_87)

(*e*) In former days, the finder of such cattle was pledged until he
brought the drink-offerings belonging to such sacrifices; every finder,
however, letting such cattle stand and going on his way, the high court
decreed, that the costs of the drink-offerings belonging thereto be
defrayed out of the public money.

(*f*) R. Simeon says: Seven decrees were promulgated by that court, and
the latter was one of them. Further: If a non-Israelite send
whole-offerings with the necessary drink-offerings from over the sea,
they are offered up; but if sent without the necessary drink-offerings,
the costs of the latter are defrayed from public money. If, again, a
proselyte died and left offerings, the drink-offerings, if also left by
him, are offered up with the others; if not left, the costs of same are
defrayed out of public money. It was also a decree of the court, that in
the event of a high priest dying, the necessary meat-offering
\[Leviticus vi. 13\] should be paid for out of the public treasury. R.
Jehudah, however, declared, that this should be done at the expense of
the heirs. In both cases a tenth of an ephah should be offered.

(*g*) Further, that the priests may (at the sacrificial meals) make use
of the salt and the wood (from the sanctuary); that the priests do not
commit a breach of trust when misusing the ashes of the red heifer <span
id="fr_88"></span>[g1](#fn_88); lastly, that the public treasury
reimburse

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

for paid bird-offerings that had become unfit. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[g2](#fn_89) R. Jose, however, says: "He who contracts
for the furnishing of the bird-offerings must reimburse for the spoilt."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[29:a1](shk11.htm#fr_80)

# CHAPTER VII.

MISHNA *a*. There are different degrees of sanctification attached to
the several kinds of offerings, some greater and some lesser. In order
not to appropriate money belonging to an offering of a greater degree of
sanctification to one of a lesser degree, it was decided that proximity
of the stray coins should govern the disposition of such money. Where,
however, the money was equidistant, it was appropriated to the offerings
of a greater degree of sanctification, and the degree may be determined
from the Mishna itself.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[29:b1](shk11.htm#fr_81) MISHNA *b*. Because it
was rare for priests to visit the cattle-market, but the Israelites who
at any time came to buy cattle for <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>
sacrifices generally bought the same with the money exchanged for their
second tithes.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[30:b2](shk11.htm#fr_82) Money found on the
Temple-mount was presumably dropped there by priests. It never occurred
that a priest should carry money belonging to the treasury about with
him; for even if he drew some money for the purpose of purchasing
necessaries, he immediately turned it over to the vender. Hence, any
money which a priest may have lost was his own, and ordinary.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[30:b3](shk11.htm#fr_83) During the festivals,
when all the Israelites congregated in Jerusalem, they brought money
only to expend for their second tithes, hence money found in any place
is considered as second tithes.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[30:c1](shk11.htm#fr_84) MISHNA *c*. Because
whole-offerings were sacrificed in complete joints, but sin-offerings,
which were eaten by the priests, were usually cut in pieces. Neither
must be eaten, because it might be that the latter had been left over
from the preceding day and should be burned; but the distinction is made
simply in case one had eaten of the meat that was cut up. If he had
eaten of the complete joint, he was certainly guilty, but if he had
eaten of the cut meat, it could not be said positively that he was
guilty.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[30:c2](shk11.htm#fr_85) This must also not be
eaten, because it may have lain more than two days and a night; but if
it is eaten, no one is guilty.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[30:c3](shk11.htm#fr_86) Incidentally the rule
is laid down as to meat found anywhere in Palestine. If the meat is
found in whole joints, it is presumed to be carrion left for dogs, and
must not be eaten. During the festivals, when meat is plentiful, it is
presumed to be slaughtered meat, and may be eaten.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[31:d1](shk11.htm#fr_87) MISHNA *d*. R. Jehudah
states, that if the animal found was a yearling and a male, it is
considered a Passover-offering, but may be sacrificed only as a
peace-offering, because a Passover-offering must be intended for a
stipulated number of persons. (See Exod. xii. 4.) The sages, however,
say, that on account of the number of whole-offerings which were brought
at the time, the animal found must not be eaten, for fear lest it be
intended for a whole-offering and a grave offence be committed. Hence it
should be sacrificed as a whole-offering only.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[31:g1](shk11.htm#fr_88) MISHNA *g*. It was not
allowed to appropriate any part of a sacrifice designated for some
special use for any other purpose. If this was done, however,
(unintentionally,) it was considered a trespass, and a trespass-offering
had to be sacrificed as expiation for the sin. The ashes of the red
heifer did not come under the above ruling previously (for reason, see
Siphri), but on account of the frequent misuse of those ashes a decree
was promulgated placing them under the same ruling as other parts of
sacrifices, which were not to be misappropriated. Subsequently, this
Mishna teaches that, there being no further necessity for the
precautionary measure, the decree was reversed and the ashes restored to
their former insignificance. This was included among the seven decrees.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[32:g2](shk11.htm#fr_89) A special decree had to
be promulgated to cover this case. Had this not been done, contractors
would have refused to furnish birds for offerings, because there were
very many birds used, and it was burdensome to properly care for them.
Still, R. Jose does not agree to this, claiming that the contractor
might use it for other purposes and thus save the Sanctuary the loss.
According to Maimonides, the Halakha prevails according to R. Jose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](shk12)
