[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb00) [Next](bb02)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

# CHAPTER I<span id="page_6_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_6_note_1).

OF GOD'S ETERNAL INTENTION IN RESPECT OF THE CREATION OF THE UNIVERSE.

   I<span class="small">T</span> is well for us to take the materials
for our discourse from the divine Scriptures, that we may not stray from
the straight paths of the way of truth. The blessed David saith, 'Lord,
thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations, before the
mountains were conceived<span id="page_6_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_6_note_2).' David, the harpist of
the Spirit, makes known thereby, that although there was a beginning of
the framing of Adam and the other creatures when they were made, yet in
the mind of God it had no beginning; that it might not be thought that
God has a new thought in respect of anything that is renewed day by day,
or that the construction of Creation was newly planned in the mind of
God: but everything that He has created and is about to create, even the
marvellous construction of the world to come, has been planned from
everlasting in the immutable mind of God. As the natural child in the
womb of his mother knows not her who bears him, nor is conscious of his
father, who, after God, is the cause of his formation; so also Adam,
being in the mind of the Creator, knew Him not. And when he was created,
and recognised himself as being created, he remained with this knowledge
six hours only<span id="page_6_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_6_note_3), and there came over him a
change, from knowledge to <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> ignorance and
from good to evil. Hence, when Divine Providence wished to create the
world, the framing of Adam was first designed and conceived in the mind
of God, and then that of the (other) creatures; as David saith, 'Before
the mountains were conceived.' Consequently, Adam is older than the
(other) creatures in respect of his conception, and the (other)
creatures are older than Adam in respect of their birth and their being
made. And whereas God created all creatures in silence and by a word, He
brought forth Adam out of His thoughts, and formed him with His holy
hands, and breathed the breath of life into him from His Spirit, and
Adam became a living soul<span id="page_7_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_7_note_1), and God gave him the
knowledge of the difference between good and evil. When he perceived his
Creator, then was God formed and conceived within the mind of man; and
man became a temple to God his maker, as it is written, 'Know ye not
that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in
you<span id="page_7_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_7_note_2)?' And again, 'I will dwell
in them, and walk in them<span id="page_7_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_7_note_3).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb02)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_6"></span>p. 6

<span id="page_6_note_1"></span>[1](#page_6_fr_1) Chap. ii in the Oxford
MS.

<span id="page_6_note_2"></span>[2](#page_6_fr_2) [Ps. xc.
1](../../bib/kjv/psa.htm#90:1), 2.

<span id="page_6_note_3"></span>[3](#page_6_fr_3) See Bezold, *Die
Schatzhöhle*, p. 7; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, fol. 7 *a*, col. 2: 'At the
third hour they entered Paradise, for three hours they enjoyed the good
things, for three hours they were ashamed, and at the ninth hour their
expulsion from Paradise took place.'

<span id="footnotes_page_7"></span>p. 7

<span id="page_7_note_1"></span>[1](#page_7_fr_1) [Gen. ii.
7](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#2:7).

<span id="page_7_note_2"></span>[2](#page_7_fr_2) [1 Cor. iii.
16](../../bib/kjv/co1.htm#3:16).

<span id="page_7_note_3"></span>[3](#page_7_fr_3) [2 Cor. vi.
16](../../bib/kjv/co2.htm#6:16); [Ex. xxix.
45](../../bib/kjv/exo.htm#29:45); [Lev. xxvi.
12](../../bib/kjv/lev.htm#26:12).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
