[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb04) [Next](bb06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# CHAPTER V<span id="page_9_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_9_note_2).

OF THE ANGELS<span id="page_9_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_9_note_3).

   T<span class="small">HE</span> Angels consist of nine classes and
three orders, upper, middle and lower. The upper order is composed of
Cherubim, Seraphim, and Thrones: these are called 'priests' (*kumrê*),
and 'chief priests,' and 'bearers of God's throne.' The middle order is
composed of Lords, Powers and Rulers<span
id="page_9_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_9_note_4): these are called
'priests' (*kâhnê*), because they receive revelations from those above
them. The lower order consists of Principalities, Archangels and Angels:
and these are the ministers who wait upon created things. The Cherubim
are an intellectual motion<span id="page_9_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_9_note_5) which bears the throne of
the holy Trinity, and is the chief of all motions; they are ever
watchful of the classes of themselves and those beneath them. As
concerning the epithet 'full of eyes<span
id="page_9_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_9_note_6),' which is applied to
them, the eyes indicate the mystery of the revelations of the Trinity.
Their head, and the foremost and highest among them, is Gabriel, who is
the mediator between God and His creation. The Seraphim are a fiery
motion, which warms those below it with the fire of the divine love. The
six wings which each of them is said to possess<span
id="page_9_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_9_note_7) indicate the revelations
which they receive from the Creator and transmit to mankind. The Thrones
are a fixed motion, which is not shaken by the trials which come upon
it. The Lords are a motion which is entrusted with the government of the
motions beneath it; and it is that which prevents the demons from
injuring created things. The Powers are a mighty motion, the minister of
the will of the Lord; and <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> it is that
which gives victory to some rulers in battle and defeat to others. The
Rulers are a motion which has power over the spiritual treasures, to
distribute them to its companions according to the will of the Creator.
This class of angels governs the luminaries, the sun, moon, and stars.
The Principalities are a defined motion which possesses the direction of
the upper ether, of rain, clouds, lightning, thunder, whirlwinds,
tempests, winds, and other ethereal disturbances. The Archangels are a
swift operative motion, into whose hands is entrusted the government of
the wild beasts, cattle, winged fowl, reptiles, and everything that hath
life, from the gnat to the elephant, except man. The Angels are a motion
which has spiritual knowledge of everything that is on earth and in
heaven. With each and every one of us is an angel of this group--called
the guardian angel--who directs man from his conception until the
general resurrection. The number of each one of these classes of angels
is equal to the number of all mankind from Adam to the resurrection.
Hence it is handed down that the number of people who are going to enter
the world is equal to the number of all the heavenly hosts; but some say
that the number is equal to that of one of the classes only, that they
may fill the place of those of them who have fallen through
transgressing the law; because the demons fell from three classes (of
angels), from each class a third part. If then it is an acknowledged
fact that there are three orders of angels, and in each order there are
three classes, and in every class a number equivalent to that of all
mankind, what is the total number of the angels? Some say that when the
angels were created, and were arranged in six divisions--Cherubim,
Seraphim, Thrones, Principalities, Archangels, and Angels--the three
lower divisions reflected (saying), 'What is the reason that these are
set above, and we below? for they have not previously done anything more
than we, neither do we fall short of them.' On account of this
reflection as a cause, according to the custom of the (divine)
government, Justice took from both sides, and established three other
middle classes of angels--Lords, Powers, and Rulers--that the upper
might not be (unduly) exalted, nor the lower think themselves wronged.
As for the dwelling-place of the angels, some say that above the
firmament there are waters, and above them another heaven in the form of
infinite light, and that this is the home of the angels. Here <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> too is God without limit, and the angels,
invisible to bodily eyes, surround the throne of His majesty, where they
minister to 'the tabernacle not made with hands<span
id="page_11_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_11_note_1).' Others say that, from
the beginning, when God created the angels, until the second day, in
which the firmament was made, all the classes of angels dwelt in the
upper heavens; but when the firmament was made, they all came down below
it, with the exception of three classes--the Cherubim, Seraphim, and
Thrones<span id="page_11_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_11_note_2)--who remained above it.
These surrounded and supported the Shechinah of God from the beginning
of the world until our Lord ascended unto heaven; and after the
Ascension, behold, they surround and support the throne of the Christ
God, who is over all, until the end of the world. The Expositor<span
id="page_11_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_11_note_3) and his companions say:
'The tabernacle which Moses made is a type of the whole world.' The
outer tabernacle is the likeness of this world, but the inner tabernacle
is the similitude of the place that is<span
id="page_11_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_11_note_4) above the firmament. And
as the priests ministered in the outer tabernacle daily, while the high
priest alone entered into the inner tabernacle once a year; so of all
rational beings, angels and men, no one has entered (the place) above
the firmament, save the High Priest of our confession, Jesus Christ<span
id="page_11_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_11_note_5). The fathers, when they
have been deemed worthy at any time to see our Lord in a revelation,
have seen Him in heaven, surrounded by the Cherubim and Seraphim. Hence
some say that there are angels above the heavens. All these celestial
hosts have revelations both of sight and of hearing; but the Cherubim
have revelations by sight only, because there is no mediator between
them and God. The angels have an intellect superior to that of the rest
of rational beings; man has stronger desire, and the demons a greater
degree of anger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_9"></span>p. 9

<span id="page_9_note_2"></span>[2](#page_9_fr_2) Chap. vi in the Oxford
MS.

<span id="page_9_note_3"></span>[3](#page_9_fr_3) 'Dionysium Areopagitam
sequitur Bassorensis in hac materia. Sufficit nomen tantum Hierarchiae
coelestis dixisse.' Schoenfelder, note 28, p. 10.

<span id="page_9_note_4"></span>[4](#page_9_fr_4) [Colossians i.
16](../../bib/kjv/col.htm#1:16), 'thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers.'

<span id="page_9_note_5"></span>[5](#page_9_fr_5) 'Motion' or
'movement,' *Zau\`â*. 'Angelus est substantia intellectualis semper
mobilis.' Schoenfelder, note 29, p. 10.

<span id="page_9_note_6"></span>[6](#page_9_fr_6) [Rev. iv.
6](../../bib/kjv/rev.htm#4:6), 8; [Ezek. i.
18](../../bib/kjv/eze.htm#1:18).

<span id="page_9_note_7"></span>[7](#page_9_fr_7) [Isaiah vi.
2](../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#6:2).

<span id="footnotes_page_11"></span>p. 11

<span id="page_11_note_1"></span>[1](#page_11_fr_1) [Heb. ix.
11](../../bib/kjv/heb.htm#9:11).

<span id="page_11_note_2"></span>[2](#page_11_fr_2) According to the
'[Cave of Treasures](../bct/bct04.htm#page_44),' these were created on
the first day. See Bezold's translation, p. 1, and Brit. Mus. Add.
25,175, fol. 1 *b*, col. 1. {This is not the same MS. Budge translated
in his own edition of the book.}

<span id="page_11_note_3"></span>[3](#page_11_fr_3) Or Commentator, that
is Theodore of Mopsuestia. See Assemani, *Bibl. Orient.*, iii. 1. 30.

<span id="page_11_note_4"></span>[4](#page_11_fr_4) Schoenfelder,
*similitudinem aetheris, qui* etc.

<span id="page_11_note_5"></span>[5](#page_11_fr_5) [Heb. ix.
7](../../bib/kjv/heb.htm#9:7).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
