[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb08) [Next](bb10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# CHAPTER IX<span id="page_13_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_13_note_2).

OF THE CREATION OF TREES AND PLANTS, AND THE MAKING OF SEAS AND RIVERS.

   O<span class="small">N</span> the third day God commanded that the
waters should be gathered together into the pits and depths of the
earth, and that the dry land should appear<span
id="page_13_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_13_note_3). When the waters were
gathered together into the depths of the earth, and the mountains and
hills had appeared, God placed the sand as a limit for the waters of the
seas<span id="page_13_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_13_note_4), that they might not pass
over and cover the earth. And God commanded the earth to put forth
herbage and grass and every green thing<span
id="page_13_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_13_note_5); and the earth brought
forth trees and herbs and plants of all kinds, complete and perfect in
respect of flowers and fruit and seed, each according to its kind. Some
say that before the transgression of the command, the earth brought
forth neither thorns nor briars, and that even the rose had no thorns as
it has now; but that after the transgression of the command, the earth
put forth thorns and briars by reason of the curse which it had
received. The reason why God created the trees and plants before the
creation of the luminaries was that the philosophers, who discourse on
natural phenomena, might not imagine that the earth brought forth herbs
and trees through the power of the heat of the sun. Concerning the
making of Paradise, it is not mentioned in the Pentateuch on what day it
was created; but according to the opinion of those who may be relied
upon, it was made on the same day in which the trees were made<span
id="page_13_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_13_note_6): and if the Lord will, we
will speak about it in its proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_13"></span>p. 13

<span id="page_13_note_2"></span>[2](#page_13_fr_2) Chap. x in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_13_note_3"></span>[3](#page_13_fr_3) [Gen. i.
9](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#1:9).

<span id="page_13_note_4"></span>[4](#page_13_fr_4) Comp. [Jer. v.
22](../../bib/kjv/jer.htm#5:22).

<span id="page_13_note_5"></span>[5](#page_13_fr_5) [Gen. i.
12](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#1:12).

<span id="page_13_note_6"></span>[6](#page_13_fr_6) According to Rabbi
Eliezer, chap. iii (Horowitz, אגרח אגרוח {Hebrew: *AGhDhX AGhDhVX*},
part i, Leipzig, 1881), Paradise was one of the seven things created
before the world.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
