[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb09) [Next](bb11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

# CHAPTER X<span id="page_14_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_14_note_1).

OF THE MAKING OF THE LUMINARIES<span
id="page_14_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_14_note_2).

   O<span class="small">N</span> the fourth day God made the
luminaries--sun, moon, and stars--of three substances, air, light, and
fire. He took aerial material and prepared vessels like lamps, and mixed
fire with light, and filled them. And because in the nature of fire
there was no light, nor heat in that of light, the fire imparted heat to
the light, and the light gave luminosity to the fire; and from these two
were the luminaries--sun, moon, and stars--fabricated. Some say that the
luminaries were made in the morning, that the sun was placed in the
east, and the moon in the west; while others say that they were made in
the evening, and that the sun was placed in the west, and the moon in
the east; and therefore the Jews celebrate the fourteenth<span
id="page_14_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_14_note_3) in the evening. Others
say that all the luminaries when they were created were placed in the
east; the sun completed his course by day, while the moon waited until
eventide, and then began her course. The path of the luminaries is
beneath the firmament, and they are not fixed as men have foolishly
stated, but the angels guide them. Mâr Isaac says, 'The sun performs his
course from the east to the west, and goes behind the lofty northern
mountains the whole night until he rises in the east.' And the
philosophers say that during the night the luminaries perform their
course under the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_14"></span>p. 14

<span id="page_14_note_1"></span>[1](#page_14_fr_1) Chap. xi in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_14_note_2"></span>[2](#page_14_fr_2) [Gen. i.
14](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#1:14).

<span id="page_14_note_3"></span>[3](#page_14_fr_3) See [Exod. xii.
18](../../bib/kjv/exo.htm#12:18).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
