[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb13) [Next](bb15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

# CHAPTER XIV<span id="page_18_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_18_note_2).

OF THE MAKING OF EVE.

   G<span class="small">OD</span> said, 'Let us make a helper for
Adam<span id="page_18_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_18_note_3).' And He threw upon Adam
a sleep and stupor, and took one of his ribs from his left side, and put
flesh in its place, and of it He formed Eve. He did not make her of
earth, that she might not be considered something alien to him in
nature; and He did not take her from Adam's fore-parts, that she might
not uplift herself against him; nor from his hind-parts, that she might
not be accounted despicable; nor from his right side, that she might not
have pre-eminence over him; nor from his head, that she might not seek
authority over him; nor from his feet, that she might <span
id="page_19">p. 19</span> not be trodden down and scorned in the eyes of
her husband: but (He took her) from his left side<span
id="page_19_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_19_note_1), for the side is the
place which unites and joins both front and back<span
id="page_19_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_19_note_2).--Concerning the sleep
which God cast upon Adam, He made him to be half asleep and half awake,
that he might not feel pain when the rib was taken from him, and look
upon the woman as a hateful thing; and yet not without pain, that he
might not think that she was not meet for him in matters of nature. When
Adam came to himself, he prophesied and said, 'This is bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh; this shall be called woman<span
id="page_19_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_19_note_3)': and they were both
clothed in light, and saw not each other's nakedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_18"></span>p. 18

<span id="page_18_note_2"></span>[2](#page_18_fr_2) Chap. xv in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_18_note_3"></span>[3](#page_18_fr_3) [Gen. ii.
18](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#2:18).

<span id="footnotes_page_19"></span>p. 19

<span id="page_19_note_1"></span>[1](#page_19_fr_1) So also Bar Hebraeus
in the *Au<u>s</u>ar Râzê* Brit. Mus. Add. 21,580, fol. 32 *a*, col. 1.

<span id="page_19_note_2"></span>[2](#page_19_fr_2) According to Rabbi
Joshua of Sichnîn, God did not form Eve from Adam' s head, that she
might not carry her head proudly; nor from his eye, that she might not
be curious; nor from his ear, that she might not be an eavesdropper; nor
from his mouth, that she might not be gossiping; nor from his heart,
that she might not be quarrelsome; nor from his hand, that she might not
touch everything with her hand; nor from his feet, that she might not
rove about. *B<u>e</u>rêshîth Rabbâh* on [Gen. ii.
22](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#2:22). Wünsche, *Der Midrash Ber. Rab.*,
Leipzig, 1881, p. 78. On Sichnîn, see Neubaner, *La Géographie du
Talmud*, p. 204.

<span id="page_19_note_3"></span>[3](#page_19_fr_3) [Gen. ii.
23](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#2:23).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
