[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb15) [Next](bb17.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

# CHAPTER XVI<span id="page_21_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_21_note_4.md).

OF THE SIN OF ADAM<span id="page_21_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_21_note_5.md).

   W<span class="small">HEN</span> God in His goodness had made Adam, He
laid down a law for him, and commanded him not to eat of the tree of
good and evil, which is the fig-tree. After Eve was created, Adam told
her the story of the tree; and Satan heard it, and by his envy it became
the occasion and cause of their being made to sin, and being expelled
from Paradise, for it was by reason of him that Adam fell from the
height <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> of his glory. Some say that Satan
heard when God commanded Adam not to eat of that tree. Others say that
God commanded Adam in his mind, mentally (and not by sense); others
again say, by sense and openly. And Satan saw that the serpent was more
subtle than all four-footed beasts<span
id="page_22_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_22_note_1.md); and he played in him, as
it were with pipes, in the hearing of Eve, like an instrument, and said
to her, 'Ye shall not die, as God hath said to you, but ye shall be gods
like God, knowers of good and evil.' Then Eve saw that the appearance of
the fig-tree was beautiful, and that its smell was delightful; and she
desired to eat of it and to become a goddess. So she stretched out her
hand, and plucked, and ate, and gave also to her husband, and he
likewise did eat. And they were stripped of the fair glory and glorious
light of purity wherewith they were clothed, when they saw not each
other's nakedness. And <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> their eyes were
opened, and they saw their nakedness; and they took leaves of the
fig-tree, and covered their nakedness for shame, and hid themselves
beneath thick trees. Then God called Adam and said to him, 'Where art
thou, Adam?'--not that He did not know where he was, but in a chiding
manner--and Adam said, 'Lord, I heard Thy voice, and I hid myself
because I am naked.' God said, 'Whence knowest thou that thou art naked?
peradventure hast thou transgressed the law and command which I laid
down for thee, and hast eaten of the tree of which I commanded thee not
to eat?' Adam said, 'The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave
to me, and I did eat.' And God questioned Eve in like manner; and Eve
said, 'The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.' And God cursed the
serpent, saying, 'Cursed art thou above all beasts upon the earth.' With
the cursing of the serpent, who was the tool of Satan, Satan, who had
instigated the serpent, was himself cursed; and immediately his legs
were destroyed, and he crawled upon his belly, and instead of being an
animal became a hissing reptile. And God set enmity between the serpent
and man, saying, 'He shall smite the heel of man, but man shall crush
his head, and the food of the serpent shall be dust.' God said to Eve,
'In pain shalt thou bring forth children;' and to Adam He said, 'Cursed
is the ground for thy sake, and in toil and the sweat of thy face shalt
thou eat thy bread; for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.'
And the earth, by reason of the curse which it had received, straightway
brought forth thorns and thistles. And God drove them out from Paradise
at the ninth hour of the same day in which they were created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb17.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_21"></span>p. 21

<span id="page_21_note_4"></span>[4](#page_21_fr_4.md) Chap. xvii in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_21_note_5"></span>[5](#page_21_fr_5.md) [Gen. iii.
6](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#3:6.md)-24.

<span id="footnotes_page_22"></span>p. 22

<span id="page_22_note_1"></span>[1](#page_22_fr_1.md) 'And he went and
dwelt in the serpent, and carried him and made him fly through the air
to the skirts of Paradise. Why did he enter into the serpent and hide
himself (there)? Because he knew that his appearance was hideous, and
that if Eve saw his form she would straightway flee from him. As one who
teaches a bird<span id="page_22_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_22_note_*.md) the
Greek tongue, brings a large mirror and places it between himself and
the bird, and then begins to speak to her; and the bird as soon as it
hears his voice turns round, and seeing its own form in the mirror
straightway rejoices, thinking that it is a companion speaking with her,
and thus willingly inclines her ear and listens to the words of him that
talks with her, and pays attention (to them) and learns to talk Greek;
so also did Satan enter in and dwell in the serpent.' Bezold, *Die
Schatzhöhle*, p. 6; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 6 *b*, col.
1](../bct/bct04.htm#fol_6b1.md).

<span id="page_22_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_22_fr_*.md) The bird that
learns to talk is called 'parrot'.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
