[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb16) [Next](bb18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

# CHAPTER XVII<span id="page_23_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_23_note_1).

OF THE EXPULSION OF ADAM AND EVE FROM PARADISE.

   A<span class="small">FTER</span> God had expelled them from Paradise,
like wicked servants driven forth from the inheritance of their master,
and had cast them into exile, over the gate at the eastern side of
Paradise He set a cherub with a sword and spear to frighten Adam from
approaching Paradise. Some say that the cherub was one of the heavenly
hosts, of the class of the <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> Cherubim; and
others say that he did not belong to the spiritual powers, but was a
terrible form endowed with a body. So also the spear point and the sword
were made of fire extended like a sharp sword, which went and came round
about Paradise to terrify Adam and his wife. And God made for them
garments of skin to cover their shame. Some say that they clothed
themselves with the skins of animals, which they stripped off; but this
is not credible, for all the beasts were created in couples, and Adam
and Eve had as yet no knives to kill and flay them; hence it is clear
that he means the bark of trees<span
id="page_24_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_24_note_1). Only the blessed Moses
called the bark of trees 'skins,' because it fills the place of skins to
trees. In the land of India there are trees whose bark is used for the
clothing of kings and nobles and the wealthy, on account of its beauty.
After God had expelled Adam and his wife from Paradise, He withheld from
them the fruits of trees, and the use of bread and flesh and wine, and
the anointing with oil; but they cooked grain and vegetables and the
herbs of the earth, and did eat sparingly. Moreover, the four-footed
beasts and fowl and reptiles rebelled against them, and some of them
became enemies and adversaries unto them. They remained thus until Noah
went forth from the ark, and then God allowed them to eat bread and to
drink wine and to eat flesh, after they had slain the animal and poured
out its blood. They say that when Adam and Eve were driven out of
Paradise, Adam cut off a branch for a staff from the tree of good and
evil; and it remained with him, and was handed down from generation to
generation unto Moses and even to the Crucifixion of our Lord; and if
the Lord will, we will relate its history in its proper place<span
id="page_24_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_24_note_2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_23"></span>p. 23

<span id="page_23_note_1"></span>[1](#page_23_fr_1) Chap. xviii in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="footnotes_page_24"></span>p. 24

<span id="page_24_note_1"></span>[1](#page_24_fr_1) These garments were
softer than the linen and silk worn by kings; Bezold, *Die Schatzhöhle*,
p. 7; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 7 *a*, col.
2](../bct/bct04.htm#fol_7a2).

<span id="page_24_note_2"></span>[2](#page_24_fr_2) See [chap.
xxx](bb30).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
