[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb20) [Next](bb22.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

# CHAPTER XXI<span id="page_33_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_33_note_3.md).

OF MELCHIZEDEK<span id="page_33_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_33_note_4.md).

   N<span class="small">EITHER</span> the father nor mother of this
Melchizedek were written down in the genealogies; not that he had no
natural parents<span id="page_33_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_33_note_5.md), but that <span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> they were not written down. The greater number
of the doctors say that he was of the seed of Canaan, whom Noah cursed.
In the book of Chronography, however, (the author) affirms and says that
he was of the seed of Shem the son of Noah. Shem begat Arphaxar,
Arphaxar begat Cainan, and Cainan begat Shâlâ<u>h</u> and Mâlâ<u>h</u>,
Shâlâ<u>h</u> was written down in the genealogies; but Mâlâ<u>h</u> was
not, because his affairs were not sufficiently important to be written
down in the genealogies. When <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> Noah died,
he commanded Shem concerning the bones of Adam, for they were with them
in the ark, and were removed from the land of Eden to this earth. Then
Shem entered the ark, and sealed it with his father's seal, and said to
his brethren, 'My father commanded me to go and see the sources of the
rivers and the seas and the structure of the earth, and to return.' And
he said to Mâlâ<u>h</u> the father of Melchizedek, and to Yôzâdâk his
mother, 'Give me your son that he may be with me, and behold, my wife
and my children are with you.' Melchizedek's parents said to him, 'My
lord, take thy servant; and may the angel of peace be with thee, and
protect thee from wild beasts and desolation of the earth.' Shem went by
night into the ark, and took Adam's coffin; and he sealed up the ark,
saying to his brethren, 'My father commanded me that no one should go
into it.' And he journeyed by night with the angel before him, and
Melchizedek with him, until they came and stood upon the spot where our
Lord was crucified. When they had laid the coffin down there, the earth
was rent in the form of a cross<span
id="page_35_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_35_note_1.md), and swallowed up the
coffin, and was again sealed up and returned to its former condition.
Shem laid his hand upon Melchizedek's head, and blessed him, and
delivered to him the priesthood, and commanded him to dwell there until
the end of his life. And he said to him, 'Thou shalt not drink wine nor
any intoxicating liquor, neither shall a razor pass over thy head; thou
shalt not offer up to God an offering of beasts, but only fine flour and
olive oil and wine; thou shalt not build a house for thyself; and may
the God of thy fathers be with thee.' And Shem returned to his brethren,
and Melchizedek's parents said to him, 'Where is our son?' Shem said,
'He died while he was with me on the way, and I buried him;' and they
mourned for him a month of days; but Melchizedek dwelt in that place
until he died. When he was old, the kings of the earth heard his fame,
and eleven of them gathered together and came to see him; and they
entreated him to go with them, but he would not be persuaded. And when
he did not conform to their wishes, they built a city for him there, and
he called it Jerusalem; and the kings said to one another, 'This is the
king of all the earth, and the father of nations.' When Abraham came
<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> back from the battle of the kings and
the nations, he passed by the mount of Jerusalem; and Melchizedek came
forth to meet him, and Abraham made obeisance to Melchizedek, and gave
him tithes of all that he had with him. And Melchizedek embraced him and
blessed him, and gave him bread and wine from that which he was wont to
offer up as an offering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb22.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_33"></span>p. 33

<span id="page_33_note_3"></span>[3](#page_33_fr_3.md) Chap. xxii in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_33_note_4"></span>[4](#page_33_fr_4.md) [Gen. xiv.
18](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#14:18.md)-24; [Heb. chap.
vii](../../bib/kjv/heb.htm#7:1.md).

<span id="page_33_note_5"></span>[5](#page_33_fr_5.md) <span
id="footnotes_page_34"></span>p. 34 'And Melchizedek was honoured by
them all, and was called "Father of Kings." Because of that which the
Apostle spake, "His days had no beginning, and his life no end," simple
folk have imagined that he was not a man at all, and in their error have
said of him that he was God. Far from it, that his days had no beginning
and his life no end. For when Shem the son of Noah took him away from
his parents, not a word was said how old he was when he went up from the
east, nor in how many years his departure from this world took place;
because he was the son of Mâlâkh, the son of Arphaxar, the son of Shem,
and not the son of one of the patriarchs; for the Apostle has said that
no one of his father's family ministered at the altar, and the name of
his father is not written down in the genealogies, because Matthew and
Luke the Evangelists wrote down the names of the patriarchs only, and
hence neither the name of his father nor that of his mother are known.
The Apostle then did not say that he had no parents, but only that they
were not written down by Matthew and Luke in the genealogies.' Bezold,
*Die Schatzhöhle*, p. 36; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 26 *b*, col.
1](../bct/bct07.htm#fol_26b1.md), line 22 to fol. 27 *a*, col. 1, line 5.
In A, on fol. 39 *a*, a marginal note says: 'Know, O my brother readers,
that in the manuscript belonging to the priest Ma<u>k</u>bal I have seen
that Melchizedek's father was called Har<u>k</u>lêîm, and his mother
Shêlâthêîl (Salathiel).'

<span id="footnotes_page_35"></span>p. 35

<span id="page_35_note_1"></span>[1](#page_35_fr_1.md) See also Bezold,
*Die Schatzhöhle*, p. 28.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
