[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb21) [Next](bb23)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# CHAPTER XXII<span id="page_36_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_36_note_1).

OF THE GENERATIONS OF NOAH<span id="page_36_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_36_note_2).

   *The children of Shem*. The people of Shem are twenty and seven
families. Elam, from whom sprang the Elamites; Asshur, from whom sprang
the Assyrians (Âthôrâyê); Arphaxar<span
id="page_36_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_36_note_3), from whom sprang the
Persians; and Lud (Lôd) and Aram, from whom sprang the Arameans, the
Damascenes, and the <u>H</u>arranites. Now the father of all the
children of Eber was Arphaxar. Shâlâ<u>h</u> begat Eber (Abâr), and to
Eber were born two sons; the name of the one of whom was Peleg (Pâlâg),
because in his days the earth was divided. From this it is known that
the Syriac language remained with Eber, because, when the languages were
confounded and the earth was divided, he was born, and was called Peleg
by the Syriac word which existed in his time. After Peleg, Jo<u>kt</u>ân
(Ya<u>kt</u>ân) was born, from whom sprang the thirteen nations who
dwelt beside one another and kept the Syriac language. And their
dwelling was from M<u>e</u>nashshê (or Manshâ) of mount Sepharvaïm<span
id="page_36_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_36_note_4), by the side of the land
of Canaan, and towards the east, beginning at Aram and Damascus, and
coming to Baishân \[Maishân ?\] and Elam, and their border (was)
Assyria, and the east, and Persia to the south, and the Great Sea<span
id="page_36_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_36_note_5). Now the Hebrew has
Maishân instead of M<u>e</u>nashshê (or Manshâ), in the verse, 'The
children of Jo<u>kt</u>ân dwelt from Maishân to Sepharvaïm<span
id="page_36_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_36_note_6).'

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

   *The children of Ham*. The people of Ham are thirty and six families,
besides the Philistines and Cappadocians. Cush, from whom sprang the
Cushites; Mi<u>s</u>raim, from whom sprang the Mi<u>s</u>râyê (or
Egyptians); Phut (or Pô<u>t</u>), from whom sprang the Pô<u>t</u>âyê;
Canaan, from whom sprang the Canaanites; the seven kings whom Joshua the
son of Nun destroyed<span id="page_37_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_37_note_1); the children of
\`Ôbâr<span id="page_37_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_37_note_2), Shebâ and <u>H</u>avîlâ,
from whom sprang the Indians, the Amorites, the Samrâyê, the
Me<u>t</u>râyê, and all the dwellers of the south. And of Cush was born
Nimrod, who was the first king after the flood. The beginning of his
kingdom was Babel (Babylon), which he built, and in which he reigned;
and then, after the division of tongues, he built the following cities:
Ârâch (Erech), which is Orhâi (Edessa), Âchâr (Accad), which is
Ni<u>s</u>îbis, and Calyâ (Calneh), which is Ctesiphon<span
id="page_37_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_37_note_3). The land of Babel he
called the land of Shinar<span id="page_37_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_37_note_4), because in it were the
languages confounded<span id="page_37_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_37_note_5), for 'Shinar' in the
Hebrew language is interpreted 'division.' From that land the Assyrian
went forth and built Nineveh and the town of Rehôbôth, which is the town
of Arbêl (Irbil). It is said that Belus, the son of Nimrod, was the
first to depart from Babel and to come to Assyria; and after Belus, his
son Ninus built Nineveh, and called it after his name, and Arbêl and
Câlâ<u>h</u>, which is <u>H</u>e<u>t</u>rê (<u>H</u>a<u>t</u>râ)<span
id="page_37_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_37_note_6), and Resen, which is
Rêsh-\`ainâ (Râs\`ain). Mi<u>s</u>raim begat Ludim, from <span
id="page_38">p. 38</span> whom sprang the Lôdâyê; La\`bîm, from whom
sprang the Lûbâyê; Lahbîm, from whom sprang the Tebtâyê;
Yaphtu<u>h</u>îm, Pathrusîm, and Casluhîm, from whom went forth the
Philistines, the Gedrâyê (Gadarenes), and the people of Sodom. Canaan
begat Sidon his firstborn, from whom sprang the <u>S</u>ôrâyê (Tyrians)
and Sidonians, ten nations who dwelt by the side of Israel, from the sea
(i.e. the Mediterranean) to the Euphrates; the <u>K</u>îshâyê, the
<u>K</u>enrâyê (or <u>K</u>îrâyê), and the A<u>k</u>d<u>e</u>mônâyê (or
<u>K</u>admônâyê), who were between the children of Esau and Amnâ of
Ireth<span id="page_38_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_38_note_1). The children of Lot are
children of Ham<span id="page_38_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_38_note_2).

   *The children of Japhet*. The people of Japhet are fifteen families.
Gomer, from whom sprang the Gêôthâyê (Gôthâyê, Goths ?); Magog, from
whom sprang the Galatians; Mâdâi, from whom sprang the Medes; Javan,
from whom sprang the Yaunâyê (Greeks); Tûbîl (Tubal), from whom sprang
the Baithônâyê (Bithynians); Meshech, from whom sprang the Mûsâyê
(Mysians); Tîras, from whom sprang the Tharn<u>ek</u>âyê (or
Thrê<u>k</u>âyê, Thracians), the Ansh<u>k</u>lâyê (or As<u>k</u>lâyê),
and the Achshklâyê. The children of Gomer: Ashk<u>e</u>naz, from whom
sprang the Armenians; Danphar, from whom sprang the Cappadocians;
Togarmah, from whom sprang the Asâyê (Asians) and the Îsaurâyê
(Isaurians). The sons of Javan: Elisha, that is Halles (Hellas);
Tarshîsh, Cilicia, Cyprus, Kâthîm (Kittîm), Doranim<span
id="page_38_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_38_note_3), and the Macedonians; and
from these they were divided among the islands of the nations. These are
the families of the children of Noah, and from them were the nations
divided on the earth after the flood; they are seventy and two families,
and according to the families, so are the languages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb23)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_36"></span>p. 36

<span id="page_36_note_1"></span>[1](#page_36_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxiii.

<span id="page_36_note_2"></span>[2](#page_36_fr_2) [Genesis, chap.
x](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#10:1).

<span id="page_36_note_3"></span>[3](#page_36_fr_3) So always, as in the
P<u>e</u>shî<u>t</u>tâ, for Arphaxad.

<span id="page_36_note_4"></span>[4](#page_36_fr_4) The
P<u>e</u>shî<u>t</u>tâ has 'and their dwelling was from Manshâ, which is
at the entering in of mount Sepharvaïm in the east.'

<span id="page_36_note_5"></span>[5](#page_36_fr_5) Perhaps we might
read, 'Assyria to the east, and Persia, and the Great Sea on the south.'

<span id="page_36_note_6"></span>[6](#page_36_fr_6) [Gen. x.
30](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#10:30). In the Oxford MS. chap. xxiv begins
here.

<span id="footnotes_page_37"></span>p. 37

<span id="page_37_note_1"></span>[1](#page_37_fr_1) Perhaps Solomon
means the 'five kings of the Amorites,' [Josh. x.
5](../../bib/kjv/jos.htm#10:5); or else he refers to the 'seven
nations,' [Deut. vii. 1](../../bib/kjv/deu.htm#7:1).

<span id="page_37_note_2"></span>[2](#page_37_fr_2) According to [Gen.
x. 7](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#10:7), we should read Cush.

<span id="page_37_note_3"></span>[3](#page_37_fr_3) See [Gen. x.
10](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#10:10). Solomon's ideas as to what is meant by
Erech, Accad, and Calneh are, of course, utterly erroneous. Erech is the
ruins of War<u>k</u>â, on the left bank of the lower Euphrates, S.E. of
Babylon; Accad is a name for Upper Babylonia, as opposed to Sumir or
Lower Babylonia; Calneh has not yet been identified. See also Schrader,
*The Cuneiform Inscriptions and the Old Testament*, p. 78.

<span id="page_37_note_4"></span>[4](#page_37_fr_4) Some Assyriologists
consider the biblical Shinar to be the same as Sumir or Lower Babylonia.
See Lenormant, *Études Accad*. ii. 3, p. 70.

<span id="page_37_note_5"></span>[5](#page_37_fr_5) It is certain that
the name Babel or Babylon has no connection with the Heb. כָּלַל {Hebrew:
*BâLaL*} or כַּלְכֵּל {Hebrew: *BaLaBeL*}; in the cuneiform inscriptions
*bâb-ilu* means 'Gate of God,' and is the Semitic equivalent of the
Akkadian *ka-dingirra-ki*.

<span id="page_37_note_6"></span>[6](#page_37_fr_6) See Hoffmann,
*Auszüge aus syr. Akten pers. Märtyrer*, pp. 184-186.

<span id="footnotes_page_38"></span>p. 38

<span id="page_38_note_1"></span>[1](#page_38_fr_1) Or possibly, 'and
the Amnê (Emim), whom he inherited.'

<span id="page_38_note_2"></span>[2](#page_38_fr_2) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxv begins here.

<span id="page_38_note_3"></span>[3](#page_38_fr_3) For Dodanîm or
Rodanîm. See [Gen. x. 4](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#10:4).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
