[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb25) [Next](bb27.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

# CHAPTER XXVI<span id="page_43_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_43_note_2.md).

OF THE TEMPTATION OF JOB<span id="page_43_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_43_note_3.md).

   T<span class="small">HERE</span> was a man in the land of Uz whose
name was Job. And he was a perfect, righteous and God-fearing man; and
there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters. The number of
his possessions was seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five
hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred she-asses, and a very large train of
servants. This man was the greatest of all the children of the east. His
children used to go and make a feast; and the day came that his sons and
his daughters were eating and drinking in the house of their eldest
brother. There came a messenger to Job and said to him, 'The oxen were
drawing the ploughs, and the she-asses were feeding by their side, when
robbers fell upon them and carried them off, and the young men were
<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> slain by the sword; and I alone have
escaped to tell thee.' While he was yet speaking, there came another and
said to him, 'The fire of God fell from heaven and consumed the sheep
and the shepherds, and burnt them up; and I alone have escaped to tell
thee.' While he was yet speaking, there came another and said to him,
'The Chaldeans divided themselves into three bands and fell upon the
camels and carried them off, and slew the young men; and I alone have
escaped to tell thee.' While he was yet speaking, there came another and
said to him, 'Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking in the
house of their eldest brother, when there came a mighty wind and beat
upon the corners of the house, and it fell upon the young people and
they are dead; and I alone have escaped to tell thee.' Then Job stood up
and rent his garment, and shaved his head; and he fell upon the ground
and prostrated himself, saying, 'Naked came I out of my mother's womb,
and naked shall I return: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away;
blessed be the name of the Lord.' In all this did Job sin not, neither
did he blaspheme God. And Satan smote Job with a grievous sore from the
sole of his foot to his head (*lit*. brain); and Job took a potsherd to
scrape himself with, and sat upon ashes. His wife says to him, 'Dost
thou still hold fast by thy integrity? curse God and die.' Job says to
her, 'Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speaketh: we have
received the good things of God; shall we not receive His evil things?'
In all this did Job sin not, neither did he blaspheme God with his lips.
Job's three friends heard of this evil which had come upon him, and they
came to him, every man from his own land, to comfort him; and their
names were these: Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar
the Naamathite. When they were come, they lifted up their eyes from afar
off, and they did not know him. And they lifted up their voice and wept,
and each man rent his garment, and they strewed dust upon their heads
towards heaven; and they sat with him upon the ground seven days and
seven nights, and none spake a word, for they saw that his blow was very
sore. And when he held fast by his God, He blessed him, and gave him
seven sons and three daughters; and there were not found in the whole
land women more beautiful than Job's daughters, and their names were
Jemima, Keren-happuch, and Kezia. And God gave him fourteen <span
id="page_45">p. 45</span> thousand sheep, six thousand camels and a
thousand yoke of oxen; and Job lived one hundred and forty years after
his temptation, and died in peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb27.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_43"></span>p. 43

<span id="page_43_note_2"></span>[2](#page_43_fr_2.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap, xxix.

<span id="page_43_note_3"></span>[3](#page_43_fr_3.md) See [Job
i](../../bib/kjv/job.md).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
