[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb26) [Next](bb28.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

# CHAPTER XXVII<span id="page_45_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_45_note_1.md).

OF THE BLESSINGS OF ISAAC<span id="page_45_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_45_note_2.md).

   J<span class="small">ACOB</span> was seventy-seven years old when his
father Isaac blessed him; and he stole the blessings and birthright from
his brother Esau, and fled from before his brother to <u>H</u>arrân. On
the first night Jacob saw a ladder reaching from earth to heaven, with
angels ascending and descending, and the Power of God upon the top
thereof. And he woke and said, 'This is the house of the Lord.' He took
the stone that was under his head, and set it up for an altar; and he
vowed a vow to God. Now the ladder was a type of Christ's crucifixion;
the angels that were ascending and descending were a type of the angels
who announced the glad tidings to the shepherds on the day of our
Saviour's birth. The Power of God which was upon the top of the ladder
was (a type of) the manifestation of God the Word in pure flesh of the
formation of Adam. The place in which the vision appeared was a type of
the church; the stone under his head, which he set up for an altar, was
a type of the altar; and the oil which he poured out upon it was like
the holy oil wherewith they anoint the altar.

   And Jacob went to Laban the Aramean, his mother's brother, and served
before him as a shepherd for fourteen years. And he took his two
daughters to wife; Leah with her handmaid Zilpah, and Rachel with her
handmaid Bilhah. Now he loved Rachel more than Leah, because she was the
younger and was fair in aspect, while Leah had watery eyes. There were
born to Jacob by Leah six sons: Rûbîl (Reuben), which is interpreted
'Great is God' (now Jacob was eighty-four years old at that time);
Simeon, which is interpreted 'the Obedient;' Levi, that is 'the
Perfect;' Judah, that is 'Praise;' Issachar, that is 'Hope is near;' and
Zebulun, that is 'Gift' or 'Dwelling-place.' Two sons were born to him
by Rachel: Joseph, that is 'Addition;' and Benjamin, that is
'Consolation.' By Zilpah two sons were born to him: <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> Gad, that is 'Luck;' and Asher, that is
'Praise.' By Bilhah two sons were born to him: Dan, that is 'Judgment;'
and Naphtali, that is 'Heartener<span
id="page_46_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_46_note_1.md);' and one daughter, whose
name was Dinah<span id="page_46_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_46_note_2.md). After twenty years Jacob
returned to Isaac; and Isaac lived one hundred and eighty years<span
id="page_46_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_46_note_3.md). Twenty-three years after
Jacob went up to his father, Joseph was sold by his brethren to the
Midianites for twenty dînârs<span id="page_46_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_46_note_4.md). When Isaac died, Jacob
was one hundred and twenty years old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb28.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_45"></span>p. 45

<span id="page_45_note_1"></span>[1](#page_45_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxx.

<span id="page_45_note_2"></span>[2](#page_45_fr_2.md) [Gen.
xxvii](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#27:1.md).

<span id="footnotes_page_46"></span>p. 46

<span id="page_46_note_1"></span>[1](#page_46_fr_1.md) The Oxford MS. omits
to explain the meanings of the names of Jacob's sons.

<span id="page_46_note_2"></span>[2](#page_46_fr_2.md) Dinah was the
daughter of Leah, [Gen. xxx. 21](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#30:21.md).

<span id="page_46_note_3"></span>[3](#page_46_fr_3.md) The Oxford MS. gives
108 years.

<span id="page_46_note_4"></span>[4](#page_46_fr_4.md) The Oxford MS adds
that Jacob and Esau buried their father in the 'double cave.'

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
