[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb27) [Next](bb29)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# CHAPTER XXVIII<span id="page_46_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_46_note_5).

OF JOSEPH<span id="page_46_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_46_note_6).

   A<span class="small">FTER</span> Jacob's sons had been born to him by
Leah, then Joseph and Benjamin were born to him (by Rachel); and he
loved Joseph more than all his children, because he was the child of
(his) old age, and because of his beauty and purity, and his being left
motherless. He made him a garment with long sleeves, and his brethren
envied him. And he dreamed dreams twice, and their hatred increased, and
they kept anger in their hearts against him. They sold him to the
Midianites, who carried him to Egypt, and sold him to Potiphar, the
chief of the guards; and Potiphar delivered his house and servants into
his hands; but because of the wantonness of Potiphar's wife, he was
bound and kept in prison for two years. When the chief cup-bearer and
the chief baker dreamed dreams in one night, and Joseph interpreted
them, his words actually came to pass. After Joseph had remained in
bondage two years, Pharaoh the king of Egypt saw two dreams in one
night; and he was troubled and disturbed, and the sorcerers and
enchanters and wise men were unable to interpret his dreams. Then one of
those who had been imprisoned with Joseph remembered (him), and they
told Pharaoh; <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> and Joseph interpreted his
dreams, and Pharaoh made him king over Egypt. And Joseph gathered
together and collected the corn of the seven prosperous years, and saved
it for the seven years of famine. When the household of Jacob lacked
bread, Jacob sent his sons to Egypt to buy corn, and they met Joseph,
and he recognised them, but they did not know him. After he had tortured
them twice by his harsh words, he at last revealed himself to them, and
shewed himself to his brethren. And he sent and brought his father Jacob
and all his family--seventy-five souls in number, and they came down and
dwelt in the land of Egypt two hundred and thirty years. Concerning that
which God spake to Abraham, 'Thy seed shall be a sojourner in a strange
land four hundred and thirty years<span
id="page_47_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_47_note_1);' they were under
subjection in their thoughts from the time that God spake to Abraham
until they went forth from Egypt. Jacob died in Egypt, and he commanded
that he should be buried with his fathers; and they carried him and
buried him by the side of his fathers in the land of Palestine. After
Joseph died, another king arose, who knew not Joseph, and he oppressed
the children of Israel with heavy labour in clay; at that time Moses was
born in Egypt. Since many have written the history of the blessed Joseph
at great length, and the blessed Mâr Ephraim has written his history in
twelve discourses, concerning everything which happened to him from his
childhood to his death, as well as another discourse upon the carrying
up of his bones (to Palestine), we refrain from writing a long account
of him, that we may not depart from the plan which we laid down in
making this collection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb29)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_46"></span>p. 46

<span id="page_46_note_5"></span>[5](#page_46_fr_5) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxxi. It is much amplified by long extracts from the Bible history
of Joseph.

<span id="page_46_note_6"></span>[6](#page_46_fr_6) Gen.
[xxxvii](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#37:1),
[xxxix](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#39:1),
[xli](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#41:1)-l.

<span id="footnotes_page_47"></span>p. 47

<span id="page_47_note_1"></span>[1](#page_47_fr_1) [Gen. xv.
13](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#15:13), [Exod. xii.
40](../../bib/kjv/exo.htm#12:40).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
