[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb28) [Next](bb30.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

# CHAPTER XXIX<span id="page_47_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_47_note_2.md).

OF MOSES AND THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL<span
id="page_47_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_47_note_3.md).

   A<span class="small">FTER</span> Joseph was dead, and another king
had arisen who knew not the Israelitish people, the people increased and
became strong in Egypt. And Pharaoh was afraid of them, and laid a
burden upon them, and oppressed them with hard work in clay, and
demanded a <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> tale of bricks from them
without giving them straw. At that time Moses the son of Amram, the son
of Kohath, the son of Levi, was born. Levi was forty-six years old when
he begat Kohath; Kohath was sixty-three years old when he begat Amram;
and Amram was seventy years old when he begat Moses. When Moses was
born, Pharaoh the king commanded to throw the new-born children of the
Israelites into the river. Moses was beautiful in appearance, and he was
called Pantîl and Amlâkyâ; and the Egyptians used to call him the
*Shakwîthâ*<span id="page_48_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_48_note_2.md) of the daughter of
Pharaoh. The name of Moses' mother was Yokâbâr (Jochebed). When the
command of the king went forth for the drowning of the infants, she made
a little ark covered with pitch, and laid the child in it; and she
carried it and placed it in a shallow part of the waters of the river
Nile (that is Gî<u>h</u>ôn); and she sat down opposite (that is, at a
distance), to see what would be the end of the child. And Shîpôr<span
id="page_48_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_48_note_3.md), the daughter of Pharaoh,
came to bathe in the river--some say that she was called
Tharm<u>e</u>sîs<span id="page_48_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_48_note_4.md)--and she saw the ark and
commanded it to be fetched. When she opened it, and saw that the
appearance of <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> the child was beautiful
and his complexion comely, she said, 'Verily this child is one of the
Hebrews' children;' and she took him, and reared him up as her son. She
sought a Hebrew nurse, and the mother of the child Moses came, and
became a nurse to him; and he was reared in the house of Pharaoh until
he was forty years old. One day he saw Pethkôm<span
id="page_49_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_49_note_1.md) the Egyptian, one of the
servants of Pharaoh, quarrelling with an Israelite and reviling him.
Moses looked this way and that way, and saw no man; and zeal entered
into him, and he slew the Egyptian and buried him in the sand. Two days
after, he saw two Hebrews quarrelling with one another. And he said to
them, 'Ye are brethren; why quarrel ye with one another?' And one of
them thrust him away from him, saying, 'Dost thou peradventure seek to
kill me as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday?' Then Moses feared lest
Pharaoh should perceive (this) and slay him; and he fled to Midian, and
sat by the well there. Now Reuel the Midianite had seven daughters, who
used to come to that well and water their father's flocks; and the
shepherds came and drove them away; and Moses arose and delivered them,
and watered their flocks. When they went to their father, he said to
them, 'Ye have come quickly to-day.' They said to him, 'An Egyptian
rescued us from the hands of the shepherds, and watered the flocks
also.' He said to them, 'Why did ye not bring him? Go quickly and call
him hither to eat bread with us.' When Moses came to the house of Reuel
and dwelt with him, Reuel loved him and gave him his daughter Zipporah
the Cushite to wife. And he said to him, 'Go into the house, and take a
shepherd's crook, and go feed thy flocks.' When Moses went into the
house to take the rod, it drew near to him by divine agency; and he took
it and went forth to feed his father-in-law's flocks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb30.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_47"></span>p. 47

<span id="page_47_note_2"></span>[2](#page_47_fr_2.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xxxii.

<span id="page_47_note_3"></span>[3](#page_47_fr_3.md) [Exod.
ii](../../bib/kjv/exo.htm#2:1.md)-iv.

<span id="footnotes_page_48"></span>p. 48

<span id="page_48_note_2"></span>[2](#page_48_fr_2.md) I do not know the
meaning of this word nor its correct pronunciation.

<span id="page_48_note_3"></span>[3](#page_48_fr_3.md) Brit. Mus. MS. Or.
2441, fol. 374 *a*, col. 1. On the margin is written, 'When Moses was
born, he was thrown into the river, and Shipôr the Egyptian, the
daughter of Pharaoh, took him out.' Bezold, *Die Schatzhöhle*, p. 41;
Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 30 *a*, col.
1](../bct/bct07.htm#fol_30a1.md).

<span id="page_48_note_4"></span>[4](#page_48_fr_4.md) This looks like a
corruption of the Egyptian name *<u>H</u>et-<u>H</u>eru-mes* or
*Athor-mes*, 'born of Athor.' She was also called *Makrî*; see note 1 on
next page.

<span id="footnotes_page_49"></span>p. 49

<span id="page_49_note_1"></span>[1](#page_49_fr_1.md) 'And he was in the
house of Pharaoh forty years, and then he slew Pethkôm the Egyptian, the
chief baker of Pharaoh. When this was heard in the house of Pharaoh,
after Makrî the daughter of Pharaoh--who was called the "Trumpet of
Egypt," and who reared up Moses--was dead, he feared,' etc. See Bezold,
*Die Schatzhöhle*, p, 42; Brit. Mus. Add. 25,875, [fol. 30 *a*, col.
2](../bct/bct07.htm#fol_30a2.md).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
