[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb31) [Next](bb33)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

# CHAPTER XXXII<span id="page_69_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_69_note_4).

OF THE DEATH OF THE PROPHETS; HOW THEY DlED, AND (WHERE) EACH ONE OF
THEM WAS BURIED<span id="page_69_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_69_note_5).

   M<span class="small">ANASSEH</span> the son of Hezekiah slew Isaiah
with a wooden saw; he was buried before the outfall of the waters which
Hezekiah concealed by the side of Siloah<span
id="page_69_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_69_note_6).

   Hosea the son of Beeri, of the tribe of Issachar, (was) from the town
of Be\`elmâth. He prophesied mystically about our Lord Jesus Christ who
was to come; saying that when He should be born, the oak in Shiloh
should be divided into twelve parts; and that He should take twelve
disciples of Israel. He died in peace, and was buried in his own land.

   Joel the son of Bethuel (Pethuel), of the tribe of Reuben, died in
peace in his own land. Others say that Ahaziah the son of Amaziah smote
him with a staff upon his head; and while his life was yet in him, they
brought him to his own land<span id="page_69_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_69_note_7), and after two days he
died.

   Amos (was) from the land of Tekoa. The priest of Bethel tortured him
and afterwards slew him. Others say that it was he whom Ahaziah the son
of Amaziah<span id="page_69_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_69_note_8) killed with a staff, and
he died.

   Obadiah from the country of Shechem was the captain of fifty of <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> Ahab's soldiers. He became a disciple of
Elijah, and endured many evil things from Ahab, because he forsook him
and went after Elijah. However he died in peace. After he followed
Elijah, he was deemed worthy of prophecy<span
id="page_70_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_70_note_1).

   Elijah the fiery, of the family of Aaron, (was) from Tashbî<span
id="page_70_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_70_note_2), a town of the Levites.
When this (prophet) was born, his father saw in a dream that one was
born, and that they wrapped him in fire instead of swaddling bands, and
gave him some of that fire to eat. He came to Jerusalem, and told the
priests the vision that he had seen. The learned among the people said
to him, 'Fear not, thy son is about to be a fire, and his word shall be
like fire, and shall not fall to the ground; he will burn like fire with
jealousy of sinners, and his zeal will be accepted before God.' He was
taken up in a chariot towards heaven. Some say that his father was
called Shôbâkh<span id="page_70_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_70_note_3).

   Elisha his pupil, from <u>A</u>bêl-M<u>e</u>hôlâh, (was) of the tribe
of Reuben. On the day of his birth a great wonder took place in Israel;
for the bull<span id="page_70_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_70_note_4) which they worshipped in
Gilgal lowed, and his voice was heard in Jerusalem. The chief priests in
Jerusalem said, 'A mighty prophet is born to-day in Israel at this time,
and he will break the images and idols to pieces.' He died in peace, and
was buried in Samaria.

   Jonah the son of Amittai<span id="page_70_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_70_note_5) (was) from
Gath-hepher<span id="page_70_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_70_note_6), from Kûryath-Âdâmôs<span
id="page_70_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_70_note_7), which is near to Ascalon
and Gaza and the sea coast. After this (prophet) had prophesied to the
Ninevites in the time of Sardânâ<span
id="page_70_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_70_note_8) <span id="page_71">p.
71</span> the king, he did not remain in his own land because the Jews
were jealous of him; but he took his mother, and went and dwelt in
Assyria. He feared the reproach of the Jews, because he had prophesied,
and his prophecy did not come to pass. He also rebuked Ahab the king,
and called a famine upon the land and the people. He came to the widow
of Elijah, and blessed her, because she received him, and he returned to
Judaea. His mother died on the way, and he buried her by the side of
Deborah's grave. He lived in the land of Serîdâ, and died two years
after the people had returned from Babylon, and was buried in the cave
of <u>K</u>ainân<span id="page_71_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_71_note_1). This (prophet)
prophesied that when the Messiah should come, the cities of the Jews
would be overturned.

   Micah the Morashthite (was) of the tribe of Ephraim, and was slain by
Joram the son of Ahab. This (prophet) prophesied concerning the
destruction of the temple of the Jews, and the abrogation of the
Passover on the death of the Messiah. He died in peace, and was buried
in Anikâm.

   Nahum, from the city of El<u>k</u>ôsh, (was) of the tribe of Simeon.
After the death of Jonah this (prophet) prophesied concerning the
Ninevites, saying, 'Nineveh shall perish by perpetually advancing
waters, and ascending fire;' and this actually took place. He prophesied
also concerning the Babylonians, that they would come against the
Israelitish people; and therefore they sought to kill him. He prophesied
that when the Messiah should be slain, the vail of the temple should be
rent in twain<span id="page_71_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_71_note_2), and that the Holy Spirit
should depart from it. He died in peace, and was buried in his own
country.

   Habakkuk (was) of the tribe of Simeon, and from the land of
<u>S</u>ûâr (Zoar)<span id="page_71_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_71_note_3). This (prophet)
prophesied concerning the Messiah, that He should come, and abrogate the
laws of the Jews. He brought food to Daniel at Babylon by the divine
(or, angelic) agency. The Jews stoned him in Jerusalem.

   Zephaniah (was) of the tribe of Simeon. He prophesied concerning
<span id="page_72">p. 72</span> the Messiah, that He should suffer, and
that the sun should become dark, and the moon be hidden. He died in
peace in his own land.

   Haggai returned from Babylon to Jerusalem when he was young. He
prophesied that the people would return, and concerning the Messiah,
that He would abrogate the sacrifices of the Jews. He died in peace.

   Zechariah the son of Jehoiada returned from Babylon in his old age,
and wrought wonders among the people. He died at a great age, and was
buried by the side of the grave of Haggai.

   Malachi was born after the return of the people, and because of his
beauty he was surnamed 'Angel.' He died in peace in his own land.

   The Jews stoned Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah in Egypt, because he
rebuked them for worshipping idols; and the Egyptians buried him by the
side of Pharaoh's palace. The Egyptians loved him much, because he
prayed and the beasts died which used to come up from the river Nile and
devour men. These beasts were called 'crocodiles.' When Alexander the
son of Philip, the Macedonian, came (to Egypt), he made enquiries about
his grave, and took and brought him to Alexandria. This (prophet) during
his life said to the Egyptians, 'a child shall be born--that is the
Messiah--of a virgin, and He shall be laid in a crib<span
id="page_72_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_72_note_2), and He will shake and
cast down the idols.' From that time, and until Christ was born, the
Egyptians used to set a virgin and a baby in a crib, and to worship him,
because of what Jeremiah said to them, that He should be born in a crib.

   Ezekiel the son of Buzi was of the priestly tribe, and from the land
of Serîdâ<span id="page_72_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_72_note_3). The chief of the Jews
who was in the land of the Chaldeans slew him, because he rebuked him
for worshipping idols. He was buried in the grave of Arphaxar, the son
of Shem, the son of Noah.

   Daniel (was) of the tribe of Judah, and was born in Upper Beth-Horon.
He was a man who kept himself from women, and hence the Jews thought
that he was an eunuch, for his face was different (from that <span
id="page_73">p. 73</span> of other men), and he had no children. He
prayed for the Babylonians, and died in Elam, in the city of the
Hôzâyê<span id="page_73_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_73_note_1), and was buried in
Shôshan the fortress. He prophesied concerning the return of the people.

   Ahijah (was) from Shilo. A lion slew this prophet, and he was buried
by the oak at Shilo in Samaria.

   Ezra the scribe was from the country of Sâbthâ<span
id="page_73_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_73_note_2), and of the tribe of
Judah. This (prophet) brought back the people, and died in peace in his
own land.

   Zechariah the son of Berachiah, the priest, was from Jerusalem. Joash
the king slew this (prophet) between the steps<span
id="page_73_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_73_note_3) and the altar, and
sprinkled his blood upon the horns of the altar, and the priests buried
him. From that day God forsook the temple, and angels were never again
seen in it.

   Simon the son of Sîrâ (Sirach) died in peace in his own town.

   Nathan died in peace.

   Here ends the first part of the book of gleanings called 'the Bee.'

   To God be the glory, and may His mercy and compassion be upon us.
Amen.

   Again, by the Divine power, we write the second part of the book of
gleanings called 'the Bee,' regarding the Divine dispensation which was
wrought in the new (covenant).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb33)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_69"></span>p. 69

<span id="page_69_note_4"></span>[4](#page_69_fr_4) Chap. xxxi (sic) in
the Oxford MS.

<span id="page_69_note_5"></span>[5](#page_69_fr_5) See Epiphanius, *De
Prophetarum Vitis*, in Migne, *Patrologiae Cursus, Ser. Gr.*, t. 43,
cols. 415-427.

<span id="page_69_note_6"></span>[6](#page_69_fr_6) Rather obscure;
\#\#\# signifies 'he hid, concealed, buried;' possibly the meaning may
be 'brought by an underground tunnel.'

<span id="page_69_note_7"></span>[7](#page_69_fr_7) Schoenfelder, *eum
in terram projecerunt*.

<span id="page_69_note_8"></span>[8](#page_69_fr_8) Epiphanius says that
Amaziah slew him.

<span id="footnotes_page_70"></span>p. 70

<span id="page_70_note_1"></span>[1](#page_70_fr_1) Solomon here follows
the tradition adopted by Jerome and Ephraim Syrus, and maintained by
Kimchi and Abarbanel. He is supposed to have been the captain of the
third fifty of soldiers sent by Ahab against Elijah. See [2 Kings i.
13](../../bib/kjv/kg2.htm#1:13).

<span id="page_70_note_2"></span>[2](#page_70_fr_2) Or Tishbeh.
Epiphanius, 'from the land of the Arabs.'

<span id="page_70_note_3"></span>[3](#page_70_fr_3) Elijah is called
'the son of Shôbâkh' in the Oxford MS. Epiphanius, Σοβάχ {Greek:
*Sobáx*}.

<span id="page_70_note_4"></span>[4](#page_70_fr_4) Epiphanius, 'the
golden heifer.'

<span id="page_70_note_5"></span>[5](#page_70_fr_5) In the Syriac,
*Yaunân the son of Mattai*.

<span id="page_70_note_6"></span>[6](#page_70_fr_6) Gath-hepher in the
tribe of Zebulun, [2 Kings xiv. 25](../../bib/kjv/kg2.htm#14:25).

<span id="page_70_note_7"></span>[7](#page_70_fr_7) Epiphanius, ἐκ λης
Καριαθιαρύμ {Greek: *ek ghs Kariaðamaoúm*}. A variant has Καριαθιαρίμ
{Greek: *Kariaðiarím*} (Kirjath-jearim).

<span id="page_70_note_8"></span>[8](#page_70_fr_8) Or Surdânôs. See
Hoffmann, *Auszüge aus syr. Akten pers. Märtyrer*, note 369, page 43.
The only son of Sennacherib whose name can be compared with this is
*Assur-nadin-sumi*.

<span id="footnotes_page_71"></span>p. 71

<span id="page_71_note_1"></span>[1](#page_71_fr_1) Epiphanius, Καὶ
κατοικήδας ἐν γῃ̑ Σαὰρ, ἐκει̑ ἀπὲθανεν, καὶ ὲτάφη ὲν τῳ̑ σπηλαίῳ Καινεζεου̑
{Greek: *Kaì katoikhdas en gh Saàr, ekei apéðanen, kaì etáfh en tw
sphlaìw Kainekseou*}.

<span id="page_71_note_2"></span>[2](#page_71_fr_2) Epiphanius
attributes this prophecy to Habakkuk.

<span id="page_71_note_3"></span>[3](#page_71_fr_3) Epiphanius, ἐξ ἀγρου̑
Βηθοχήρ {Greek: *eks agrou Bhðoxhr*}. A variant has Βιδζεχάρ {Greek:
*Bidzexár*}.

<span id="footnotes_page_72"></span>p. 72

<span id="page_72_note_2"></span>[2](#page_72_fr_2) See Migne,
*Patrologiae Cursus, Ser. Gr*., t. 43, col. 421; and the chapter on the
going down of our Lord into Egypt.

<span id="page_72_note_3"></span>[3](#page_72_fr_3) Epiphanius, ἐκ γη̑ς
Σαρηρά {Greek: *ek ghs Sarhrá*}.

<span id="footnotes_page_73"></span>p. 73

<span id="page_73_note_1"></span>[1](#page_73_fr_1) In Arabic
*al-Ahwâz*, now *Khûzistân*.

<span id="page_73_note_2"></span>[2](#page_73_fr_2) Epiphanius, ἐκ γη̑ς
Συνβαθά {Greek: *ek ghs Sunbaðá*}.

<span id="page_73_note_3"></span>[3](#page_73_fr_3) Bar Bahlûl (Brit.
Mus. Or. 2441, fol. 343 *b*, col. 1) explains this word thus: 'according
to Bar Sarôshwai they were two balustrades (or banisters), between which
the steps were built.' Another lexicon, Brit. Mus. Add. 7203, fol. 159
*a*, col. 2, says: 'the raised platform (or dais) which is before the
door of the altar.'

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
