[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb32) [Next](bb34.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# CHAPTER XXXIII<span id="page_73_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_73_note_4.md).

OF THE MESSIANIC GENERATIONS<span id="page_73_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_73_note_5.md).

   G<span class="small">OD</span> created Adam. Adam begat Seth. Seth
begat Enos. Enos begat <u>K</u>ainân. <u>K</u>ainân begat Mahalaleel.
Mahalaleel begat Jared. <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> Jared begat
Enoch. Enoch begat Methuselah. Methuselah begat Lamech. Lamech begat
Noah. Noah begat Shem. Shem begat Arphaxar. Arphaxar begat
<u>K</u>ainân. <u>K</u>ainân begat Shâlâch. Shâlâch begat Eber. Eber
begat Peleg. Peleg begat Reu. Reu begat Serug. Serug begat Nahor. Nahor
begat Terah. Terah begat Abraham. Abraham begat Isaac. Isaac begat
Jacob. Jacob begat Judah. Judah took a Canaanitish wife, whose name was
Shuah. And it was very grievous to Jacob, and he said to Judah, 'The God
of my fathers will not allow the seed of Canaan to be mingled with our
seed, nor his family with our family.' There were born to Judah by the
Canaanitish woman three sons, Er, Onan, and Shelah. Er took Tamar, the
daughter of Merari the son of Levi, to wife, and he lay with her in the
Sodomite way and died without children. After him his brother Onan took
her, to raise up seed to his brother; he also, when he lay with her,
scattered his seed outside of her on the ground, and he too died without
children. Because Shelah was a child, Judah kept his daughter-in-law in
widowhood, that he might give her to Shelah to raise up seed by her. But
Tamar went into her father-in-law by crafty devices, and lay with him,
and conceived, and gave birth to twins, Pharez and Zarah. Pharez begat
Hezron. Hezron begat Aram. Aram begat Amminadab. Amminadab begat
Nahshon. Eleazar the son of Aaron, the priest, took the sister of
Nahshon to wife, and by her begat Phinehas; and the seed of the
priesthood was mingled with the royal line<span
id="page_74_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_74_note_1.md). Nahshon begat Salmon.
Salmon begat Boaz by Rahab. Boaz begat Obed by Ruth the Moabitess. Obed
begat Jesse. Jesse begat David the king by Nahash.

   Now two genealogies are handed down from David to Christ; the one
from Solomon to Jacob<span id="page_74_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_74_note_2.md), and the other from
Nathan to Heli<span id="page_74_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_74_note_3.md). David begat Solomon.
Solomon begat Rehoboam. Rehoboam begat Abijah. Abijah begat Asa. Asa
begat Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat begat Joram. Joram begat Uzziah. Uzziah
begat Jotham. Jotham begat Ahaz. Ahaz begat Hezekiah. Hezekiah begat
Manasseh. <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> Manasseh begat Amon. Amon
begat Josiah. Josiah begat Jeconiah. Jeconiah begat Salathiel. Salathiel
begat Zerubbabel. Zerubbabel begat Abiud. Abiud begat Eliakim. Eliakim
begat Azor. Azor begat Zadok. Zadok begat Achin. Achin begat Eliud.
Eliud begat Eleazar. Eleazar begat Matthan. Matthan begat Jacob. Jacob
begat Joseph. Or again: David begat Nathan. Nathan begat Mattatha.
Mattatha begat Mani. Mani begat Melea. Melea begat Eliakim. Eliakim
begat Jonam. Jonam begat Levi<span id="page_75_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_75_note_1.md). Levi begat Mattîtha.
Mattîtha begat Jorim. Jorim begat Eliezer. Eliezer begat Jose. Jose
begat Er. Er begat Elmodad. Elmodad begat Cosam. Cosam begat Addi. Addi
begat Melchi. Melchi begat Neri. Neri begat Salathiel. Salathiel begat
Zorobabel. Zorobabel begat Rhesa. Rhesa begat Johannan. Johannan begat
Juda. Juda begat Joseph. Joseph begat Semei. Semei begat Mattatha.
Mattatha begat Maath. Maath begat Nagge. Nagge begat Esli. Esli begat
Nahum. Nahum begat Amos. Amos begat Mattîtha. Mattîtha begat Joseph.
Joseph begat Janni. Janni begat Melchi. Melchi begat Levi. Levi begat
Matthat. Matthat begat Heli. Heli begat Joseph.

   Know too, O my brother, that Mattan the son of Eliezer--whose descent
was from the family of Solomon--took a wife whose name was Astha (or
Essetha) and by her begat Jacob naturally. Mattan died, and
Melchi--whose family descended from Nathan the son of David--took her to
wife, and begat by her Eli (or Heli); hence Jacob and Heli are brothers,
(the sons) of (one) mother. Eli took a wife and died without children.
Then Jacob took her to wife, to raise up seed to his brother, according
to the command of the law; and he begat by her Joseph, who was the son
of Jacob according to nature, but the son of Heli according to the law;
so whichever ye choose, whether according to nature, or according to the
law, Christ is found to be the son of David. It is moreover right to
know that Eliezer begat two sons, Mattan and Jotham. Mattan begat Jacob,
and Jacob begat Joseph; Jotham begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Mary. From
this it is clear that Joseph's father and Mary's father were cousins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb34.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_73"></span>p. 73

<span id="page_73_note_4"></span>[4](#page_73_fr_4.md) Chap. xxxvii in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_73_note_5"></span>[5](#page_73_fr_5.md) See [Gen.
v](../../bib/kjv/gen.htm#5:1), [Matt. i](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#1:1.md), and
[Luke iii. 23](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:23.md)-38.

<span id="footnotes_page_74"></span>p. 74

<span id="page_74_note_1"></span>[1](#page_74_fr_1.md) This sentence is
omitted by the Oxford MS., as well as several names from the
genealogies.

<span id="page_74_note_2"></span>[2](#page_74_fr_2.md) [Matt. i.
6](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#1:6.md)-16.

<span id="page_74_note_3"></span>[3](#page_74_fr_3.md) [Luke iii.
23](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:23.md)-31.

<span id="footnotes_page_75"></span>p. 75

<span id="page_75_note_1"></span>[1](#page_75_fr_1.md) Joseph, Juda, and
Simeon should follow here. See [Luke iii.
29](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#3:29.md), 30.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
