[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb33) [Next](bb35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

# CHAPTER XXXIV<span id="page_76_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_76_note_1).

OF THE ANNUNCIATlON OF THE ANGEL TO YÔNÂKÎR (JOACHIM) IN RESPECT OF
MARY.

   T<span class="small">HIS</span> Zadok, who was called Yônâkîr, and
Dinah his wife were righteous before God, and were rich in earthly
riches and in goods and chattels; but they had neither fruit nor
offspring like other people<span id="page_76_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_76_note_2). They were reproached by
the people for their barrenness, and they did not allow them to offer up
the offering except after every one else, because they had no children
among the people of Israel. And Yônâkîr went out into the desert, and
pitched his tent outside the encampment, and he prayed before God with
mournful tears, and put on garments of mourning; so also did Dinah his
wife. And God heard their prayers and accepted the sacrifices of their
tears. The angel of God came to them, and announced to them the
conception of Mary, saying, 'Your prayer has been heard before God, and
behold, He will give you blessed fruit, a daughter who shall be a sign
and a wonder among all the generations of the world; and all families
shall be blessed through her.' Then they two praised God, and Zadok
returned to his habitation. And Dinah his wife conceived, and brought
forth Mary; and from that day she was called Hannah (Anna) instead of
Dinah, for the Lord had had compassion upon her. Now the name 'Mary'
(Maryam or Miriam) is interpreted 'lifted up,' 'exalted;' and they
rejoiced in her exceedingly. And after six months her parents said to
one another, 'We will not allow her to walk upon the ground<span
id="page_76_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_76_note_3);' <span id="page_77">p.
77</span> and they carried her with sacrifices and offerings, and
brought her to the temple of the Lord. And they sacrificed oxen and
sheep to the Lord, and offered Mary to the high priest. He laid his hand
upon her head, and blessed her, saying, 'Blessed shalt thou be among
women.' Two years after she was weaned, they brought her to the temple
of the Lord, even as they had vowed to the Lord, and delivered her to
the high priest. He laid his hand upon her head, and blessed her, and
said to her that she should give herself over to the aged women who were
there. And she was brought up with the virgins in the temple of the
Lord, and performed the service of the temple with joyful heart and
godly fervour until she was twelve years old. Because she was beautiful
in appearance, the priests and the high priest took counsel and prayed
before God that He would reveal to them what they should do with
her<span id="page_77_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_77_note_1). And the angel of God
appeared unto the high priest and said to him, 'Gather together the
staves of the men who have been left widowers by their first wives, and
are well known for piety, uprightness, and righteousness, and what God
sheweth thee, do.' And they brought many staves and laid them down in
the temple; and they prayed before God that day and its night. The chief
priest went into the temple and gave to each of them his staff, and when
Joseph took his staff in his hand, there went forth from it a white
dove, and hovered over the top of the rod, and sat upon it. The chief
priest drew near to Joseph and kissed him on his head, and said to him,
'The blessed maiden has fallen to thy lot from the Lord; take her to
thee until she arrives at the age for marriage, and (then) make a
marriage feast after the manner and custom of men; for it is meet for
thee (to do so) more than others, because ye are cousins.' Joseph said
to the chief priest, 'I am an old and feeble man, and this is a girl,
and unfit for my aged condition; it is better to give her to one of her
own age, because I cannot rely upon myself to watch her and guard her.'
The chief priest said to him, 'Take heed that thou dost not transgress
the command of God, and bring a punishment upon thee.' So Joseph took
Mary, and went to his dwelling-place.

   <span id="page_77_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_77_note_2)Some days after the
priests distributed various coloured silken <span id="page_78">p.
78</span> threads to weave for the veil of the sanctuary; and it fell to
Mary's lot to weave purple. And while she was in the temple in prayer,
having placed incense before the Lord, suddenly the archangel Gabriel
appeared to her in the form of a middle-aged man, and a sweet odour was
diffused from him; and Mary was terrified at the sight of the angel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_76"></span>p. 76

<span id="page_76_note_1"></span>[1](#page_76_fr_1) Chap. xxxviii in the
Oxford MS.

<span id="page_76_note_2"></span>[2](#page_76_fr_2) See William Hone,
*The Apocryphal New Testament*, 8vo, London, 1820, Protevangelion and
Mary; Wright, *Contributions to the Apocryphal Literature of the New
Testament*, p. 1; Cowper, *The Apocryphal Gospels*, pp. 3, 29, and 84
foll.; Tischendorf, *Evangelia Apocrypha*, Leipzig, 1853, pp. 53 foll.;
Thilo, *Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti*, Lipsiae, 1832, t. i, pp. 162
foll. For a list of other works on the Apocryphal Gospels, see Migne,
*Dictionnaire des Apocryphes*, col. 962.

<span id="page_76_note_3"></span>[3](#page_76_fr_3) Then her mother
caught her up and said, 'As the Lord my God liveth, thou shalt not walk
again on this earth till I bring thee into the temple of the Lord.'
Hone, *Apoc. New Test.*, Mary, chap. vi. 2.

<span id="footnotes_page_77"></span>p. 77

<span id="page_77_note_1"></span>[1](#page_77_fr_1) Hane, *Apoc. New
Test.*, chap. viii. 31.

<span id="page_77_note_2"></span>[2](#page_77_fr_2) *Ibid*., chap. ix.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
