[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb36) [Next](bb38.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

# CHAPTER XXXVII<span id="page_81_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_81_note_1.md).

THE PROPHECY OF ZÂRÂDÔSHT CONCERNING OUR LORD.

   T<span class="small">HIS</span> Zârâdôsht is Baruch the scribe. When
he was sitting by the fountain of water called Glôshâ of <u>H</u>ôrîn,
where the royal bath had been erected, he said to his disciples, the
king Gûshnâsâph<span id="page_81_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_81_note_2.md) and Sâsân and Mahîmad,
'Hear, my beloved children, for I will reveal to you a mystery
concerning the great King who is about to rise upon the world. At the
end of time, and at the final dissolution, a child shall be conceived in
the womb of a virgin, and shall be formed in her members, without any
man approaching her. And he shall be like a tree with beautiful foliage
and laden with fruit, standing in a parched land; and the inhabitants of
that land shall be gathered together<span
id="page_81_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_81_note_3.md) to uproot it from the
earth, but shall not be able. Then they will take him and crucify him
upon a tree, and heaven and earth shall sit in mourning for his sake;
and all the families of the nations shall be in grief for him. He will
begin to go down to the depths of the earth, and from the depth he will
be exalted to the height; then he will come with the armies of light,
and be borne aloft upon white clouds; for he is a child conceived by the
Word which establishes natures.' Gûshnâsâph says to him, 'Whence has
this one, of whom thou sayest these things, his power? Is he greater
than thou, or art thou greater than he?' Zârâdôsht says to him, 'He
shall descend from my family; I am he, and he is I; he is in me, and I
am in him. When the beginning <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> of his
coming appears, mighty signs will be seen in heaven, and his light shall
surpass that of the sun. But ye, sons of the seed of life, who have come
forth from the treasuries of life and light and spirit, and have been
sown in the land of fire and water, for you it is meet to watch and take
heed to these things which I have spoken to you, that ye await his
coming; for you will be the first to perceive the coming of that great
king, whom the prisoners await to be set free. Now, my sons, guard this
secret which I have revealed to you, and let it be kept in the
treasure-houses of your souls. And when that star rises of which I have
spoken, let ambassadors bearing offerings be sent by you, and let them
offer worship to him. Watch, and take heed, and despise him not, that he
destroy you not with the sword; for he is the king of kings, and all
kings receive their crowns from him. He and I are one.' These are the
things which were spoken by this second Balaam, and God, according to
His custom, compelled him to interpret these things; or he sprang from a
people who were acquainted with the prophecies<span
id="page_82_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_82_note_1.md) concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ, and declared them aforetime.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb38.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_81"></span>p. 81

<span id="page_81_note_1"></span>[1](#page_81_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xli.

<span id="page_81_note_2"></span>[2](#page_81_fr_2.md) Or rather,
*Gushnasp*.

<span id="page_81_note_3"></span>[3](#page_81_fr_3.md) Or, according to
another reading, *shall strive with one another*.

<span id="footnotes_page_82"></span>p. 82

<span id="page_82_note_1"></span>[1](#page_82_fr_1.md) See Eisenmenger,
*Entdecktes Judenthum*, Theil ii, pp. 439, 440, and 905.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
