[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb39) [Next](bb41.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

# CHAPTER XL<span id="page_86_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_86_note_4.md).

OF OUR LORD'S GOING DOWN INTO EGYPT<span
id="page_86_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_86_note_5.md).

   W<span class="small">HEN</span> the Magi had returned to their
country, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, and said
to him, 'Arise, take the Child <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> and His
mother, and flee to Egypt; and stay there until I tell thee.' So Joseph
arose and took the Child and His mother by night, and fled to Egypt, and
was there until the death of Herod. When they were journeying along the
road to Egypt, two robbers met them; the name of the one was Titus, that
of the other Dûmâchos (?). Dûmâchos wished to harm them and to treat
them evilly, but Titus would not let him, and delivered them from the
hands of his companion. When they reached the gate of the city called
Hermopolis<span id="page_87_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_87_note_1.md), there were by the two
buttresses of the gate two figures of brass, that had been made by the
sages and philosophers; and they spoke like men. When our Lord and His
mother and Joseph entered Egypt, that is to say that city, these two
figures cried out with a loud voice, saying, 'A great king has come into
Egypt<span id="page_87_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_87_note_2.md).' When the king of Egypt
heard this, he was troubled and moved; for he feared lest his kingdom
should be taken away from him. And he commanded the heralds to proclaim
throughout the whole city, 'If any man knoweth (who He is), let him
point (Him) out to us without delay.' When they had made much search and
did not find Him, the king commanded all the inhabitants of the city to
go outside and come in one by one. When our Lord entered, these two
figures cried out, 'This is the king.' And when our Lord was revealed,
Pharaoh sought to slay Him. Now Lazarus--whom Christ raised from the
dead--was there, and was one of the king's officials, and held in much
esteem by the lord of Egypt. He drew near to Joseph and asked them,
'Whence are ye?' They said to him, 'From the land of Palestine.' When he
heard that they were from the land of Palestine, he was sorry for them,
and came to the king and pledged himself for the Child. And he said to
the king, 'O king, live for ever! If deceit be found in this Child,
behold, I am before thee, do unto me according to thy will.' This is the
(cause) of the love between Lazarus and Christ. One day when Mary was
washing the <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> swaddling bands of our Lord,
she poured out the water used in washing in a certain place, and there
grew up there apûrsam<span id="page_88_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_88_note_1) (that is to say balsam.md)
trees, a species of tree not found anywhere else save in this spot in
Egypt. Its oil has (divers) properties; if a man dips iron into it, and
brings (the iron) near a fire, it shines like wax; if some of it is
thrown upon water, it sinks to the bottom; and if a drop of it is
dropped upon the hollow of a man's hand, it goes through to the other
side. Our Lord remained two years in Egypt, until Herod had died an evil
death. He died in this manner. First of all he slew his wife and his
daughter, and he killed one man of every family, saying, 'At the time of
my death there shall be mourning and weeping and lamentation in the
whole city.' His bowels and his legs were swollen with running sores,
and matter flowed from them, and he was consumed by worms. He had nine
wives and thirteen children. And he commanded his sister Salome and her
husband, saying, 'I know that the Jews will hold a great festival on the
day of my death; when they are gathered together with the weepers and
mourners, slay them, and let them not live after my death.' There was a
knife in his hand, and he was eating an apple; and by reason of the
severity of his pain, he drew the knife across his throat, and cut it
with his own hand; and his belly burst open, and he died and went to
perdition. After the death of Herod who slew the children, his son Herod
Archelaus reigned, who cut off the head of John. And the angel of the
Lord appeared to Joseph in Egypt and said to him, 'Arise, take the Child
and His mother, and go to the land of Israel, for those who sought the
life of the Child are dead.' So Joseph took the Child and His mother,
and came to Galilee; and they dwelt in the city of Nazareth, that what
was said in the prophecy might be fulfilled, 'He shall be called a
Nazarene.' In the tenth year of the reign of Archelaus the kingdom of
the Jews was divided into four parts. To Philip (were assigned) two
parts, Ituraea and Trachonitis; to Lysanias one part, which was Abilene;
and to <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> Herod the younger the fourth
part. And Herod loved Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb41.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_86"></span>p. 86

<span id="page_86_note_4"></span>[4](#page_86_fr_4.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xliv.

<span id="page_86_note_5"></span>[5](#page_86_fr_5.md) [Matt. chap.
ii](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#2:1.md).

<span id="footnotes_page_87"></span>p. 87

<span id="page_87_note_1"></span>[1](#page_87_fr_1.md) In the Thebaïd. For
the opinions of the ancient writers on this subject see Tillemont, *Mém.
Eccles.*, i. 8.

<span id="page_87_note_2"></span>[2](#page_87_fr_2.md) When Christ entered
Egypt, ail the idols fell down and were broken. See Fabricius, *Evangel.
Infantiae*, p. 175; Migne; *Dict. des Apoc.*, vol. xxiv, p. 926; Thilo,
*Codex Apoc.*, p. 399; Cowper, *Apoc. Gospels*, p. 63.

<span id="footnotes_page_88"></span>p. 88

<span id="page_88_note_1"></span>[1](#page_88_fr_1.md) See Löw, *Aram.
Pflanzennamen*, p. 73, no. 53.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
