[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb42) [Next](bb44.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# CHAPTER XLIII<span id="page_92_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_92_note_1.md).

OF THE PASSOVER OF OUR LORD<span id="page_92_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_92_note_2.md).

   W<span class="small">HEN</span> the time of the Passover came, He
sent two of His disciples to a man with whom they were not acquainted,
saying, 'When ye enter the city, behold, there will meet you a man
carrying a pitcher of water; follow him, and wheresoever he entereth,
say ye to the master of the house, "Our Master saith, Where is the
guest-chamber, where I may eat the Passover with My disciples?" and
behold, he will shew a large upper chamber made ready and prepared;
there make ye ready <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> for us.' And because
at that time crowds of people were flocking thickly into Jerusalem to
keep the feast of the Passover, so that all the houses of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem were filled with people by reason of the great
crowd which was resorting thither, our Lord, by the power of His
Godhead, worked upon the master of the house to make ready a large upper
chamber without his being aware for whom he was preparing it, but he
thought that perhaps some great man among the nobles and grandees of the
Jews was about to come to him, and that it was right to keep a room for
him furnished with all things (needful); because all those who came from
other places to Jerusalem were received into their houses by the people
of the city, and whatsoever they required for the use of the feast of
the Passover they supplied. Hence the master of the house made ready
that upper chamber with all things (needful), and permitted no man to
enter therein, being restrained by the power of our Lord. Because a
mystical thing was about to be done in it, it was not meet for Him to
perform the hidden mystery when others were near. Mâr Basil says: 'On
the eve of the Passion, after the disciples had received the body and
blood of our Lord, He poured water into a basin and began to wash the
feet of His disciples; this was baptism to the apostles. They were not
all made perfect, because they were not all pure, for Judas, the son of
perdition, was not sanctified<span id="page_93_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_93_note_1.md); and because that basin
of washing was in truth baptism, as our Lord said to Simon Peter, "If I
wash thee not, thou hast no part with Me," that is to say, "If I baptise
thee not, thou art not able to enter into the kingdom of heaven."
Therefore, every one who is not baptised by the priests, and receives
not the body and blood of Christ our Lord, enters not into the kingdom
of heaven.' Mâr Dâd-îshô\` says in his commentary on Abbâ Isaiah<span
id="page_93_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_93_note_2.md): 'When our Lord at the
Passover had washed the feet of His disciples, He kissed the knees of
Judas, and wiped the soles of his feet with the napkin which was girt
round His loins, like a common slave; for everything which our Lord did,
He did for our teaching.' Mâr Basil in his 'Questions' advises
Christians to eat oil, drink wine, <span id="page_94">p. 94</span> and
break their fast on this evening; for in it was the old covenant
finished, and the new one inaugurated; and in it was the (chosen) people
stripped of holiness, and the nations were sanctified and pardoned.
Although this saint permits (this), yet the other fathers do not give
leave (to do) this, neither do we, nor those of our confession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb44.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_92"></span>p. 92

<span id="page_92_note_1"></span>[1](#page_92_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xlvii.

<span id="page_92_note_2"></span>[2](#page_92_fr_2.md) [Matt. chap.
xxvi](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#26:1.md).

<span id="footnotes_page_93"></span>p. 93

<span id="page_93_note_1"></span>[1](#page_93_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS.
this chapter ends here.

<span id="page_93_note_2"></span>[2](#page_93_fr_2.md) Isaiah of Scêtê. See
Assemânî, *Bibl. Orient.*, t. iii, pt. i, p. 99; Wright's *Catal*., p.
458 sqq., p. 868, col. 2.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
