[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb43) [Next](bb45.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

# CHAPTER XLIV<span id="page_94_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_94_note_1.md).

OF THE PASSION OF OUR LORD.

   T<span class="small">HREE</span> years and three months after His
baptism, Judas Iscariot the son of Simon betrayed his Lord to death. He
was called Iscariot (S<u>e</u>khariô<u>t</u>â) from the name of his town
(S<u>e</u>khariô<u>t</u>), and he had the sixth place among the
disciples before he betrayed our Lord. Our Lord was crucified at the
third hour of Friday, the ninth of Nisan. Caiaphas, who condemned our
Lord, is Josephus. The name of Bar-Abbâ was Jesus<span
id="page_94_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_94_note_2.md). The name of the soldier
who pierced our Lord with the spear, and spat in His face, and smote Him
on His cheek, was Longinus; it was he who lay upon a sick bed for
thirty-eight years, and our Lord healed him, and said to him, 'Behold,
thou art healed; sin no more, lest something worse than the first befall
thee<span id="page_94_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_94_note_3.md).' The watchers at the
grave were five, and these are their names: Issachar, Gad, Matthias,
Barnabas and Simon; but others say they were fifteen, three centurions
and their Roman and Jewish soldiers. Some men have a tradition that the
stone which was laid upon the grave of our Lord was the stone which
poured out water for the children of Israel in the wilderness. The grave
in which our Redeemer was laid was prepared for Joshua the son of Nun,
and was carefully guarded by the Divine will for the burial of our Lord.
The purple which they put on our Lord mockingly, was given in a present
to the Maccabees by the emperors of the Greeks; and they handed it over
to the priests for dressing the <span id="page_95">p. 95</span>
temple<span id="page_95_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_95_note_1.md). The priests took it and
brought it to Pilate, testifying and saying, 'See the purple which He
prepared when He thought to become king,' The garment which the soldiers
divided into four parts indicates the passibility of His body, The robe
without seam at the upper end which was not rent, is the mystery of the
Godhead which cannot admit suffering. As touching the blood and water
which came forth from His side<span id="page_95_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_95_note_2.md), John the son of Zebedee
was deemed worthy to see that vivifying flow from the life-giving
fountain. Mâr John Chrysostom says: 'When His side was rent by the
soldiers with the spear, there came forth immediately water and blood.
The water is a type of baptism, and the blood is the mystery of His
precious blood, for baptism was given first, and then the cup of
redemption. But in the gospel it is written, "There went forth blood and
water<span id="page_95_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_95_note_3.md),"' As to the tree upon
which our Redeemer was crucified, some have said that He was crucified
upon those bars with which they carried the ark of the covenant; and
others that it was upon the wood of the tree on which Abraham offered up
the ram as an offering instead of Isaac. His hands were nailed upon the
wood of the fig-tree of which Adam ate, and behold, we have mentioned
its history with that of Moses' rod. The thirty pieces of silver (zûzê)
which Judas received, and for which he sold his Lord, were thirty pieces
according to the weight of the sanctuary, and were equal to six hundred
pieces according to the weight of our country<span
id="page_95_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_95_note_4.md). Terah<span
id="page_95_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_95_note_5.md) made these pieces for
Abraham his son; Abraham gave them to Isaac; Isaac bought a village with
them; the owner of the village carried them to Pharaoh; Pharaoh sent
them to Solomon the son of <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> David for the
building of his temple; and Solomon took them and placed them round
about the door of the altar. When Nebuchadnezzar came and took captive
the children of Israel, and went into Solomon's temple and saw that
these pieces were beautiful, he took them, and brought them to Babylon
with the captives of the children of Israel. There were some Persian
youths there as hostages, and when Nebuchadnezzar came from Jerusalem,
they sent to him everything that was meet for kings and rulers. And
since gifts and presents had been sent by the Persians, he released
their sons and gave them gifts and presents, among which were those
pieces of silver about which we have spoken; and they carried them to
their parents. When Christ was born and they saw the star, they arose
and took those pieces of silver and gold and myrrh and frankincense, and
set out on the journey; and they came to the neighbourhood of Edessa,
and these kings fell asleep by the roadside. And they arose and left the
pieces behind them, and did not remember them, but forgot that anything
of theirs remained behind. And certain merchants came and found them,
and took these pieces, and came to the neighbourhood of Edessa, and sat
down by a well of water. On that very day an angel came to the
shepherds, and gave them the garment without seam at the upper end,
woven throughout. And he said to them, 'Take this garment, in which is
the life of mankind.' And the shepherds took the garment, and came to
the well of water by the side of which were those merchants. They said
to them, 'We have a garment without seam at the upper end; will ye buy
it?' The merchants said to them, 'Bring it here.' When they saw the
garment, they marvelled and said to the shepherds: 'We have thirty
pieces of silver which are meet for kings; take them and give us this
garment.' When the merchants had taken the garment, and had gone into
the city of Edessa, Abgar the king sent to them and said, 'Have ye
anything meet for kings, that I may buy it from you?' The merchants said
to him, 'We have a garment without seam at the upper end.' When the king
saw the garment, he said to them, 'Whence have ye this garment?' They
said to him, 'We came to a well by the gate of thy city, and we saw it
in the hands of some shepherds, and we bought it from them for thirty
pieces of stamped silver, which were also meet for kings like thyself.'
The king sent for <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> the shepherds, and
took the pieces from them, and sent them together with the garment to
Christ for the good that He had done him in healing his sickness. When
Christ saw the garment and the pieces, He kept the garment by Him, but
He sent the pieces to the Jewish treasury. When Judas Iscariot came to
the chief priests and said to them, 'What will ye give me that I may
deliver Him to you?' the priests arose and brought those pieces, and
gave them to Judas Iscariot; and when he repented, he returned them to
the Jews, and went and hanged himself. And the priests took them and
bought with them a field for a burial-place for strangers.

   <span id="page_97_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_97_note_1.md)Of Joseph the senator
(βουλευτής {Greek: *Bouleuths*}), and why he was thus called. The
senators were a class very much honoured in the land of the Romans; and
if it happened that no one could be found of the royal lineage, they
made a king from among this class. If one of them committed an offence,
they used to beat his horse with white woollen gloves instead of him.
This Joseph was not a senator by birth, but he purchased the dignity,
and enrolled himself among the Roman senate, and was called Senator<span
id="page_97_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_97_note_2.md).

   <span id="page_97_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_97_note_3.md)As for the committal of
Mary to John the son of Zebedee by our Lord, He said to her, 'Woman,
behold thy son;' and to John He said, 'Behold thy mother;' and from that
hour he took her into his house and ministered unto her. Mary lived
twelve years<span id="page_97_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_97_note_4.md) after our Lord's
Ascension: the sum of the years which she lived in the world was
fifty-eight years, but others say sixty-one years<span
id="page_97_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_97_note_5.md). She was not buried on
<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> earth, but the angels carried her to
Paradise, and angels bore her bier. On the day of her death all the
apostles were gathered together, and they prayed over her and were
blessed by her<span id="page_98_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_98_note_1.md). Thomas was in India, and
an angel took him up and brought him, and he found the angels carrying
her bier through the air; and they brought it nigh to Thomas, and he
also prayed and was blessed by her.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

   <span id="page_99_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_99_note_1.md)As regards the name of
*\`arûbhtâ* (i.e. the eve of the Jewish Sabbath), it was not known until
this time, but that day was called the sixth day. And when the sun
became dark, and the Divine Care also set and abandoned the Israelitish
people, then that day was called *\`arûbhtâ*.

   Touching the writing which was written in Greek, Hebrew and Latin,
and set over Christ's head, there was no Aramean written upon the
tablet, for the Arameans or Syrians had no part in (the shedding of)
Christ's blood, but only the Greeks and Hebrews and Romans; Herod the
Greek and Caiaphas the Hebrew and Pilate the Roman. Hence when Abgar the
Aramean king of Mesopotamia heard (of it), he was wroth against the
Hebrews and sought to destroy them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb45.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_94"></span>p. 94

<span id="page_94_note_1"></span>[1](#page_94_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xlviii.

<span id="page_94_note_2"></span>[2](#page_94_fr_2.md) The Oxford MS. omits
this sentence.

<span id="page_94_note_3"></span>[3](#page_94_fr_3.md) [John v.
14](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#5:14.md). The Oxford MS. adds passages from
Isaiah, Zechariah and the Psalms, and after these our Lord's statement
that He would rise again and restore the temple in three days.

<span id="footnotes_page_95"></span>p. 95

<span id="page_95_note_1"></span>[1](#page_95_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS,
the purple is said to have been made for Hiram, king of Tyre, who sent
it to Solomon, and he placed it in the Sanctuary.

<span id="page_95_note_2"></span>[2](#page_95_fr_2.md) In the Oxford MS. a
long account of the baptism of Adam is introduced here.

<span id="page_95_note_3"></span>[3](#page_95_fr_3.md) [John xix.
34](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#19:34.md). See Chrysostom's *Homilies on St.
John's Gospel*, ed. Migne, vol. viii, col. 465, lines 24-30,

<span id="page_95_note_4"></span>[4](#page_95_fr_4.md) \#\#\# = δρακμή
{Greek: *draxmh*}

<span id="page_95_note_5"></span>[5](#page_95_fr_5.md) Melchior, one of the
Persian Magi, offered to Christ thirty pieces of gold, which had been
coined by Terah the father of Abraham. Joseph paid them into the
treasury of Sheba for spices to embalm Jacob, and the queen of Sheba
gave them to Solomon, Sandys, *Christmas Carols*, London, 1883, p,
lxxxiii foll.

<span id="footnotes_page_97"></span>p. 97

<span id="page_97_note_1"></span>[1](#page_97_fr_1.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. xlix begins here, fol. 176 *a*.

<span id="page_97_note_2"></span>[2](#page_97_fr_2.md) The Oxford MS. here
gives an account of the taking down of our Lord from the cross, and of
His burial by Joseph.

<span id="page_97_note_3"></span>[3](#page_97_fr_3.md) In the Oxford MS. a
new chapter begins here, fol. 177 *a*.

<span id="page_97_note_4"></span>[4](#page_97_fr_4.md) According to the
Oxford MS., 13 years.

<span id="page_97_note_5"></span>[5](#page_97_fr_5.md) So also in the
Oxford MS.; but in the *History of the Virgin*, MS. A, fol. 157 *b*, we
read: 'And the blessed Mary departed this life in the year of Alexander
three hundred and ninety-four (i.e. <span
id="footnotes_page_98"></span>p. 98 <span class="small">A.D.</span>
82-3). At the Annunciation she was thirty years old, and she lived also
the \[thirty\]-three years of the Dispensation; and after the
Crucifixion she lived fifty-eight years. The years which she lived were
one hundred and twenty-one.'

<span id="page_98_note_1"></span>[1](#page_98_fr_1.md) In the *History of
the Virgin*, fol. 156 *a*, we read as follows: 'And Mary remained in
Jerusalem, and grieved because of her separation from our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the absence of the apostles from her. And she prayed and
cast frankincense into the fire, and lifted up her eyes and spread out
her hands to heaven, and said, "O Christ, the Son of the living God,
hearken unto the voice of Thy handmaiden, and send unto me Thy friend
John the young with his fellow-apostles, that I may see them and be
comforted by the sight of them before the day of my death; and I will
praise and adore Thy goodness." And straightway it was revealed by the
Holy Spirit to each one of the apostles, in whatever country he was in,
that the blessed Mary was about to depart from this world into the
never-ending life. And the Spirit summoned them, along with those of
them who were dead, to be gathered together at daybreak to the blessed
Mary for her to see them: and each one of them came to her from his own
land at dawn by the agency of the Holy Spirit, and they saluted Mary and
each other, and adored her.' See Wright, *Contributions to the Apoc.
Lit. of the New Test*.

<span id="footnotes_page_99"></span>p. 99

<span id="page_99_note_1"></span>[1](#page_99_fr_1.md) The two following
paragraphs do not appear in the Oxford MS.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
