[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb52) [Next](bb54.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# CHAPTER LIII<span id="page_124_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_124_note_3.md).

OF THE END OF TIMES AND THE CHANGE OF KINGDOMS<span
id="page_124_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_124_note_4.md); FROM THE BOOK OF
METHODIUS, BISHOP OF ROME<span id="page_124_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_124_note_5.md).

   I<span class="small">N</span> this seventh and last millennium will
the kingdom of the Persians be destroyed. In it will the children of
Ishmael go forth from the wilderness of Yathrib (al-Medînah), and they
will all come and be gathered together in Gibeah of Ramah, and there
shall the fat ones of the kingdom of the Greeks, who destroyed the
kingdoms of the Hebrews and the Persians, be destroyed by Ishmael, the
wild ass of the desert; for in wrath shall he be sent against the whole
earth, against man and beast and trees, and it shall be a merciless
chastisement. It is not because God loves them that He has allowed them
to enter into the kingdoms of the Christians, but by reason of the
iniquity and sin which is wrought by the Christians, the like of which
has never been wrought in any one of the former generations. They are
mad with drunkenness and anger and shameless lasciviousness; they have
intercourse with one another wickedly, a man and his son committing
fornication with one woman, the brother with his brother's wife, male
with male, and female with female, contrary to the law of nature and of
Scripture, as the blessed Paul has said, 'Male with male did work shame,
and likewise also the <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> women did work
lewdness, and, contrary to nature, had intercourse with one another<span
id="page_125_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_125_note_1.md).' Therefore they have
brought upon themselves the recompense of punishment which is meet for
their error, women as well as men, and hence God will deliver them over
to the impurity of the barbarians, that their wives may be polluted by
the sons of pollution, and men may be subjected to the yoke of tribute;
then shall men sell everything that they have and give it to them, but
shall not be able to pay the debt of the tribute, until they give also
their children to them into slavery. And the tyrant shall exalt himself
until he demands tribute and poll-tax from the dead that lie in the
dust, first oppressing the orphans and defrauding the widows. They will
have no pity upon the poor, nor will they spare the miserable; they will
not relieve the afflicted; they will smite the grey hairs of the aged,
despise the wise, and honour fools; they will mock at those who frame
laws, and the little shall be esteemed as the great, and the despised as
the honourable; their words shall cut like swords, and there is none who
shall be able to change the persuasive force of their words. The path of
their chastisement shall be from sea to sea, and from east to west, and
from north to south, and to the wilderness of Yathrib. In their latter
days there shall be great tribulation, old men and old women hungering
and thirsting, and tortured in bonds until they account the dead happy.
They will rip up the pregnant woman, and tear infants away from their
mothers' bosoms and sell them like beasts, and those that are of no use
to them will they dash against the stones. They will slay the priests
and deacons in the sanctuary, and they will lie with their wives in the
houses of God. They will make clothes for themselves and their wives out
of the holy vestments, and they will spread them upon their horses, and
work impurity upon them in their beds. They will bring their cattle into
the churches and altars, and they will tie up their dogs by the shrines
of the saints. In those days the spirit of the righteous and of them
that are well versed in signs will be grieved. The feeble will deny the
true faith, the holy Cross, and the life-giving mysteries; and without
compulsion many will deny Christ, and become rebels and slanderers and
boasters, denying the faith. With this chastisement shall the Christians
be tried. For at that <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> time the
righteous, the humble, the peaceful and the gentle will not be sought
after, but liars and slanderers and accusers and disturbers and the
obscene and those who are destitute of mercy, and those who scoff at
their parents and blaspheme the life-giving mysteries. And the true
believers shall come into troubles and persecutions until they despair
of their lives. Honour shall be taken away from the priests, and the
pastors shall become as the people. When the measure of their (i.e. the
Ishmaelites') victory is full, tribulation will increase, and
chastisement will be doubled upon man and beast. And there shall be a
great famine, and the dead bodies of men shall lie in the streets and
squares without any one to bury them, and (just) reckoning shall vanish
and disappear from the earth, And men shall sell their brass and their
iron and their clothes, and shall give their sons and their daughters
willingly to the heathen. A man shall lie down in the evening and rise
in the morning, and shall find at his do or two or three exactors and
officers to carry off by force; and two or three women shall throw
themselves upon one man and say, 'We will eat our own bread, and wear
our own apparel, only let us take refuge beneath thy skirts<span
id="page_126_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_126_note_2.md).' When men are oppressed
and beaten, and hunger and thirst, and are tormented by that bitter
chastisement; while the tyrants shall live luxuriously and enjoy
themselves, and eat and drink, and boast in the victory they have won,
having destroyed nations and peoples, and shall adorn themselves like
brides, saying, 'The Christians have neither a God nor a deliverer;'
then all of a sudden there shall be raised up against them pains like
those of a woman in childbirth; and the king of the Greeks shall go
forth against them in great wrath, and he shall rouse himself like a man
who has shaken off his wine. He shall go forth against them from the sea
of the Cushites, and shall cast the sword and destruction into the
wilderness of Yathrib and into the dwelling-place of their fathers. They
shall carry off captive their wives and sons and daughters into the
service of slavery, and fear of all those round about them shall fall
upon them, and they shall all be delivered into the hand of the king of
the Greeks, and shall be given over to the sword and to captivity and to
slaughter, and their latter subjection shall be one hundred times more
severe than their <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> (former) yoke. They
shall be in sore tribulation from hunger and thirst and anxiety; they
shall be slaves unto those who served them, and bitter shall their
slavery be. Then shall the earth which has become desolate of its
inhabitants find peace, and the remnant that is left shall return every
man to his own land and to the inheritance of his fathers; and men shall
increase like locusts upon the earth which was laid waste. Egypt shall
be ravaged, Arabia shall be burnt with fire, the land of Hebron shall be
laid waste, and the tongue of the sea shall be at peace. All the wrath
and anger of the king of the Greeks shall have full course upon those
who have denied Christ. And there shall be great peace on earth, the
like of which has not been from the creation of the world until its end;
for it is the last peace. And there shall be great joy on earth, and men
shall dwell in peace and quiet; convents and churches shall be restored,
cities shall be built, the priests shall be freed from taxes, and men
shall rest from labour and anxiety of heart. They shall eat and drink;
there shall be neither pain nor care; and they shall marry wives and
beget children during that true peace. Then shall the gates of the north
be opened, and the nations shall go forth that were imprisoned there by
Alexander the king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb54.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_124"></span>p. 124

<span id="page_124_note_3"></span>[3](#page_124_fr_3.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. liv, fol. 191 *b*.

<span id="page_124_note_4"></span>[4](#page_124_fr_4.md) See Assemânî,
*Bibl. Orient.*, t. iii, pt. i, p. 53; and the revelation to Methodius
in prison, edited by Brant, Basel, 1516, 4to, pp. 1-80.

<span id="page_124_note_5"></span>[5](#page_124_fr_5.md) Solomon has made a
slip here: Methodius was bishop of Olympus and Tyre, but never of Rome.

<span id="footnotes_page_125"></span>p. 125

<span id="page_125_note_1"></span>[1](#page_125_fr_1.md) [Rom. i.
26](../../bib/kjv/rom.htm#1:26.md), 27.

<span id="footnotes_page_126"></span>p. 126

<span id="page_126_note_2"></span>[2](#page_126_fr_2.md) [Isa. iv.
1](../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#4:1.md).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
