[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb53) [Next](bb55)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

# CHAPTER LIV<span id="page_127_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_127_note_1).

OF GOG AND MAGOG, WHO ARE IMPRISONED IN THE NORTH.

   W<span class="small">HEN</span> Alexander was king and had subdued
countries and cities, and had arrived in the East, he saw on the
confines of the East those men who are of the children of Japhet. They
were more wicked and unclean than all (other) dwellers in the world;
filthy peoples of hideous appearance, who ate mice and the creeping
things of the earth and snakes and scorpions. They never buried the
bodies of their dead, and they ate as dainties the children which women
aborted and the after-birth. People ignorant of God, and unacquainted
with the power of reason, but who lived in this world without
understanding like ravening beasts. When Alexander saw their wickedness,
he called God to his aid, and he gathered together and brought them and
their wives and children, and <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> made
them go in, and shut them up within the confines of the North. This is
the gate of the world on the north, and there is no other entrance or
exit from the confines of the world from the east to the north. And
Alexander prayed to God with tears, and God heard his prayer and
commanded those two lofty mountains which are called 'the children of
the north,' and they drew nigh to one another until there remained
between them about twelve cubits. Then he built in front of them a
strong building, and be made for it a door of brass, and anointed it
within and without with oil of Thesna<u>kt</u>îs, so that if they should
bring iron (implements) near it to force it open, they would be unable
to move it; and if they wished to melt it with fire, it would quench it;
and it feared neither the operations of devils nor of sorcerers, and was
not to be overcome (by them). Now there were twenty-two kingdoms
imprisoned within the northern gate, and tbeir names are these: Gôg,
Mâgôg, Nâwâl, Eshk<u>e</u>nâz<span id="page_128_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_128_note_3), D<u>e</u>nâphâr<span
id="page_128_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_128_note_4), Pa<u>kt</u>âyê,
W<u>e</u>lô<u>t</u>âyê<span id="page_128_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_128_note_5), Humnâyê, Parzâyê,
Da<u>k</u>lâyê, Thaub<u>e</u>lâyê<span
id="page_128_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_128_note_6), Darm<u>et</u>âyê,
Kawk<u>e</u>bâyê, Dog-men (Cynocephali), Emd<u>e</u>râthâ, Garmîdô\`,
Cannibals<span id="page_128_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_128_note_7), Ther<u>k</u>âyê,
Âlânâyê, Pîsîlôn, Den<u>k</u>âyê<span
id="page_128_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_128_note_8), Sal<u>t</u>râyê<span
id="page_128_fr_9"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">9</span></sup>](#page_128_note_9). At the end of the world
and at the final consummation, when men are eating and drinking and
marrying wives, and women are given to husbands; when they are planting
vineyards and building buildings, and there is neither wicked man nor
<span id="page_129">p. 129</span> adversary, on account of the assured
tranquillity and certain peace; suddenly the gates of the north shall be
opened and the hosts of the nations that are imprisoned there shall go
forth. The whole earth shall tremble before them, and men shall flee and
take refuge in the mountains and in caves and in burial places and in
clefts of the earth; and they shall die of hunger; and there will be
none to bury them, by reason of the multitude of afflictions which they
will make men suffer. They will eat the flesh of men and drink the blood
of animals; they will devour the creeping things of the earth, and hunt
for serpents and scorpions and reptiles that shoot out venom, and eat
them. They will eat dead dogs and cats<span
id="page_129_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_129_note_1), and the abortions of
women with the after-birth; they will give mothers the bodies of their
children to cook, and they will eat them before them without shame. They
will destroy the earth, and there will be none able to stand before
them. After one week of that sore affliction, they will all be destroyed
in the plain of Joppa, for thither will all those (people) be gathered
together, with their wives and their sons and their daughters; and by
the command of God one of the hosts of the angels will descend and will
destroy them in one moment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb55)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_127"></span>p. 127

<span id="page_127_note_1"></span>[1](#page_127_fr_1) In the Oxford MS.
chap. lv, fol. 197 *a*. See Brant's edition of *Methodius*, p. 20.

<span id="footnotes_page_128"></span>p. 128

<span id="page_128_note_3"></span>[3](#page_128_fr_3) C, *Eshkîn*.

<span id="page_128_note_4"></span>[4](#page_128_fr_4) B, *Dîfâr*.

<span id="page_128_note_5"></span>[5](#page_128_fr_5) C, *Lûdâyê*; A
omits the name.

<span id="page_128_note_6"></span>[6](#page_128_fr_6) B, *Tuklâyê*.

<span id="page_128_note_7"></span>[7](#page_128_fr_7) A, C have:
*Kauk<u>e</u>bâyê, Emrartâ, Garmîdô\`, Cannibals, Dog-men*
(Cynocephali).

<span id="page_128_note_8"></span>[8](#page_128_fr_8) B,
*Dun<u>k</u>âyê*.

<span id="page_128_note_9"></span>[9](#page_128_fr_9) B,
*Sal<u>t</u>âyê*.--Some of these names are biblical, e. g. Gog, Magog,
and Ashkenaz. Of the others many are doubtless corrupt, as the variants
shew, but a few are easily recognisable; e.g. Pa<u>kt</u>âyê, the people
of Πακτύη {Greek: *Paktuh*} in the Thracian Chersonesus; *Humnâyê =
Hunnâyê*, the Huns, Οὐ̑ννοι {Greek: *Ounnoi*}; *Ther<u>k</u>âyê*, the
Thracians, Θρᾳ̑κες {Greek: *Ðrakes*} and *Âlânâyê*, the Alani, ’Αλανοί
{Greek: *'Alanoí*}.

<span id="footnotes_page_129"></span>p. 129

<span id="page_129_note_1"></span>[1](#page_129_fr_1) The text has
*weasels*, glossed by *cats*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
