[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb57) [Next](bb59.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

# CHAPTER LVIII<span id="page_135_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_135_note_3.md).

OF THE MANNER AND STATE IN WHICH MEN WILL RISE IN THE DAY OF THE
RESURRECTION.

   A<span class="small">LL</span> classes and conditions of men will
rise from the dead in the state of the perfect form of Christ, about
thirty-three years of age, even as our <span id="page_136">p. 136</span>
Redeemer rose from the grave. We shall rise with all our limbs perfect,
and with the same constitutions, without addition or diminution. Some
say that the hair and nails and prepuce will rise, and some say they
will not; as if they were superfluous for the completion of the nature
of man. Some say concerning the resurrection that a likeness only will
rise, without parts and without the composition of the limbs of man; a
mere similitude of hands and feet and hardness of bones. Others say that
the whole man will be cast into one crystalline substance, and that all
his parts will be mingled together; and they do not grant him an ordered
arrangement of composition. Others say that the vessels which are inside
the belly, such as the bowels, liver, etc., will not rise; but they err
and stray from the truth, and do not understand that if one of the parts
of the body perish, it is not perfect. For Paul shewed plainly and laid
down an example of the resurrection in the grain of wheat: just as that
grows up entire with its glory, without any portion of it having
perished, even so we; for the whole man shall rise with all his limbs
and parts, and ordered in his composition as now, only having acquired
purification from the humours. And this is not surprising, that if an
earthen vessel acquires firmness and lightness when it goes into the
fiery furnace, without any change taking place in its shape or form, but
is lightened of its heaviness and density, whilst it preserves its shape
uninjured; so also should the Holy Spirit burn us in the furnace of the
resurrection and drive forth from us all the foul material of the
present (life), and clothe us with incorruptibility. 'It is sown an
animal body; it rises a spiritual body<span
id="page_136_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_136_note_1.md).' We shall neither see
nor hear with all our bodily members, although some men have thought
that the whole man will be sight and hearing; but we shall carry out
action with these same usual limbs, if it happen to be necessary;
although we shall not there need speech and conversation with one
another, because each other's secrets will be revealed to us.

   The things which certain stupid men invent, who indulge their fancy,
and give bodily form to the punishment of sinners and the reward of the
just and righteous, and say that there is at the resurrection a
reckoning and a pair of scales, the Church does not receive; but each
<span id="page_137">p. 137</span> one of us carries his light and his
fire within him, and his heaviness and his lightness is round in his own
pature. Just as stone and iron naturally possess the property of falling
to the earth, and as the air naturally ascends upward on account of its
rarity and its lightness; so also in the resurrection, he that is heavy
and lying in sins, his sins will bring him down; and he that is free
from the rust of sin, his purity will make him rise in the scale. And
our Lord will ascend to heaven, and the angels (will go) before Him like
ambassadors, and the just and the righteous will be upon His right hand
and His left, and the children behind Him in the form of the life-giving
Cross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](bb59.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_135"></span>p. 135

<span id="page_135_note_3"></span>[3](#page_135_fr_3.md) In the Oxford MS.
chap. lix, fol. 204 *b*.

<span id="footnotes_page_136"></span>p. 136

<span id="page_136_note_1"></span>[1](#page_136_fr_1.md) [1 Cor. xv.
44](../../bib/kjv/co1.htm#15:44.md).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
