[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](bb59)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

# CHAPTER LX<span id="page_139_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_139_note_1).

WHETHER MERCY WILL BE SHEWN TO SINNERS AND THE DEVILS IN GEHENNA, AFTER
THEY HAVE BEEN TORMENTED AND SUFFERED AND BEEN PUNISHED, OR NOT? AND IF
MERCY IS TO BE SHEWN TO THEM, WHEN WILL IT BE?

   S<span class="small">OME</span> of the Fathers terrify us beyond our
strength and throw us into despair; and their opinion is well adapted to
the simple-minded and trangressors of the law. Others of them encourage
us and bid us rely upon Divine mercy; and their opinions are suitable
and adapted to the perfect and those of settled minds and the pious. In
the 'Book of Memorials' it is thus written: 'This world is the world of
repentance, but the world which is to come is the world of retribution.
As in this world repentance saves until the last breath, so in the world
to come justice exacts to the uttermost farthing. And as it is
impossible to see here strict justice unmingled with mercy, so it is
impossible to find there strict justice mingled with mercy.' Mâr Isaac
says thus: 'Those who are to be scourged in Gehenna will be tortured
with stripes of <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> love; they who feel
that they have sinned against love will suffer harder and more severe
pangs from love than the pain that springs from fear.' Again he says:
'The recompense of sinners will be this: the resurrection itself will be
their recompense instead of the recompense of justice; and at the last
He will clothe those bodies which have trodden down His laws with the
glory of perfection. This act of grace to us after we have sinned is
greater than that which, when we were not, brought our nature into
being.' Again he says: 'In the world which is to come grace will be the
judge and not justice.' Mâr Theodore the Expositor says: 'Those who have
here chosen fair things will receive in the world to come the pleasure
of good things with praises; but the wicked who have turned aside to
evil things all their life, when they are become ordered in their minds
by penalties and the fear that springs from them, and choose good
things, and learn how much they have sinned by having persevered in evil
things and not in good things, and by means of these things receive the
knowledge of the highest doctrine of the fear of God, and become
instructed to lay hold of it with a good will, will be deemed worthy of
the happiness of the Divine liberality. For He would never have said,
"Until thou payest the uttermost farthing," unless it had been possible
for us to be freed from our sins through having atoned for them by
paying the penalty; neither would He have said, "he shall be beaten with
many stripes," or "he shall be beaten with few stripes," unless it were
that the penalties, being meted out according to the sins, should
finally come to an end.' These things the Expositor has handed down in
his books clearly and distinctly.

   So also the blessed Diodorus, who says in the 'Book of the
Dispensation<span id="page_140_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_140_note_1):' 'A lasting reward,
which is worthy of the justice of the Giver, is laid up for the good, in
return for their labours; and torment for sinners, but not everlasting,
that the immortality which is prepared for them may not be worthless.
They must however be tormented for a short time, as they deserve, in
proportion to the measure of their iniquity and wickedness, according to
the amount of the wickedness of their deeds. This they will have to
bear, that they suffer for a short time; but immortal and unending
happiness is prepared for them. If it be then <span id="page_141">p.
141</span> that the rewards of good deeds are as great (in proportion to
them) as the times of the immortality which are prepared for them are
longer than the times of the limited contests which take place in this
world, the torments for many and great sins must be very much less than
the greatness of mercy. So then it is not for the good only that the
grace of the resurrection from the dead is intended, but also for the
wicked; for the grace of God greatly honours the good, but chastises the
wicked sparingly.'

   Again he says: 'God pours out the wages of reward beyond the measure
of the labours (wrought), and in the abundance of His goodness He
lessens and diminishes the penalty of those who are to be tormented, and
in His mercy He shortens and reduces the length of the time. But even
thus He does not punish the whole time according to (the length of) the
time of folly, seeing that He requites them far less than they deserve,
just as He does the good beyond the measure and period (of their
deserts); for the reward is everlasting. It has not been revealed
whether the goodness of God wishes to punish without ceasing the
blameworthy who have been found guilty of evil deeds (or not), as we
have already said before.         \*         \*         \*         \*  
      \*         \*         \*         \*         \*         \*        
\*         \*         \*         \*<span
id="page_141_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_141_note_3) But if punishment is to
be weighed out according to sin, not even so would punishment be
endless. For as regards that which is said in the Gospel, 'These shall
go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life
eternal<span id="page_141_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_141_note_4);' this word 'eternal'
(*l<u>e</u>-\`âlam*) is not definite: for if it be not so, how did Peter
say to our Lord, 'Thou shalt never wash my feet<span
id="page_141_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_141_note_5),' and yet He washed him?
And of Babylon He said, 'No man shall dwell therein for ever and
ever<span id="page_141_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_141_note_6),' and behold many
generations dwell therein. In the 'Book of Memorials' he says: 'I hold
what the most celebrated of the holy Fathers say, that He cuts off a
little from much. The penalty of Gehenna is a man's mind; for the
punishment <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> there is of two kinds, that
of the body and that of the mind. That of the body is perhaps in
proportion to the degree of sin, and He lessens and diminishes its
duration; but that of the mind is for ever, and the judgment is for
ever.' But in the New Testament *l<u>e</u>-\`âlam* is not without end.
To Him be glory and dominion and praise and exaltation and honour for
ever and ever. Amen and Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_139"></span>p. 139

<span id="page_139_note_1"></span>[1](#page_139_fr_1) Some portions of
this chapter have been translated by Assemânî, *Bibl. Orient.*, t. iii,
pt. i, pp. 323-324. See also Schoenfelder's translation, pp. 99, 100. In
the Oxford MS. chap. lxi, fol. 208 *a*.

<span id="footnotes_page_140"></span>p. 140

<span id="page_140_note_1"></span>[1](#page_140_fr_1) See Assemânî,
*Bibl. Orient.*, t. iii, pt. i, p. 29, and note 2.

<span id="footnotes_page_141"></span>p. 141

<span id="page_141_note_3"></span>[3](#page_141_fr_3) This sentence
seems to me to be untranslatable as it now stands.

<span id="page_141_note_4"></span>[4](#page_141_fr_4) [Matt. xxv.
46](../../bib/kjv/mat.htm#25:46).

<span id="page_141_note_5"></span>[5](#page_141_fr_5) [John xiii.
8](../../bib/kjv/joh.htm#13:8).

<span id="page_141_note_6"></span>[6](#page_141_fr_6) [Isa. xiii.
20](../../bib/kjv/isa.htm#13:20).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
