[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhl02)  [Next](mhl04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# THE MIDRASH

"*Wisdom is granted by God to him who already possesses knowledge, not
to the ignorant*."

--MIDRASH TANHUMA.

"*The Bible, or written law, contains unexplained passages and hidden
sentences, which can not be fully understood without the help of the
oral law*."

--MIDRASH TANHUMA.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# THE MIDRASH

(INTRODUCTION)

AMONG the thousand odds and ends of wisdom and fantasy stored up for us
within the Midrash is the statement that all of the Jewish law would
have been written out for the people, as was the Torah, or Five Bible
Books of Moses, only "God saw that the Torah would eventually be
translated into Greek, and published as though it were the law entrusted
to Greeks," meaning Gentiles. Hence the Talmud and Midrash, "the oral
law, the key to and interpreter of the written law, being entrusted to
Israelites only, the Jews alone have the whole of God's word with the
interpretation in full."

This will make clear, at least from the Hebrew viewpoint, the value of
the Midrash. It is the last and final word given as "explanation" of the
Holy Scriptures. Some Midrashim, or explanations of the Bible, have of
course always existed among the Hebrews. The Talmud, as pointed out in
the preceding volume, consists of such early explanations as were
accepted as authoritative and incorporated in the Jewish faith before
A.D. 500. During the Middle Ages a large number of such Midrashim were
written. Most of these deal with some particular book of the Bible. A
studious rabbi would resolve to write a Midrash upon Genesis or upon
Exodus and would collect all he had learned upon the theme from earlier
teachers. Some studious successor would copy this book and enlarge it,
adding a few points culled from another Midrash. Sometimes the new work
became known by the reviser's name, sometimes it retained that of the
earlier writer. In that way we have often several very different forms
of a Midrash, all going under the same name.

Through this medley of books built upon books we have no

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

clear guide, no lines of separation; and gradually the whole mass of
repeated traditions, legends, explanations, layer piled upon layer, has
come to be known collectively as the Midrash. The present Midrash,
therefore, is a loose collection of commentaries, said to be founded on
traditions as old as the Bible and Talmud. Some of its books are reputed
to have originated with noted rabbis of the third and fourth centuries.
But we can not trace any of its known books of to-day back to such a
high antiquity, and where one still retains some antique writer's name
we can be sure that it has been changed and changed and changed again,
until very little of the reputed author's work remains.

Perhaps the oldest of the surviving Midrashim is that known as the
Mekilta; but the Mekilta is almost wholly a textual commentary. That is,
it confines itself to explaining the exact shades of grammar and meaning
in the Bible text. As Christian scholars wholly reject these elaborate
textual commentaries, modern readers will find far more interest in the
oldest Midrash, which, going beyond mere definition of the text,
illustrates its points with examples and thus recalls some vision of the
past. This still vivid and living Midrash is the Tanhuma. It is so
called because its origin is attributed to a learned Palestinian rabbi,
Tanhuma, who lived in the fourth century; but our present Midrash
Tanhuma can not have been composed before the seventh century. It is
still, of course, chiefly concerned with grammar and text, so that only
the essence of its more living spirit is given here.

After this we print, in the same concentrated form, the living items or
bits of still interesting information gleaned from the most celebrated
of the later Midrashim. These are the "Rabba," or a collection of
commentaries on ten of the most sacred of the Biblical books, more
especially on the five books of Moses. Among these the Genesis Rabba,
which is known as the Bereshith, is regarded as particularly venerable,
and sacred.

No part of the Rabba, however, seems likely to have been written before
the ninth century, and most of it is of about the twelfth century. Only,
when we speak of such comparatively

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

recent dates, we must again remind the reader that Hebrew lore regards
the time of the writing down of our present Midrash as unimportant,
since its writers are trusted to have preserved only genuine traditions,
each reaching back to the event of which it tells or the authority whom
it quotes.

In illustration of what is still being done by modern Hebrew scholars
with the mass of the Midrash, we close our section on its books with the
story of the king of demons, Ashmedai. This has been put together by a
modern rabbi, who, going carefully through the Midrash, collected all
its references to Ashmedai and so built up the life-story of the
demon-king.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Midrash Tanhuma](mhl04.md)
