[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhl15)  [Next](mhl17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

# THE BOOK CUSARI

The King of Khazars, a man of piety and of fervent devotion to his
religion, was told in a dream that his intentions were agreeable to God,
but not his actions. The King therefore obtained an interview with a
philosopher in order to ascertain his opinions about God, the world, and
mankind. The explanations of the philosopher, based as they were upon
the eternity of the world, the perfection to be attained by men through
philosophic meditation, and the exaltation of God above all individual
providence, did not satisfy him; and he decided to seek for further
enlightenment from a Christian and a Mohammedan, thinking in himself
that one of these two must be right--as for the Jew, it was sufficient
to notice in what a depressed condition the Jews were, reduced in
numbers and despised by every one. He accordingly called one of the most
learned Christians and asked him about the belief and practises of his
religion.

The Christian replied: "I believe that all things are created: that God
is eternal, and that he created the whole world in six days, and that
all men are descended firstly from Adam, and secondly from Noah, to whom
they are accordingly related. God provides for all his creatures, but
entertains special relations toward man: with him are wrath, mercy, and
favor: he speaks with his prophets and his saints: he appears and
reveals himself to them, dwelling amongst those that please him. I
believe in general that all that is written in the law, and all the
traditions of the children of Israel, are facts which it is impossible
to doubt, since they are so fully known, so imperishable, and were so
loudly proclaimed before a great multitude. Then afterwards, however,
the Godhead was incarnate, and took flesh in the womb of a virgin, one
of the noblest women in Israel, who bore him in semblance human, in
mystery divine--in semblance a prophet, in mystery God. This was the
Messiah, called the

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

Son of God, and this is the mystery of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
although when we proclaim the Trinity it is really the Unity only which
we believe. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_6) I believe further that the
Messiah dwelt amongst Israel for their glory, so long as they adhered to
the idea of the Godhead, manifest in him, but that at last they rebelled
against him and crucified him. From that time till now the wrath of God
has continued against the multitude of the rebellious, but his grace has
been upon every one of those that followed the Messiah, as well as upon
the nations which have followed them, and to which we belong. We are
not, indeed, descendants of the family of Israel, but we are worthier
than they to bear their name, because we have followed the Messiah and
the twelve apostles who represent the twelve tribes. A great number of
Israelites followed the Twelve: these formed the nucleus of the
Christian people, and well did they deserve the rank and title of
Israel's sons. We have become powerful in different lands: and all
nations are invited to attach themselves to this creed, and enjoined to
glorify the Messiah and his cross. Our laws and customs are derived
partly from the commandments of the Apostle Simon (Peter), partly from
the Torah, which we read, and the truth of which is beyond question: for
the Gospel itself relates what the Messiah said: 'I came not to destroy
one tittle of the law of Moses, but to confirm and explain it.'" <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_7)

The King replied: "To argue on this subject is quite useless: for reason
rejects most of what thou hast said. Only when the evidence and proof of
a fact is so manifest to all that every man, from utter inability to
confute it, is bound to accord belief, can reason come in to explain any
part of it which may appear strange. In fact, this is the method pursued
by scientific men for explaining the wonderful occurrences of nature
which, so long as they are simply related without having been seen, they
ignore; but after having examined them, they express a definite opinion
and

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

try to assign their causes, either in the stars or in the winds,
inasmuch as the evidence for them can not be denied. Moreover, thy words
are new to me: and as I have not been trained up in them, I am
disinclined to accept them without a thorough investigation."

The King called next a learned Mohammedan to inquire concerning the
belief and practises of Mohammedanism. His answer was as follows: "We
affirm the unity and eternity of God, the creation of the world, and the
descent of the whole human race from Adam and from Noah. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_8) We deny in general the corporeality of God,
endeavoring to explain any difficulty which may here meet us by saying
that the expression which occasions it is only metaphorical or
approximately true. We are bound to confess that the Koran is the Word
of God: for the Koran is in itself a miracle, inasmuch as no man could
compose such a book as it is, or even a single chapter of it, and we are
therefore, of course, compelled to accept it even for its own sake. I
believe further that our prophet is the last of the prophets, that he
annulled all the laws in existence before him, and that he invites all
nations to attach themselves to Islam. The recompense of the obedient
will be that in Paradise his soul will return to his body and there he
will live in the midst of delights, with plenty to eat and to drink, and
every other pleasure he may desire: the punishment of the rebellious
will be the condemnation to dwell after death in a fire where his pains
will never cease."

The King of the Khazars answered. "One who undertakes to guide a man in
the right way concerning the knowledge of God, and to convince him of
what he denies, namely, that God has held intercourse with flesh, can
only do so successfully with the help of irrefragable evidences: only
thus, I repeat, could one who doubts be persuaded that God has held
intercourse with flesh. If your book is a miracle because it is written
in Arabic <span id="fr_12"></span>[4](#fn_9) it certainly can not be
regarded

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

as such by a foreigner like myself: if read to me, it makes no other
impression upon me than any other book in the same language."

The Mohammedan replied: "Miracles were indeed wrought by the Prophet,
but they are not given as a reason for accepting his law."

The Khazar said: "A man can only be led to believe that God entertains
relations with the flesh through some miracle by which the nature of a
thing is changed, and in which he may be enabled to perceive that the
change could only have been caused by him who created all things out of
nothing: moreover, this change must have been seen by a multitude, and
not known merely from tradition and tales: and it must have been
submitted to a searching examination, else it might be accounted for by
the power of imagination or by collusion. These great principles,
*viz.*, that God who has created both this world and the next, the
angels, the heavens, and the light, entertains relations with man, who
is a piece of impure clay, that he speaks with him and answers his
requests and wishes, might be believed on the evidence of miracles, but
in no other way."

The learned Mohammedan answered: "Is not our book filled with narratives
respecting Moses and the children of Israel? No one is able to deny what
God did unto Pharaoh; how he divided the sea, and saved those whom he
loved, but drowned those with whom he was wroth, how he gave them manna
and quails during the space of forty years, and spoke with Moses upon
Sinai; how he made the sun stand still for Joshua, and helped him
against the giants. Neither, again, is it possible to deny what he did
at the time of the deluge, and how he destroyed the people of Lot. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[5](#fn_10) All this is sufficiently clear, and there
can be no suspicion of the operation of imagination or of collusion."

The King of the Khazars then said: "There can be no longer any doubt
that I must inquire of the Jews, who are

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

the remnant of the ancient Israelites: for I see that all the proofs for
the existence of God's law upon earth are derived ultimately from them."
He accordingly called a learned Jew and questioned him about the
principles of his faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[363:1](mhl16.htm#fr_9) This was one of the chief
points of discussion between the Jews and the Christians in the Middle
Ages.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[363:2](mhl16.htm#fr_10) Matt, v. 17.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[364:3](mhl16.htm#fr_11) This point is one that
was adhered to by both Christians and Mohammedans, in opposition to the
opinion of the philosophers that the world and man had both existed from
eternity.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[364:4](mhl16.htm#fr_12) Since it was generally
believed that Mohammed could neither read nor write, the beautiful and
elegant language in which the Koran was composed was thought to be a
proof of its miraculous origin.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[365:5](mhl16.htm#fr_13) The inhabitants of
Sodom and Gomorrah are by Mohammedan writers termed "the people of Lot."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](mhl17)
