[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac027)  [Next](ac029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="1351.">1351.</span></span>

Verse 22. And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor. "And Serug
lived thirty years," signifies the beginning of the seventh state of
this church; "Serug" signifies the same here as before "and begat
Nahor," signifies a derivation therefrom. Nahor was a nation so named
from him as its father, whereby is signified worship verging to what is
idolatrous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1352.">1352.</span></span>

Verse 23. And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters. "And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two
hundred years," signifies the duration and state; "Serug" and "Nahor"
signify the same here as before; "and begat sons and daughters"
signifies the rituals of that worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1353.">1353.</span></span>

Verse 24. And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah. "And
Nahor lived nine and twenty years," signifies the beginning of the
eighth state of this church; "Nahor" signifies here, as before, worship
verging to what is idolatrous; "and begat Terah," signifies a derivation
therefrom. Terah was a nation so named from him as its father whereby
idolatrous worship is signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1354.">1354.</span></span>

Verse 25. And Nahor lived after he begat Terah a hundred and nineteen
years, and begat sons and daughters. "And Nahor lived after he begat
Terah a hundred and nineteen years" signifies the duration and state;
"Nahor" signifies here, as before, worship verging to what is
idolatrous; "Terah" signifies idolatrous worship; "and begat sons and
daughters," signifies idolatrous rituals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1355.">1355.</span></span>

Verse 26. And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and
Haran. "And Terah lived seventy years," signifies the beginning of the
ninth state, which was the last; "Terah" signifies here, as before,
idolatrous worship; "and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran," signifies the
derivations therefrom. Abram, Nahor, and Haran were persons, from whom
also nations were named that were idolaters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1356.">1356.</span></span>

That by "Terah" is signified idolatrous worship, may be seen from the
derivations spoken of from the twentieth verse to this place. This
Second Ancient Church degenerated from a kind of internal worship, and
was so adulterated that at last it became idolatrous; as churches are
wont to do, in that from internal things they go to external, and
finally terminate in mere external things, internal things being blotted
out. That such was the case with this church, insomuch that a great part
of them did not acknowledge Jehovah as God, but worshiped other gods, is
evident in Joshua: Joshua said unto all the people, Thus hath said
Jehovah the God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt of old time beyond the
river, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor; and
they served other gods. Now therefore fear Jehovah, and serve Him in
integrity and in truth; and put away the gods that your fathers served
beyond the river, and in Egypt, and serve ye Jehovah. And if it be evil
in your eyes to serve Jehovah, choose ye this day whom ye will serve;
whether the gods that your fathers served, that were beyond the river,
or the gods of the Amorites (Joshua 24:2, 14-15). Here it is very plain
that Terah, Abram, and Nahor were idolaters. \[2\] That Nahor was a
nation in which there was idolatrous worship, is also evident from Laban
the Syrian, who dwelt in the city of Nahor, and worshiped the images or
teraphim which Rachel carried away (Gen. 24:10; 31:19, 26, 32, 34). And
that there was one god of Abraham, another god of Nahor, and another of
their father, that is, of Terah, is evident from Genesis 31:53. It is
also plainly stated by Moses concerning Abram, that Jehovah was not
known to him: I Jehovah appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto
Jacob, in God Shaddai, but by My name Jehovah I was not known to them
(Exod. 6:3). From all this it is evident how much this church fell away
among this nation into the idolatrous worship which is here signified by
Terah; and because it is signified by Terah, it is also signified by
Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1357.">1357.</span></span>

There are three universal kinds of idolatry. The first comes of the love
of self; the second, of the love of the world; the third, of the love of
pleasures. All idolatrous worship has one or other of these for its end.
The worship of idolaters can have no other ends; for they know not and
care not for eternal life; they even deny it. These three kinds of
idolatry are signified by the three sons of Terah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1358.">1358.</span></span>

That Abram, Nahor, and Haran were persons, from whom also nations were
named that were idolaters, is evident from the historical parts of the
Word. As regards Nahor this has been already shown; for the city was
called the city of Nahor (Gen. 24:10). At that time cities were nothing
else than families that dwelt together; and a number of families
constituted a nation. That a number of nations were born of Abraham, is
evident not only from the posterity of Ishmael, or the Ishmaelites, but
also from that of his several sons by his wife Keturah, who are named in
Genesis 25:1-4.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1359.">1359.</span></span>

Verse 27. And these are the births of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor,
and Haran; and Haran begat Lot. "And these are the births of Terah,"
signifies the origins and derivations of the idolatry from which came
the representative church. Terah was the son of Nahor, and was also a
nation named from him as its father. By him there is signified
idolatrous worship. Abram, Nahor, and Haran were sons of Terah, and also
nations named from them as their fathers. By them are here signified the
idolatrous worships derived from that one. From Lot also there came two
nations that were idolaters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1360.">1360.</span></span>

And these are the births of Terah. This signifies the origins and
derivations of the idolatry from which came the representative church.
It has been shown above (at verse 10 of this chapter) that "births"
signify origins and derivations. Here now the Third Church after the
flood is treated of, which succeeded when the second-treated of from
verse 10 to this-became idolatrous in Terah. It has been shown that
Terah, Abram, Nahor, and Haran were idolaters, as well as the nations
derived from them, as the Ishmaelites and Midianites, and others who
were descendants of Abram; besides others in Syria that were derived
from Nahor; and also the Moabites and Ammonites, who were descendants of
Lot.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1361.">1361.</span></span>

That from being idolatrous the church became representative, no one can
know unless he knows what a representative is. The things that were
represented in the Jewish Church, and in the Word, are the Lord and His
kingdom, consequently the celestial things of love, and the spiritual
things of faith: these are what were represented, besides many things
that pertain to these, such as all things that belong to the church. The
representing objects are either persons or things that are in the world
or upon the earth; in a word, all things that are objects of the senses,
insomuch that there is scarcely any object that cannot be a
representative. But it is a general law of representation that there is
no reflection upon the person or upon the thing which represents, but
only upon that thing itself which is represented. \[2\] For example,
every king, whoever he was, in Judah and Israel, and even in Egypt and
elsewhere, could represent the Lord. Their royalty itself is what is
representative. So that the worst of all kings could represent, such as
the Pharaoh who set Joseph over the land of Egypt, Nebuchadnezzar in
Babylon (Dan. 2:37-38), Saul, and the other kings of Judah and of
Israel, of whatever character they were. The anointing itself-from which
they were called Jehovah's anointed-involved this. In like manner all
priests, how many soever they were, represented the Lord; the priestly
function itself being what is representative; and so in like manner the
priests who were evil and impure; because in representatives there is no
reflection upon the person, in regard to what his quality is. And not
only did men represent, but also beasts, such as all that were offered
in sacrifice; the lambs and sheep representing celestial things; the
doves and turtledoves, spiritual things; and in like manner the rams,
goats, bullocks, and oxen represented lower celestial and spiritual
things. \[3\] And not only were animate things used as representatives,
but also inanimate things, such as the altar and even the stones of the
altar, the ark and the tabernacle with all that was in them, and, as
everyone may know, the temple with all that was therein, such as the
lamps, the breads, and the garments of Aaron. Nor these things only, but
also all the rites in the Jewish Church were representative. In the
Ancient Churches, representatives extended to all the objects of the
senses, to mountains and hills, to valleys, plains, rivers, brooks,
fountains, and pools, to groves and trees in general, and to every tree
in particular, insomuch that each tree had some definite signification;
all which, afterwards, when the significative church had ceased, were
made representatives. From all this it may be seen what is meant by
representatives. And as things celestial and spiritual-that is-the
things of the Lord's kingdom in the heavens, and of the Lord's kingdom
on earth could be represented not only by men, whosoever and of what
quality soever they were, but also by beasts, and even by inanimate
things, it may now be seen what a representative church is. \[4\] The
representatives were of such an efficacy that all things that were done
according to the rites commanded appeared holy before the spirits and
angels, as for instance when the high priest washed himself with water,
when he ministered clothed in his pontifical garments, when he stood
before the burning lights, no matter what kind of man he was, even if
most impure, and in his heart an idolater. The case was the same with
all the other priests. For, as before said, in representatives the
person was not reflected upon, but only the thing itself that was
represented, quite abstractly from the person, as it was abstractly from
the oxen, the bullocks, and the lambs that were sacrificed, or from the
blood that was poured round about the altar, and also abstractly from
the altar itself; and so on. \[5\] This representative church was
instituted-after all internal worship was lost, and when worship had
become not only merely external, but also idolatrous-in order that there
might be some conjunction of heaven with earth, that is, of the Lord
through heaven with man, even after the conjunction by the internal
things of worship had perished. But what kind of conjunction this is by
representatives alone, shall of the Lord's Divine mercy be told in what
follows. Representatives do not begin until the following chapter; in
which, and in those that follow, all things in general and in particular
are purely representative. Here, the subject treated of is the state of
those who were the fathers, before certain of them and their descendants
became representative; and it has been shown above that they were in
idolatrous worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1362.">1362.</span></span>

That Terah was the son of Nahor, and also a nation named from him as its
father, and that by him is signified idolatrous worship, has been shown
before. That Terah was a nation, may be seen from the fact that the
nations which originated from his sons acknowledged him as their father,
just as the sons of Jacob, or the Jews and Israelites, and also the
Ishmaelites, Midianites, and others, acknowledged Abraham; and the
Moabites and Ammonites acknowledged Lot. Although these nations were not
named from them, but from their sons, yet when all acknowledge a common
father and call themselves his sons-as the sons of Terah, the sons of
Abraham, or the sons of Lot-in a general sense a nation is signified by
each one of these, as here by Terah, by Abram, by Nahor, and by Lot; for
they are the stocks or roots of the nations. So with the descendants of
Jacob, who were all named from his twelve sons, and yet were called
Jacob and Israel, as also the seed and the sons of Abraham (John 8:33,
39).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1363.">1363.</span></span>

That Abram, Nahor, and Haran were sons of Terah, and that they were also
nations named from them as their fathers, and that by them idolatrous
worships are here signified, is evident from the explanations given
above; and also from the fact that idolatry is signified by Terah, whose
sons they were. But what idolatrous worships are here signified by the
three sons of Terah, and afterwards by Lot the son of Haran, may be seen
if idolatrous worships are examined according to their kinds. There are
in general four idolatrous worships, one more interior than another. The
three more interior ones are as the sons of one parent; the fourth is as
the son of the third. Idolatrous worships are internal and external; the
internal are those which condemn man; the external not so much. The more
interior the idolatrous worship is, the more it condemns; but the more
exterior, the less. Internal idolaters do not acknowledge God, but adore
themselves and the world, and make idols of all their cupidities;
whereas external idolaters are able to acknowledge God, although they do
not know who is the God of the universe. Internal idolaters are known
from the life they have acquired; and in proportion as this life departs
from the life of charity, in the same proportion are they more interior
idolaters. External idolaters are known solely from their worship; and,
although idolaters, they can still have the life of charity. Internal
idolaters can profane holy things, but external idolaters cannot; and
therefore external idolatry is tolerated, in order to prevent the
profanation of holy things; as may be seen from what has been said
before (n. 571, 582; and at verse 9, n. 1327).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1364.">1364.</span></span>

That from Lot there sprang two nations that were idolaters, is evident
from his two sons, Moab and Ben-Ammi, by his daughters (Gen. 19:37, 38),
from whom descended the Moabites and the Ammonites, who, as is evident
from the Word, were idolaters. Lot is mentioned here as the father of
the idolatrous worships signified by Moab and Ben-Ammi.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1365.">1365.</span></span>

Verse 28. And Haran died upon the faces of Terah his father, in the land
of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees. "And Haran died upon the faces
of Terah his father, in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the
Chaldees," signifies that interior worship was blotted out and became
merely idolatrous; by "Haran" is signified interior idolatrous worship;
by "Terah his father," as before, idolatrous worship in general; by "the
land of his nativity," the origin whence it was derived; by "Ur of the
Chaldees," external worship in which there are falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1366.">1366.</span></span>

And Haran died upon the faces of Terah his father, in the land of his
nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees. That this signifies that interior
worship was blotted out and became merely idolatrous, is evident from
the signification of "Haran," of "Terah," of "nativity," and of "Ur of
the Chaldees;" and also from its being said that he "died upon the faces
of Terah his father." As regards the fact that interior worship was
blotted out, or that there came to be none, the case is this. The church
cannot come forth anew among any nation until it has been so vastated
that nothing of evil and falsity remains in its internal worship. So
long as there is evil in its internal worship, the things that are good
and true, which constitute its internal worship, are impeded; for so
long as evils and falsities are present, goods and truths cannot be
received. This may be seen from the fact that they who have been born in
any heresy, and have so confirmed themselves in its falsities that they
are entirely persuaded, can with difficulty, if ever, be brought to
receive the truths which are contrary to their falsities. But with
Gentiles who do not know what is the truth of faith, and yet live in
charity, the case is different. This was the reason why the Lord's
church could not be restored among the Jews, but among Gentiles who had
no knowledges of faith. The former, by their falsities, entirely darken
and thus extinguish the light of truth; but the Gentiles not so much,
for they do not know what is the truth of faith; and what they do not
know they cannot darken and extinguish. \[2\] As a new church was now to
be restored, <span id="fr_33"></span>[1366-1](#fn_33) those were taken
to form it with whom goods and truths could be implanted, being those
with whom all knowledge of the good and of the truth of faith had been
blotted out, and who, like the Gentiles, had become external idolaters.
As regards Terah and Abram, it has been shown above that they were of
this character, that is to say, they worshiped other gods, and had no
knowledge of Jehovah, nor consequently of what is the good and the truth
of faith. They had thus become better fitted to receive the seed of
truth than others in Syria among whom knowledges as yet remained. That
they did remain with some is evident from Balaam, who was from Syria,
and who not only worshiped Jehovah, but also offered sacrifice, and was
at the same time a prophet. These therefore are the things contained in
this verse, namely, that interior worship had been blotted out and had
become merely idolatrous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1367.">1367.</span></span>

That by "Haran" is signified interior idolatrous worship, and by "Terah"
idolatrous worship in general, has been stated and shown before. That
the origin is signified by "the land of his nativity;" and that their
idolatrous worship was thence derived, is evident from the signification
of nativity," as being origin and derivation, concerning which see under
verses 10 and 27.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1368.">1368.</span></span>

That by "Ur of the Chaldees" is signified external worship in which
there are falsities, is evident from the signification in the Word of
"the Chaldeans." It has been shown above, at verse 9, that by "Babel" is
signified worship in which interiorly there are evils; but by "Chaldea"
is signified worship in which interiorly there are falsities.
Consequently by "Babel" is signified worship in which there is inwardly
nothing of good; and by "Chaldea," worship in which there is inwardly
nothing of truth. Worship in which there is inwardly nothing good and
nothing true, is a worship wherein there is interiorly what is profane
and idolatrous. That such worship is signified in the Word by "Chaldea,"
may be seen from the following passages. In Isaiah: Behold the land of
the Chaldeans; this people is no more; Asshur founded it in Ziim; they
shall set up the watchtowers thereof, they shall raise up her palaces;
he shall make it a ruin (Isa. 23:13). "The land of the Chaldeans which
is not a people," denotes falsities; "Asshur founded it," denotes
reasonings; "the watchtowers," phantasies. Again: Thus hath said
Jehovah, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, For your sake I have
sent to Babylon, and have thrown down the bars, all of them, and the
Chaldeans in whose ships is a cry (Isa. 43:14). "Babylon" denotes
worship in which inwardly there is evil; "the Chaldeans," worship in
which inwardly there is falsity; the "ships" are knowledges of truth
which are corrupted. \[2\] Again: Sit thou silent and get thee into
darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans; for they shall no more call thee
the lady of kingdoms. I was wroth with My people, I profaned My
inheritance, and gave them into thy hand; these two things shall come to
thee suddenly in one day, the loss of children and widowhood together;
to the full shall they come upon thee, because of the multitude of thy
sorceries, and because of the greatness of thine enchantments (Isa.
47:5-6, 9). Here it is evident that "Chaldea" is the profanation of
truth, and is called "sorceries" and "enchantments." Again: Go ye forth
out of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans (Isa. 48:20); that is, from
the profanation of good and of truth in worship. In Ezekiel: Cause
Jerusalem to know her abominations; thy father was an Amorite, and thy
mother a Hittite; thou hast committed whoredom with the sons of Egypt;
thou hast committed whoredom with the sons of Asshur; hence thou hast
multiplied thy whoredom even into the land of Chaldea (Ezek. 16:2-3, 26,
28-29). This is said specifically of the Jewish Church; "the Sons of
Egypt" denote memory-knowledges; "the sons of Assyria," reasonings; "the
land of Chaldea into which she multiplied her whoredom," the profanation
of truth. That countries are not meant by Egypt, Assyria, and Chaldea,
and that no other whoredom is spoken of, may be seen by anyone. \[3\]
Again: Oholah hath committed whoredom, and hath doted on her lovers the
Assyrians, her neighbors; and she hath not forsaken her whoredoms from
Egypt; she hath added to her whoredoms; and she saw men, it was
portrayed upon the wall, images of the Chaldeans portrayed with
vermilion, girded with girdles upon their loins, dyed turbans hanging
down on their heads, all of them leaders to look upon, the likeness of
the sons of Babylon, of the Chaldeans, the land of their nativity. As
soon as she saw them she loved them lewdly, and sent messengers unto
them into Chaldea; the sons of Babylon polluted her by their whoredoms
(Ezek. 23:5, 8, 14-17). Here the Chaldeans are called "sons of Babylon,"
and denote truths profaned in worship. "Oholah" denotes the spiritual
church, which is called Samaria. \[4\] In Habakkuk: I stir up the
Chaldeans, a bitter and hasty nation, that march through the breadths of
the earth, to possess dwelling places that are not theirs, a horrible
and a terrible one, and from itself doth its judgment and its exaltation
go forth; whose horses are swifter than leopards, and keener <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1368-1](#fn_34) than the evening wolves; and the
horsemen thereof spread themselves, yea, the horsemen thereof come from
afar; they fly as an eagle that hasteth to devour; wholly doth it come
for violence; the panting desire of its faces is toward the east (Hab.
1:6-9). The Chaldean nation is here described by many representatives
that are significant of the profanations of truth in worship. \[5\]
Moreover, Babylon and Chaldea are described in two entire chapters in
Jeremiah (chapters 50 and 51), where what is signified by each is
plainly evident, namely, by Babylon the profanation of celestial things,
and by Chaldea the profanation of spiritual things, in worship. From all
this therefore it is evident what is signified by "Ur of the Chaldees,"
namely, external worship in which there is inwardly profane idolatry.
Moreover it has been permitted that I should be instructed by themselves
that such was the character of their worship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1369.">1369.</span></span>

Verse 29. And Abram and Nahor took them wives; and the name of Abram's
wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of
Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah. "And Abram and
Nahor took them wives; and the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the
name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of
Milcah, and the father of Iscah," signifies marriages of evil with
falsity in idolatrous worship; which stand in the relationship here
indicated. By the husbands are signified evils; by the wives, falsities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1370.">1370.</span></span>

That these things are signified it would take too long to set forth; for
it would involve a setting forth of the genera and derivations of
idolatries. These cannot be known except from the opposite things, that
is, from profanations, as of the celestial things of love, of the
spiritual things of the same, and of the rational things therefrom, and
lastly of memory-knowledges. The profanations themselves of these things
constitute the genera and species of idolatries; but not the worships of
idols, which are external idolatries, and which worships can be
conjoined with affections of good and truth, and thus with charity, as
takes place among Gentiles who live in mutual charity. It is interior
idolatrous worships that are signified in the Word by the external
idolatrous worships. The births, the generations, and also the marriages
of them, which are those of evil and falsity, are circumstanced
precisely as are these relationships and these marriages, which have
been described in the 27th verse, and also in this one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1371.">1371.</span></span>

Verse 30. And Sarai was barren, she had no offspring. These words
signify that what was evil and false reproduced itself no further.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1372.">1372.</span></span>

This may be seen from the signification of "barren," concerning which
elsewhere. For, as before shown, a son and a daughter signify truth and
good; and in the opposite sense, evil and falsity. Hence "barren"
signifies that the evil and falsity of idolatrous worship reproduced
itself no further.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1373.">1373.</span></span>

Verse 31. And Terah took Abram his son; and Lot the son of Haran, his
son's son; and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife; and they
went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of
Canaan; and they came even unto Haran, and stayed there. These words
signify that those who had been in idolatrous worship were instructed in
the celestial and spiritual things of faith, in order that a
representative church might come forth from that source.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1374.">1374.</span></span>

That this is signified may be seen from what has been said above, and
from what is to be said in the following chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1375.">1375.</span></span>

Verse 32. And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years; and
Terah died in Haran. "And the days of Terah were two hundred and five
years," signifies the duration and state of the idolatrous worship meant
by Terah; "and Terah died in Haran," signifies the end of idolatry, and
the beginning of a representative church through Abram.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1376.">1376.</span></span>

CONTINUATION CONCERNING SITUATION AND PLACE,AND ALSO CONCERNING DISTANCE
AND TIME, IN THE OTHER LIFE. I have frequently conversed with spirits
concerning the idea of place and of distance among them-that it is not
anything real, but appears as if it were, being nothing else than their
states of thought and of affection, which are thus varied, and are in
this manner presented to view in the world of spirits; but not so much
so in heaven among the angels, since these are not in the idea of place
and time, but in that of states. But the spirits to whom bodily and
earthly ideas adhere, do not apprehend this, for they suppose that the
case is exactly as they see it to be. Such spirits can hardly be brought
to believe otherwise than that they are living in the body, and are not
willing to be persuaded that they are spirits; and thus scarcely that
there is any appearance, or any fallacy, in relation to the matter, for
they desire to live in fallacies. Thus do they preclude themselves from
the apprehension and acknowledgment of truths and goods, which are as
far as possible from fallacies. It has been shown them many times that
change of place is nothing but an appearance, and also a fallacy of
sense. For there are two kinds of mutation of place in the other life;
one is that which has been spoken of before, when it is said that all
spirits and angels in the Grand Man constantly keep their own situation
therein; which is an appearance. The other is that spirits appear in a
place when in fact they are not there, which is a fallacy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1377.">1377.</span></span>

That in the world of spirits place, change of place, and distance, are
an appearance, has been evidenced from the fact that all souls and
spirits whatever who have existed from the first creation, appear
constantly in their own places, and never change their places except
when their state is changed; and that as their state is changed, so are
the places and distances with them varied. But as everyone has a general
state which is regnant, and as the particular and individual changes of
state have regard to the general state, therefore after these changes
all return to their own situation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1378.">1378.</span></span>

I have been informed, both by conversation with angels, and by living
experience, that spirits, as spirits, in regard to the organic forms
which constitute their bodies, are not in the place where they are seen,
but may be far away, and yet appear there. I know that they who suffer
themselves to be carried away by fallacies will not believe this, but
still the case is so. This has been illustrated to those spirits who
have believed nothing to be true that they did not see with their
eyes-even if this were mere fallacy-by the fact that something similar
is exhibited among men in the world. Take for instance the sound of a
speaker's voice coming to the ear of another person: if the person who
hears it did not know to the contrary, by the discriminations of sound,
learned by experience from infancy, and did not see the speaker at a
distance, he would have no other belief than that the speaker was close
to his ear. So with a man who sees remote objects: if he did not at the
same time see intervening objects, and know from them, or judge of the
distance by what he knows, he would believe a distant object to be near
his eye. Much more is this the case with the speech of spirits, which is
interior speech; and with their sight, which is interior sight. \[2\]
And the spirits were told, further, that when plain experience declares
a fact, they ought not to doubt, and still less deny it, on the ground
that it does not so appear to the senses, and that they do not perceive
it. For even within the realm of nature there are many things that are
contrary to the fallacies of the senses, but are believed because
visible experience teaches them. For example, the sailing of a ship
around the globe: they who suffer themselves to be carried away by the
fallacies of the senses, might believe that ship and sailors would fall
off when they came to the opposite side, and that the people at the
antipodes could never stand upon their feet. Such also is the case with
the subject before us, and with many things in the other life that are
contrary to the fallacies of the senses, and yet are true-as that man
has no life of himself, but from the Lord; and very many other things.
By these and other considerations, incredulous spirits could be brought
to believe that the case is as we have stated it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1379.">1379.</span></span>

From all this it may also be seen that the walking and removal of
spirits from place to place, and their advancements, which are so
frequently seen, are nothing but changes of state; that is to say, they
appear in the world of spirits as changes of place; but in heaven, as
changes of state. The case is similar with many other things that are
representative, and are there presented to view, concerning which of the
Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1380.">1380.</span></span>

That in the other life place, change of place, and distance are a
fallacy, has been evidenced by the fact that spirits can by phantasy be
carried up on high in a moment, even to a very great height, and can
also at the same moment be carried into the depths below; and also as it
were from one end of the universe to the other. Nay, the sorceresses and
magicians there, can by phantasies induce others to believe that when
they are in one place they are also at the same time in another, even in
several places, thus counterfeiting as it were a universal presence.
They who in the life of the body have aspired to exalted station, and
also those who have been deceitful, often appear above the head, while
really they are in a hell under the feet; and as soon as their soaring
arrogance is taken away, they sink down into their own hell, as has been
shown me. Their appearance on high is not an appearance, but a fallacy;
for, as already said, there are two kinds of mutation of place; that
arising from all spirits and angels keeping constantly in their own
situation, being an appearance; and their appearing in one place when
their real situation is not there, being a fallacy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1381.">1381.</span></span>

The souls and spirits who have not as yet been allotted a constant
situation in the Grand Man, are carried to various places, now to this,
now to that; now are seen on one side, now on another; now above, now
below. These are called wandering souls or spirits, and are comparable
to the fluids in the human body, which rise up from the stomach,
sometimes to the head, sometimes to other parts, and are carried about.
So is it with these spirits, until they come to their designated place,
and to a situation in conformity with their general state. It is their
states that are thus changed, and that are wandering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1382.">1382.</span></span>

Men cannot but confound the Divine Infinity with infinity of space; and
as they have no apprehension of infinity of space except as of a
nothing, which in fact it is, they do not believe in the Divine
Infinity. Such also is the case with the Eternity, which men cannot
conceive of except as an eternity of time, since it is presented by
means of time to those who are in time. The true idea of the Divine
Infinity is insinuated into the angels by the fact that they are
instantly present under the Lord's sight, with no intervening space or
time, even though they were at the furthest extremity of the universe;
and the true idea of the Divine Eternity is insinuated by the fact that
thousands of years do not appear to them as time, but scarcely otherwise
than as if they had lived only a minute; and both ideas are insinuated
by the fact that in their present they have past and future things
together. Hence they have no solicitude about future things; nor have
they ever any idea of death, but only the idea of life; so that in all
their present there is the Lord's Eternity and Infinity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1383.">1383.</span></span>

CHAPTER 12 CONCERNING THE PERCEPTION OF SPIRITS AND OF ANGELS AND
CONCERNING SPHERES IN THE OTHER LIFE. Among the wonderful things in the
other life are perceptions, of which there are two kinds. One kind,
which is angelic perception, consists in perceiving what is true and
good, and what is from the Lord, and what from the persons themselves;
and also in perceiving the source and quality of their thoughts, words,
and actions, when these are from themselves. The other kind is common to
all, to angels in the highest perfection, and to spirits according to
their respective qualities, and consists in knowing the quality of
another on his first approach.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1384.">1384.</span></span>

As regards the first kind of perception, which is angelic, and which
consists in perceiving what is true and good, also what is from the Lord
and what from the persons themselves; and also in perceiving the source
and quality of their thoughts, words, and actions, when these are from
themselves-it has been granted me to converse with the sons of the Most
Ancient Church concerning their perception. They said that of themselves
they neither think nor can think anything, nor of themselves will
anything; but that in all things whatever which they think and will,
both in general and in particular, they perceive what comes from the
Lord, and what from other sources; and they perceive not only how much
is from the Lord, and how much is as from themselves, but also, when it
is as from themselves, they perceive whence it is, from what angels, and
likewise the quality of the angels and what their thoughts are,
distinguishing every difference; thus they perceive what the influx is,
and numberless other things. Perceptions of this kind exist in much
variety. With the celestial angels, who are in love to the Lord, there
is a perception of good, and from this, of all things of truth; and as
they perceive truth from good, they do not admit of any speaking, and
still less of any reasoning, about truth; but they say that it is so, or
that it is not so. Whereas the spiritual angels, who likewise have
perception, although not such as the celestial have, speak concerning
truth and good; but still they perceive them, although with a
difference; for there are innumerable varieties of this perception, the
varieties having reference to their perception as to whether a thing is
of the Lord's will, as to whether it is of His leave, or as to whether
it is of His permission, all of which are perfectly distinct from each
other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1385.">1385.</span></span>

There are spirits who belong to the province of the skin, especially the
scaly skin, who desire to reason about everything; they have no
perception of what is good and true; indeed the more they reason, the
less they perceive; they make wisdom consist in reasoning, and on this
base their claim to seem wise. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1385-1](#fn_35)
They have been told that it is of angelic wisdom to perceive without
reasoning whether a thing is good and true; but they do not apprehend
that such perception is possible. These are they who in the life of the
body had confused truth and good by means of matters of knowledge and of
philosophy, and thereby had seemed to themselves to be pre-eminently
learned; but as they had not previously adopted any principles of truth
from the Word, they have less common sense than others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1386.">1386.</span></span>

So long as spirits suppose that they are under their own guidance and
think from themselves, and that they have knowledge, understanding, and
wisdom from themselves, they cannot have perception, but believe it to
be a fable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1387.">1387.</span></span>

I have several times conversed about perception with those in the other
life who, while they lived in the world, had regarded themselves as able
to penetrate and understand all things; telling them that angels
perceive that they think and speak, and will and act from the Lord. But
still they could not conceive what perception is, but supposed that if
all things were to inflow in this way, they would be bereaved of all
life; because in that case they would think nothing from themselves, or
from what is their own; and in this they had made life to consist; and
that in that case it would be another who was thinking, and not
themselves; so that they would be mere organs devoid of life. But they
were told that between having perception, and not having it, the
difference of life is like that between light and darkness; and that men
first begin to feel alive when they receive such perception; for then
they live from the Lord, and also have what is their own, which is given
together with all happiness and delight. It was also shown them by
varied experience how the case is with perception, and at the time they
acknowledged the possibility of it; but after a while they again did not
know, doubted, and denied. From this it has been made evident how
difficult it is for man to comprehend what perception is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1388.">1388.</span></span>

The second kind of perception, as has been said, is what is common to
all, in the highest perfection to angels, and to spirits according to
their quality. It consists in knowing the quality of another at his
first approach, even if he does not speak. He manifests himself
forthwith by a certain wonderful influx. It is known of a good spirit,
not only of what goodness he is, but also of what faith; and when he
speaks, this is known from every word. Of an evil spirit it is known of
what evil he is and of what unbelief; and when he speaks, this is known
from every word, and so manifestly that there can be no mistake.
Something similar appears with men, who likewise can sometimes know from
another's gesture, looks, or speech, what he is thinking, even although
it is contrary to what he says; and this knowledge is natural to man,
deriving its origin and character from the nature of spirits, and thus
from the spirit of the man himself, and its communication with the world
of spirits. This communicative perception has its beginning in the fact
that the Lord wills that all goods may be communicable, and that all may
be affected by mutual love, and so be happy. Hence such a perception
reigns universally also among spirits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1389.">1389.</span></span>

Souls that have come into the other life have wondered that there is
such a communication of another's thoughts, and that they at once know
the quality of another person's faith, as well as that of his
disposition. But they were told that the spirit receives much more
excellent faculties when it has been separated from the body. During the
bodily life there is an influx of the objects of the senses; and also of
phantasy from those things which thence inhere in the memory; besides
anxieties for the future; various cupidities that are excited by
external things; cares for food, clothing, place of abode, children; and
other things, concerning which they take no thought in the other life;
and therefore on the removal of these obstacles and hindrances, together
with the corporeal parts that are of gross sensation, they cannot but be
in a more perfect state. The same faculties remain, but are much more
perfect, clear, and free; especially with those who have lived in
charity and faith in the Lord, and in innocence; for the faculties of
all such are immensely elevated above those which they had in the body,
being finally elevated even to the angelic faculties of the third
heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1390.">1390.</span></span>

Nor is there a communication merely of another's affections and
thoughts, but also of his memory-knowledge, to such an extent that one
spirit supposes that he has known what another knows, even if he had
known nothing about such matters. Thus there is a communication of all
the other's knowledge. Some spirits retain what is thus communicated,
and some do not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1391.">1391.</span></span>

Communications are made both by conversation with one another, and by
ideas together with representations; for the ideas of thought of spirits
are simultaneously representative, and by this means all things are set
forth in great fullness. They can represent more by a single idea than
they can utter by a thousand words. But the angels perceive what is
within the idea, what the affection is, what the origin of the
affection, what its end; besides other things that are interior.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1392.">1392.</span></span>

The delights and happiness in the other life are wont to be communicated
from one to many by a real transmission that is wonderful, by which they
too are affected in a similar manner; and these communications are
effected without any loss to him who makes the communication. It has
been granted me also thus to communicate delights to others by
transmissions. From this may be seen what must be the happiness of those
who love the neighbor more than themselves, and who desire nothing more
than to transfer their happiness to others; a condition that originates
in the Lord, who in this manner communicates felicities to the angels.
The communications of happiness are such continual transmissions; but
without any reflection that they are from such an active origin, and
from a determination as it were open and voluntary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1393.">1393.</span></span>

Communications are also effected in a wonderful way by means of
removals, the nature of which cannot be perceived by man. Sad and
troublesome things are removed in an instant, and thus things that give
delight and happiness are presented without any hindrances; for when
these have been removed, the angels flow in, and communicate their happy
feelings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1394.">1394.</span></span>

It is owing to the existence of such perception as enables one to know
in an instant what is the quality of another in respect to love and
faith, that spirits and angels are joined together into societies in
accordance with their agreement, and are separated from fellowship
according to their disagreement; and this so exquisitely that there is
not the smallest difference which does not dissociate or consociate.
Hence the societies in the heavens are so distinct from one another that
nothing can be conceived to be more so; and this in accordance with all
the differences of love to the Lord, and of faith in Him, which cannot
be numbered. Hence comes the form of heaven, which is such as to
represent one man; and this form is continually being perfected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1395.">1395.</span></span>

As regards this kind of perception, I have learned many things from
experience, but it would be tedious to relate them all. Often have I
heard the deceitful speaking, and have perceived not only that there was
deceit, but also what the deceit was, and what special wickedness there
was in it. There is as it were an image of the deceit in every tone of
the voice. I could also perceive whether the deceit belonged to him who
was speaking, or to others who spoke through him. The case is similar
with those who are in hatred: the nature of the hatred is at once
perceived, and more things that are in it than man can in any wise be
induced to believe. When the persons are presented against whom the
hatred has been felt, a lamentable state results, for whatever had been
thought and plotted against them stands forth to view.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1396.">1396.</span></span>

A certain spirit who while he lived in the world had desired to arrogate
to himself merit for his acts and his teaching, went away to the right
and came to those who were not of such a character. In order that he
might be associated with them, he said that he was nothing, and that he
desired to serve them; but instantly, on his first approach, and indeed
while he was still far away, they perceived what he was; and they at
once replied that he was not what he professed to be, but that he
desired to be great, and therefore could not be in agreement with them,
who were little. Being ashamed at this, he withdrew, wondering that they
knew him so far away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1397.">1397.</span></span>

As the perceptions are so exquisite, evil spirits cannot approach a
sphere, or any society, where there are good spirits who are in mutual
love. When they merely approach it they begin to be distressed, and they
complain and lament. In his audacity and self-confidence, a spirit who
was evil obtruded himself into a certain society that is at the first
threshold of heaven; but from the moment of his arrival he was scarcely
able to breathe, and became sensible of a cadaverous stench from
himself, and therefore fell back.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1398.">1398.</span></span>

There were a number of spirits about me who were not good. An angel
came, and I saw that the spirits could not endure his presence; for, as
he came nearer, they fell back more and more. I wondered at this, but it
was given me to know that the spirits could not stay in the sphere which
he had with him. From this, and also from other experience, it has been
made evident that one angel can put to flight myriads of evil spirits,
for they cannot endure the sphere of mutual love. And yet it was
perceived that the sphere of the angel had been tempered by means of
others who were associated with him: if it had not been tempered, they
would all have been dissipated. From all this it is evident what a
perfect perception exists in the other life; and how those who are there
are associated together, and also separated from fellowship, in
accordance with the perceptions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1399.">1399.</span></span>

Every spirit has communication with the interior and with the inmost
heaven, though he is wholly ignorant of it, and without this
communication he could not live. What he is inwardly, is known by the
angels who are in his interiors, and he is also ruled by the Lord by
means of these angels. Thus there are communications of his interiors in
heaven, as there are of his exteriors in the world of spirits. By means
of interior communications he is fitted for the use into which he is led
without his being aware of it. The case is the same with man: he
likewise communicates with heaven by means of angels-although of this he
is wholly ignorant-for otherwise he could not live. The things which
flow in therefrom into his thoughts, are only the ultimate effects; all
his life is from this source, and from this are ruled all the endeavors
\[conatus\] of his life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1400.">1400.</span></span>

A continuation concerning perceptions and the spheres that arise from
them, will be found at the end of this chapter. CHAPTER 12 1. And
Jehovah said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy land, and from thy birth,
and from thy father's house, to the land that I will cause thee to see.
2. And I will make thee into a great nation; and I will bless thee, and
will make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing. 3. And I will
bless them that bless thee, and will curse him that curseth thee; and in
thee shall all the families of the ground be blessed. 4. And Abram went
as Jehovah had spoken unto him, and Lot went with him. And Abram was a
son of five years and seventy years, when he went forth out of Haran. 5.
And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their
substance that they had gotten, and the soul that they had gained in
Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the
land of Canaan they came. 6. And Abram passed through the land, even
unto the place Shechem, even unto the oak-grove Moreh: and the Canaanite
was then in the land. 7. And Jehovah was seen of Abram, and said, To thy
seed will I give this land. And there he built an altar to Jehovah, who
was seen of him. 8. And he removed from thence into the mountain on the
east of Bethel, and spread his tent; having Bethel toward the sea, and
Ai on the east. And there he built an altar to Jehovah, and called on
the name of Jehovah. 9. And Abram journeyed, going and journeying,
toward the south. 10. And there was a famine in the land. And Abram went
down into Egypt to sojourn there; because the famine was grievous in the
land. 11. And it came to pass that when he drew nigh to come into Egypt,
he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold I pray, I know that thou art a woman
beautiful to look upon: 12. And it shall come to pass, when the
Egyptians shall see thee, that they will say, This is his wife; and they
will kill me, and will make thee to live. 13. Say, I pray, thou art my
sister; that it may be well with me for thy sake, and that my soul may
live because of thee. 14. And it came to pass when Abram was come into
Egypt, that the Egyptians saw the woman, that she was very beautiful.
15. And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, and praised her to Pharaoh; and
the woman was taken to Pharaoh's house. 16. And he did well unto Abram
for her sake; and he had flock and herd, and he-asses and menservants,
and maidservants and she-asses, and camels. 17. And Jehovah smote
Pharaoh with great plagues, and his house, because of the word of Sarai,
Abram's wife. 18. And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that
thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me that she is thy wife?
19. Why saidst thou, She is my sister? and I might have taken her to me
for a woman. And now, behold thy wife; take her, and go. 20. And Pharaoh
commanded the men concerning him; and they sent him away, and his wife,
and all that he had.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[1366-1](ac028.htm#fr_33) As Swedenborg all
through his theological Writings speaks of "restoring" (restaurare) and
"renewing" (instaurare) a new church, he may have had a special reason
for this seeming solecism. \[REVISER.\]

<span id="fn_34"></span>[1368-1](ac028.htm#fr_34) The Latin has oculi, a
manifest misprint for acuti Vide Schmidius in loco.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[1385-1](ac028.htm#fr_35) Compare Arcana 5556,
and Spiritual Experiences 3703. \[REVISER.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1401-1450](ac029)
