[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac022)  [Next](ac024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="1101.">1101.</span></span>

May God enlarge Japheth, signifies the enlightenment of this church. In
the literal sense "to enlarge" is to extend the boundaries, but in the
internal sense it is to be enlightened; for enlightenment is the
enlargement, as it were, of the boundaries of wisdom and intelligence.
As in Isaiah: Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth
the curtains of thine habitations (Isa. 54:2), meaning enlightenment in
spiritual things. The man of the external church is "enlarged" when he
is instructed in the truths and goods of faith; and as he is in charity,
he is thereby more and more confirmed; and besides, the more he is
instructed, the more is the cloud of his intellectual part dispersed-of
that intellectual part, that is to say, in which are charity and
conscience.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1102.">1102.</span></span>

And he shall dwell in the tents of Shem. That this signifies in order
that the internals of worship may be in the externals, is evident from
all that has been said before concerning Shem, namely, that "Shem" is
the internal church, or internal worship, and that external worship is
nothing but an inanimate affair, or else an unclean one, unless there is
internal worship to vivify and hallow it. That the "tents" signify
nothing else than what is holy of love, and the derivative worship, is
evident from the signification of "tents" (concerning which, see above,
n. 414). It was customary among the ancients to speak of "journeying"
and "dwelling in tents" by which was signified in the internal sense
holy worship, for the reason that the most ancient people not only
journeyed with tents, but also dwelt in tents, and performed their holy
worship in them. Hence also "to journey" and "to dwell" signified in the
internal sense to live. \[2\] That "tents" signify holy worship, the
following passages-in addition to those before cited (n. 414)-may serve
for confirmation. In David: God forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the
tent in which He dwelt in man (Ps. 78:60), where "tent" signifies the
same as "temple" in which God is said to "dwell" when He is present with
man in love. Hence the man who lived in holy worship, was called by the
ancients a tent, and afterwards a temple. In Isaiah: Enlarge the place
of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine
habitations (Isa. 54:2), meaning enlightenment in those things which are
of true worship. In Jeremiah: The whole land is laid waste, suddenly
have My tents been laid waste, and My curtains in a moment (Jer. 4:20),
where it is very manifest that tents are not meant, but holy worship. In
Zechariah: Jerusalem shall yet again dwell in her own place, even in
Jerusalem. Jehovah also shall save the tents of Judah (Zech. 12:6-7),
where the "tents of Judah" stand for the worship of the Lord from the
holy of love. \[3\] From these passages it is now evident what it is "to
dwell in the tents of Shem" namely, that internal worship is in
external. But because the man Japheth, or the man of the external
church, does not well know what internal things are, this shall be
briefly told. When a man feels or perceives in himself that he has good
thoughts concerning the Lord, and that he has good thoughts concerning
the neighbor, and desires to perform kind offices for him, not for the
sake of any gain or honor for himself; and when he feels that he has
pity for anyone who is in trouble, and still more for one who is in
error in respect to the doctrine of faith, then he may know that he
dwells in the tents of Shem, that is, that he has internal things in him
through which the Lord is working.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1103.">1103.</span></span>

And Canaan shall be his servant. That this signifies that those who make
worship consist solely in externals are able to perform vile offices, is
evident from what has been said above, under the preceding verses (25,
26), about Canaan, as being a servant. Such men are not indeed servants
in the church of the Lord on earth, for there are many of them who hold
high stations, and who are set over all others, who do nothing from
charity and conscience, and yet observe with much strictness the
externals of the church, and even condemn those who do not observe them.
But such persons, because they are in no charity and conscience, and
make worship consist solely in externals without internals, are servants
in the kingdom of the Lord, that is, in the other life; for they are
among the unhappy. The services which they there perform are vile, and
are so many that they cannot be well set forth here, but of the Divine
mercy of the Lord will be described hereafter. For in the other life
everyone without exception must perform some use, because man is born
for no other end than that he may perform use to the society in which he
is and to the neighbor, while he lives in the world, and in the other
life according to the good pleasure of the Lord. The case in this
respect is the same as it is in the human body, every part of which must
perform some use, even things which in themselves are of no value, such
as humors which in themselves are excrementitious, as are the many
salival fluids, the biles, and other secretions, which must be of
service not only to the food, but in separating the excrements and
purging the intestines. Such also are the uses of manure and dung in the
fields and vineyards; and many other such things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1104.">1104.</span></span>

Verses 28, 29. And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty
years; and all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years; and
he died. These words signify the duration of the first Ancient Church,
and at the same time its state.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1105.">1105.</span></span>

That these things are signified is sufficiently evident from what has
been said before concerning numbers and years (see n. 482, 487, 488,
493, 575, 647, 648).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1106.">1106.</span></span>

CONCERNING VASTATIONS There are many persons who during their life in
this world from simplicity and ignorance have imbibed falsities of
religious belief, and yet have had a kind of conscience in accordance
with the principles of their faith, and have not like others lived in
hatred, revenge, and adultery. In the other life these persons cannot be
introduced into heavenly societies so long as they remain in these
falsities, for they would contaminate them; and they are therefore kept
for a time in the lower earth, in order that they may get rid of their
false principles. The time that they remain there is longer or shorter
according to the nature of the falsity, and the life contracted thereby,
and according to the degree in which they have confirmed themselves in
their principles. Some suffer there severely, others not severely. These
sufferings are what are called Vastations, of which there is frequent
mention in the Word. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1106-1](#fn_19) When the
period of vastation is completed, they are taken up into heaven, and as
newcomers are instructed in the truths of faith, and this by the angels
by whom they are received.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1107.">1107.</span></span>

There are some who are very willing to be vastated and thus get rid of
the false principles which they have brought with them from the world.
(No one can get rid of his false principles in the other life except by
the lapse of time and by means provided by the Lord.) While these
persons remain in the lower earth, they are kept by the Lord in the hope
of deliverance, and in the thought of the end in view, which is that
they may be amended and prepared to receive heavenly happiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1108.">1108.</span></span>

Some are kept in a middle state between sleep and waking, and think very
little, except when they as it were awake-which takes place by
alternations-and then they remember what they had thought and done in
the life of the body, and again they relapse into the middle state
between being awake and being asleep. In this way these are vastated.
They are under the left foot, a little in front.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1109.">1109.</span></span>

Those who have fully confirmed themselves in false principles are
reduced to complete ignorance, and then they are in obscurity and
confusion, so that when they merely think of the things in which they
have confirmed themselves, they have inward pain. But after some time
has passed, they are as it were created anew, and are imbued with the
truths of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1110.">1110.</span></span>

Those who have assumed righteousness and merit on account of their good
works, and so have attributed the efficacy of salvation to themselves,
and not to the Lord and His righteousness and merit, and have confirmed
themselves in this in thought and in life, in the other world have their
principles of falsity turned into phantasies, so that they seem to
themselves to be hewing wood: this is exactly as it appears to them. I
have spoken with them. When they are engaged in their labor, and are
asked whether they are not fatigued, they reply that they have not yet
accomplished enough work to be able to merit heaven. When they are
hewing the wood there appears to be something of the Lord under the
wood, thus as if the wood were merit that they are getting. The more of
the Lord there appears in the wood, the longer they remain in this
condition; but when that appearance begins to cease, their vastation is
drawing to an end. At length they become such that they too can be
admitted into good societies, but still they long fluctuate between
truth and falsity. Great care is taken of them by the Lord, because they
have lived a dutiful life, and He from time to time sends angels to
them. These are they who in the Jewish Church were represented by the
hewers of wood (Josh. 9:23, 27).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1111.">1111.</span></span>

Those who have lived a good civic and moral life, but have persuaded
themselves that they merit heaven by their works, and have believed that
it is sufficient to acknowledge an only God as the Creator of the
universe, in the other life have their false principles turned into such
phantasies that they seem to themselves to be cutting grass, and are
called grass-cutters. They are cold, and try to warm themselves by this
cutting. Sometimes they go round and inquire among those whom they meet
whether they will give them some heat, which indeed spirits can do, but
the heat which they receive has no effect upon them, because it is
external and what they want is internal heat; and therefore they return
to their cutting, and thus gain heat by their labor. Their cold I have
felt. They are always hoping to be taken up into heaven, and sometimes
consult together how they may introduce themselves by their own power.
As these persons have performed good works, they are among those who are
vastated; and at length, after some time has passed, they are introduced
into good societies, and are instructed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1112.">1112.</span></span>

Those however who have been in the goods and truths of faith, and have
gained therefrom a conscience and a life of charity, are taken up by the
Lord into heaven immediately after death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1113.">1113.</span></span>

There are girls who have been enticed into harlotry, and thus persuaded
that there is no evil in it, being in other respects rightly disposed.
These, because they are not yet of an age to be able to know and judge
concerning such a life, have an instructor with them, quite severe, who
chastises them whenever in thought they break out into such wantonness.
Of him they are in great fear, and in this way are vastated. But adult
women who have been harlots and have enticed other women, do not undergo
vastation, but are in hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1114.">1114.</span></span>

CHAPTER 10. CONCERNING THE MOST ANCIENT CHURCH, WHICH WAS CALLED MAN, OR
ADAM Angels and spirits, or men after death, when permitted by the Lord,
can meet all whom they have known in this world, or whom they have heard
of-whomsoever they desire-can see them as present, and can converse with
them. Wonderful to say, they are at hand in a moment and are most
intimately present; so that it is possible to converse not only with
friends, who usually find one another, but also with others that have
been respected and esteemed. By the Divine mercy of the Lord it has been
granted me to converse not only with those whom I had known when they
lived in the body, but also with those of especial note in the Word;
also with those who were of the Most Ancient Church, which was that
called "Man," or "Adam," and with some who were of the subsequent
churches, in order that I might know that by the names in the first
chapters of Genesis churches are meant; and also that I might know what
was the character of the men of the churches of that time. The accounts
therefore that follow are what it has been given me to know about the
Most Ancient Churches.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1115.">1115.</span></span>

They who were of the Most Ancient Church, which was called Man, or Adam,
and were celestial men, are very high above the head, and dwell together
there in the greatest happiness. They said that others rarely come to
them, except some at times, as they expressed it, "from the universe;"
and that they were on high above the head not because they were of a
lofty spirit, but in order that they might govern those who are there.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1116.">1116.</span></span>

Dwellings were shown me of those who were of the second and third
posterities of this Most Ancient Church. They are magnificent, extending
to a great length, and diversified with beautiful colors of bright
crimson and azure blue. For the angels have most magnificent dwellings,
such as cannot be described, as I have often seen. To their eyes so real
is their appearance that nothing can be more real. But whence such real
appearances come will be shown of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.
They live in an aura, so to speak, of resplendent pearly and sometimes
of diamond-like light. For there are wonderful auras in the other life,
of inexpressible variety. They greatly err who do not believe that such
things exist there, and indefinitely more than anyone ever could or can
conceive. They are indeed representative, like the things sometimes seen
by the prophets; but yet are so real that they who are in the other life
hold them to be real, and the things which are in the world to be
relatively unreal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1117.">1117.</span></span>

They live in the most intense light. The light of this world can
scarcely be compared to that in which they live. That light was shown me
by a light as of flame that as it were streamed down before my eyes; and
they who were of the Most Ancient Church said that the light is such
with them, but still more intense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1118.">1118.</span></span>

There was shown me by a certain influx which I cannot describe, what the
nature of their speech was when they lived in this world-that it was not
articulate, like the vocal speech of our time, but tacit; and was
produced not by external but by internal respiration. It was also
granted me to perceive the nature of their internal respiration-that it
advanced from the navel toward the heart, and so through the lips,
without sound; and that it did not enter into the ear of another and
strike upon what is called the drum of the ear by an external way, but
by a certain way within the mouth, in fact by a passage there which is
now called the Eustachian tube. And it was shown me that by such speech
they could much more fully express the sentiments of the mind and the
ideas of thought than can possibly be done by articulate sounds, or
vocal words, which likewise are directed by the respiration, but
external. For there is nothing in any word that is not directed by
applications of the respiration. But with them this was done much more
perfectly, because by the internal respiration; which, from the fact
that it is interior, is at once far more perfect, and more applicable
and conformable to the very ideas of thought. Besides, they also
conversed by slight movements of the lips, and correspondent changes of
the face; for being celestial men, whatever they thought shone forth
from their faces and eyes, which were varied conformably. They could by
no means put on an expression of countenance different from that which
was in agreement with their thoughts. Simulation, and still more deceit,
was to them a monstrous iniquity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1119.">1119.</span></span>

It has been shown me to the life how the internal respiration of the
most ancient people silently flowed into a kind of external and thus
tacit speech, perceived by another in his interior man. They said that
this respiration varied with them, according to the state of their love
and faith in the Lord. They gave also as a reason that it could not be
otherwise, because they had communication with heaven; for they respired
with the angels in whose company they were. Angels have a respiration to
which internal respiration corresponds; and it likewise varies with
them. For when anything befalls them which is contrary to love and faith
in the Lord, their respiration is restrained; but when they are in the
happiness of love and faith, their respiration is free and full. There
is something like this also with every man, but in accordance with his
corporeal and worldly loves and also with his principles. When anything
opposes these, there is a restriction of the respiration; and when they
are favored, the respiration is free and full. These, however, are
variations of external respiration. But concerning the respiration of
the angels, of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1120.">1120.</span></span>

It has also been shown that the internal respiration of the men of the
Most Ancient Church, which was from the navel toward the interior region
of the breast, in the course of time, or in their posterity, was
changed, and receded more toward the back region, and toward the
abdomen, thus more outward and downward; and that at length, in the last
posterity of that church, which existed immediately before the flood,
scarcely anything of internal respiration remained; and when at last
there remained none of this in the breast, they were suffocated of their
own accord; but that in some, external respiration then began, and with
it articulate sound, or the language of spoken words. Thus with the men
before the flood the respiration was in accordance with the state of
their love and faith; and at last, when there was no love and no faith,
but a persuasion of falsity, internal respiration ceased; and with this,
the immediate communication with angels, and perception.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1121.">1121.</span></span>

I have been informed by sons of the Most Ancient Church concerning the
state of their perception, that they had perception of all things that
belong to faith, almost as have the angels with whom they had
communication; for the reason that their interior man, or spirit, by
means also of the internal respiration, was joined to heaven; and that
love to the Lord and love toward the neighbor are attended with this;
for man is thus conjoined with angels through their veriest life, which
consists in such love. They said that they had the law written upon
them, because they were in love to the Lord and love toward the
neighbor; and such being the case, whatever the laws prescribe was in
agreement with their perception, and whatever the laws forbid was
contrary to it. Nor did they doubt that all laws, human as well as
Divine, are founded in love to the Lord and charity toward the neighbor,
and regard these as their fundamental. Wherefore, as they had this
fundamental in them, from the Lord, they could not but know all things
that were from it. They believe too that those who live in the world at
this day, who love the Lord and the neighbor, have also the law written
upon them, and are acceptable citizens everywhere on earth, as the same
are in the other life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1122.">1122.</span></span>

I have been further informed that the men of the Most Ancient Church had
most delightful dreams, and also visions, and that it was insinuated
into them at the same time what they signified. Hence their paradisal
representations, and many other things. The objects of the external
senses therefore, which are earthly and worldly, were nothing to them;
nor had they any perception of delight in them, but only in what they
signified and represented; and therefore when they looked at earthly
objects they did not think about them at all, but only about the things
which they signified and represented, which were most delightful to
them; for they were such things as are in heaven, from which they see
the Lord Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1123.">1123.</span></span>

I have conversed with the third generation of the Most Ancient Church,
who said that in their time, when they lived in the world, they expected
the Lord, who would save the whole human race; and that it was then a
common saying among them that the seed of the woman would tread down the
serpent's head. They said that from that time the greatest delight of
their life was to procreate offspring; so that their sweetest
deliciousnesses were to love their consort for the sake of offspring,
which they called most delightful deliciousnesses and most delicious
delights, adding that the perception of these delights and
deliciousnesses was from influx out of heaven, because the Lord was to
be born.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1124.">1124.</span></span>

There were near me some of the posterity that lived before the flood-not
of those who perished, but of those who were somewhat better than they.
At first they flowed in gently and imperceptibly enough; but it was
given me to perceive that inwardly they were evil, and that they
inwardly acted contrary to love. There exhaled from them a sphere of the
odor of a dead body, so that the spirits who were around me fled away.
They imagined themselves to be so subtle that no one would perceive what
they thought. I spoke with them about the Lord, as to whether or not
they had expected Him, as their fathers did. They said that they had
represented the Lord to themselves as an old man, holy, with a gray
beard; and also that they became holy from Him, and in like manner
bearded; whence arose such veneration for beards among their posterity.
They added that now also they are able to adore Him, but from
themselves. But then an angel came, whose presence they could not
endure.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1125.">1125.</span></span>

It has also been granted me to converse with those who were of the
church called "Enosh," concerning which in Genesis 4:26. Their influx
was gentle, and their conversation unassuming. They said that they live
in charity with one another, and perform offices of friendship to others
who come among them. But it was evident that their charity was the
charity of friendship. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1125-1](#fn_20) They
live quietly, as good citizens, and do no injury to anyone.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1126.">1126.</span></span>

There appeared to me a narrow room; and the door being opened a tall man
came into view, clothed in white, the whiteness being intense. I
wondered who he was, and was told that a man clothed in white signified
those who were called "Noah," who were the first of all of the Ancient
Church, which was the church after the flood; and that they were thus
represented because they were few.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1127.">1127.</span></span>

It has been granted me to converse with those of the Ancient Church, or
of the church after the flood, who were called "Shem." They inflowed
gently through the region of the head into the region of the breast,
toward the heart, but not to the heart. The quality of spirits can be
known from their influx.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1128.">1128.</span></span>

There appeared one veiled over as with a cloud, about whose face were
many wandering stars, which signify falsities. I was told that such were
the posterity of the Ancient Church when it began to perish, especially
among those who instituted worship by sacrifices, and by images.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1129.">1129.</span></span>

Some account of the antediluvians who perished follows at the end of
this chapter. CHAPTER 10. 1. And these are the nativities of the sons of
Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the
flood. 2. The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan,
and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 3. And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz,
and Riphath, and Togarmah. 4. And the sons of Javan: Elishah, and
Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. 5. From these were spread abroad the
isles of the nations in their lands, everyone according to his tongue,
according to their families, as to their nations. 6. And the sons of
Ham: Cush, and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan. 7. And the sons of Cush:
Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabteca. And the sons of
Raamah: Sheba, and Dedan. 8. And Cush begat Nimrod. He began to be a
mighty one in the earth. 9. He was mighty in hunting before Jehovah;
wherefore it was said, As Nimrod, mighty in hunting before Jehovah. 10.
And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and
Calneh, in the land of Shinar. 11. Out of that land went forth Asshur,
and built Nineveh, and the city of Rehoboth, and Calah. 12. And Resen,
between Nineveh and Calah; this is that great city. 13. And Mizraim
begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim. 14. And Pathrusim,
and Casluhim, from whom went forth the Philistines, and Caphtorim. 15.
And Canaan begat Zidon, his firstborn, and Heth. 16. And the Jebusite,
and the Amorite, and the Girgashite. 17. And the Hivite, and the Arkite,
and the Sinite. 18. And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the
Hamathite. And afterwards were the families of the Canaanites spread
abroad. 19. And the border of the Canaanites was from Zidon, in coming
to Gerar, even unto Gaza; in coming to Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah,
and Zeboiim, even unto Lasha. 20. These are the sons of Ham, according
to their families, according to their tongues, in their lands, in their
nations. 21. And there was born to Shem also; he is the father of all
the sons of Eber; the elder brother of Japheth. 22. The sons of Shem:
Elam, and Asshur, and Arpachshad, and Lud, and Aram. 23. And the sons of
Aram: Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. 24. And Arpachshad begat
Shelah; and Shelah begat Eber. 25. And unto Eber were born two sons; the
name of the one was Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided; and
his brother's name was Joktan. 26. And Joktan begat Almodad, and
Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah. 27. And Hadoram, and Uzal, and
Diklah. 28. And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba. 29. And Ophir, and
Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan. 30. And their
dwelling was from Mesha, in coming to Sephar, the mountain of the east.
31. These are the sons of Shem, according to their families, according
to their tongues, in their lands, according to their nations. 32. These
are the families of the sons of Noah, according to their nativities, in
their nations; and from these were spread abroad the nations in the
earth after the flood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1130.">1130.</span></span>

THE CONTENTS The subject treated of throughout this whole chapter is the
Ancient Church, and its propagation (verse 1).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1131.">1131.</span></span>

They who had external worship corresponding to internal are the "sons of
Japheth" (verse 2). They who had worship more remote from internal are
the "sons of Gomer and Javan" (verses 3, 4). And they who had worship
still more remote are the "isles of the nations" (verse 5).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1132.">1132.</span></span>

They who cultivated knowledges, memory-knowledges, and rituals, and
separated them from things internal, are the "sons of Ham" (verse 6).
They who cultivated the knowledges of spiritual things are the "sons of
Cush;" and they who cultivated the knowledges of celestial things are
the "sons of Raamah" (verse 7).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1133.">1133.</span></span>

Those treated of who have external worship in which are interior evils
and falsities, "Nimrod" being such worship (verses 8, 9). The evils in
such worship (verse 10). The falsities in such worship (verses 11, 12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1134.">1134.</span></span>

Concerning those who form for themselves new kinds of worship out of
memory-knowledges by means of reasonings (verses 13, 14); and concerning
those who make mere memory-knowledge of the knowledges of faith (verse
14).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1135.">1135.</span></span>

Concerning external worship without internal, which is "Canaan," and the
derivations of this worship (verses 15-18); and its extension (verses
19, 20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1136.">1136.</span></span>

Concerning internal worship, which is "Shem," and its extension even to
the second Ancient Church (verse 21). Concerning internal worship and
its derivations, which being from charity, are derivations of wisdom, of
intelligence, of memory-knowledge, and of knowledges, which are
signified by the "nations" (verses 22-24).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1137.">1137.</span></span>

Concerning a certain church which arose in Syria, instituted by Eber,
which is to be called the second Ancient Church, the internal worship of
which is "Peleg," the external "Joktan" (verse 25). Its rituals are the
nations named in verses 26 to 29. The extension of this church (verse
30).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1138.">1138.</span></span>

That there were different kinds of worship in the Ancient Church, in
accordance with the genius of each nation (verses 31, 32).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1139.">1139.</span></span>

THE INTERNAL SENSE It has been stated already that there are four
different styles in the Word. The first, which was that of the Most
Ancient Church, is such as is that from the first chapter of Genesis to
this chapter. The second is the historical style, as in the following
books of Moses, and in the rest of the historical books. The third is
the prophetic style. The fourth is intermediate between the prophetic
style and that of common speech. Concerning these styles see n. 66.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1140.">1140.</span></span>

In this chapter, and in the following one as far as Eber, the most
ancient style is continued; but here it is intermediate between the
style of made-up history, and that of true history. For by Noah, and his
sons, Shem, Ham, Japheth, and Canaan, nothing else was meant, nor is
anything else meant, than the Ancient Church regarded abstractly as to
its worship-namely, by "Shem" internal worship, by "Japheth"
corresponding external worship, by "Ham" internal worship corrupted, by
"Canaan" external worship separated from internal. Such persons never
existed; but the kinds of worship were so named because all other
different kinds, or all specific differences, could be reduced to these
as fundamental ones. By "Noah" therefore was meant merely the Ancient
Church in general, as a parent comprehending all. And yet by the names
in this chapter, except those of Eber and his posterity, are meant so
many nations; and so many nations there were that constituted the
Ancient Church; which church was widely spread around the land of
Canaan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1141.">1141.</span></span>

They who are here named "sons of Japheth" were all such as had external
worship corresponding to internal; that is, who lived in simplicity, in
friendship, and in mutual charity. Nor did they know any other doctrinal
teachings than external rites. They who are named "sons of Ham" were
those who had internal worship corrupted. They who are called "sons of
Canaan" were those who had external worship separate from internal. They
who are called "sons of Shem" were internal men, and worshiped the Lord
and loved the neighbor; whose church was nearly like our true Christian
Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1142.">1142.</span></span>

What manner of men they were specifically is not related in this
chapter, for they are only recounted as to their names. But this appears
from the writings of the prophets, where the names of these nations
occur in different places, and everywhere with no other
signification-though sometimes in the genuine, and sometimes in the
opposite sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1143.">1143.</span></span>

Although these were the names of the nations that constituted the
Ancient Church, yet in the internal sense they mean actual things
\[res\], namely, the worships themselves. In heaven nothing at all is
known about the names, countries, nations, and the like; the angels have
no idea of such things, but of the actual things signified by them. The
Word of the Lord is living by virtue of the internal sense. This is as
the soul, of which the external sense is as the body. And just as with
man when his body dies the soul lives, and when the soul lives he no
longer knows the things that pertain to the body, so when he comes among
angels he does not know what the Word is in the sense of the letter, but
only what it is in its soul. Such was the man of the Most Ancient
Church; who, if he were living and read the Word at the present day,
would not cleave at all to the sense of the letter; but would be as if
he did not see it, but only the internal sense abstractly from the
letter; and indeed as if the letter had no existence. Thus he would be
in the life or soul of the Word. It is the same everywhere in the Word,
even in its historical parts, which were just such as are narrated, and
yet there is not so much as one little word therein that does not, in
the internal sense, enfold within it deep secrets which never appear to
those who hold the mind in the historical connection. Thus in this
chapter by the names, in the literal or historical sense, are meant the
peoples that constituted the Ancient Church, but in the internal sense
their doctrinals are signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1144.">1144.</span></span>

Verse 1. And these are the nativities of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham,
and Japheth; and unto them were sons born after the flood. "These are
the nativities of the sons of Noah," signifies derivations of the
doctrinals and worships of the Ancient Church, which in general is
"Noah;" "Shem, Ham, and Japheth" signify here as before-"Shem" true
internal worship, "Ham" internal worship corrupted, and "Japheth"
external worship corresponding to internal; "and unto them were sons
born" signifies doctrinals derived therefrom; "after the flood,"
signifies from the time when this new church arose.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1145.">1145.</span></span>

These are the nativities of the sons of Noah. That these signify
derivations of the doctrinals and worships of the Ancient Church, which
in general is "Noah," is evident from the signification of "nativities"
(of which above). In the external or literal sense, "nativities" or
"births," as is known, are generations of one from another; but in the
internal sense all things have regard to what is celestial and
spiritual, that is, to the things of charity and of faith. Thus here the
"nativities" are those of the church, consequently are doctrinal
matters, as will be made more clear in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1146.">1146.</span></span>

Shem, Ham, and Japheth. That these signify here as before-"Shem" true
internal worship, "Ham" internal worship corrupted, and "Japheth"
external worship corresponding to internal, is evident from what has
been previously stated concerning them; where it was shown, not only
that Shem, Ham, and Japheth signify those kinds of worship, but also
what is meant by true internal worship, or Shem; what by internal
worship corrupted, or Ham; and what by external worship corresponding to
internal, or Japheth. They need not therefore be further dwelt upon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1147.">1147.</span></span>

And unto them were sons born. That these signify the doctrinals thence
derived, is evident from the signification of "sons" in the internal
sense, as being the truths of faith, and also the falsities,
consequently doctrinal matters; by which both true and false are meant,
for such are the doctrinals of churches. (That "sons" have such a
signification may be seen above, n. 264, 489, 491, 535.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1148.">1148.</span></span>

After the flood. That this signifies from the time when this new church
arose, is evident likewise from what has been said in the preceding
chapters; for the end of the Most Ancient Church is described by the
flood, and also the beginning of the Ancient Church. It must be observed
that the church before the flood is called the Most Ancient Church, and
the church after the flood, the Ancient Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1149.">1149.</span></span>

Verse 2. The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan,
and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. "The sons of Japheth" signify those
who had external worship corresponding to internal. "Gomer, Magog,
Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras" were so many nations, with whom
such worship existed, by which in the internal sense are signified so
many different doctrinals that were the same as rituals, which they
devoutly observed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1150.">1150.</span></span>

The sons of Japheth. That these signify those who had external worship
corresponding to internal, has been explained before. External worship
is said to correspond to internal when that which is the essential is in
the worship. This essential is the adoration of the Lord from the heart;
which is by no means possible unless there is charity, or love to the
neighbor. In charity or love toward the neighbor the Lord is present,
and then He can be adored from the heart. Thus the adoration is from the
Lord, for the Lord gives all the ability and all the being in the
adoration. Hence it follows that such as is the charity in a man, such
is his adoration or worship. All worship is adoration, because the
adoration of the Lord must be in it for it to be worship. The sons of
Japheth, or the nations and peoples called "sons of Japheth," lived in
mutual charity with each other, in friendship, in courtesy, and in
simplicity; and therefore the Lord was present in their worship. For
when the Lord is present in the external worship, there is internal
worship in the external, that is, there is external worship
corresponding to internal. There were formerly very many such nations.
And there are also at this day those who make worship consist in
externals and do not know what internal worship is, or if they know, do
not think about such things. If these persons acknowledge the Lord and
love the neighbor, the Lord is in their worship, and they are sons of
Japheth; but if they deny the Lord, and love only themselves, and do not
care for the neighbor, especially if they bear hatred toward him, their
worship is external separate from internal, and they are sons of Canaan,
or Canaanites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[1106-1](ac023.htm#fr_19) Vastation in the Latin
is the same word as wasting or laying waste. \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_20"></span>[1125-1](ac023.htm#fr_20) Swedenborg often uses
the term "friendship" in the sense of mere personal and selfish regard.
See Arcana Coelestia, n. 1158:2, 3875:5, 4054, 4804, etc. \[REVISER\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1151-1200](ac024)
