[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ac029)  [Next](ac031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852146/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Arcana Coelestia*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1749-56\], tr. by John F.
Potts \[1905-10\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Arcana Coelestia

<span class="margnote"><span id="1451.">1451.</span></span>

That to be "removed into the mountain on the east of Bethel" signifies
the progression of the celestial things of love, is evident from the
signification of a "mountain," as being what is celestial, as has been
shown above (n. 795, 796); and from the signification of "the east," as
being Jehovah Himself as to love; for He is the East itself, as has also
been shown above (n. 101, and elsewhere); and also from the
signification of "Bethel," as being the knowledge of celestial things.
Celestial things are insinuated into man both without knowledges, and
with knowledges; celestial things without knowledges from infancy up to
childhood, as said just above; but celestial things with knowledges from
childhood onward to adult age. And as the Lord was to advance into the
knowledges of celestial things, which are signified by "Bethel," it is
here said that Abram passed over thence to a mountain on the east of
Bethel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1452.">1452.</span></span>

And spread his tent. That this signifies the holy things of faith, is
evident from the signification of a "tent," as being the holy of love,
and consequently the holy of faith from love, as before shown (n. 414).
That "he spread his tent," there signifies that this was now beginning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1453.">1453.</span></span>

Having Bethel toward the sea, and Ai on the East, signifies that the
Lord's state was still obscure, that is to say, in regard to the
knowledges of celestial and spiritual things; for it is one thing to be
in celestial things, and another to be in the knowledges of celestial
things. Infants and children are in celestial things more than adults,
because they are in love toward their parents, and in mutual love, and
also in innocence; but adults are in the knowledges of celestial things
more than infants and children, while very many of them are not in the
celestial things of love. Before man is instructed in the things of love
and faith, he is in an obscure state, that is, in regard to knowledges;
which state is here described by having Bethel toward the sea, that is
on the west, and Ai on the east. By "Bethel," as has been said, is
signified the knowledges of celestial things; but by "Ai" the knowledges
of worldly things. The knowledges of celestial things are said to be "on
the west" when they are in obscurity, for in the Word "the west"
signifies what is obscure; and the knowledges of worldly things are said
to be "on the east" when they are in clearness, for relatively to the
west, the east is clearness. That the west and the east have this
signification needs no confirmation, for it is evident to everyone
without confirmation. \[2\] And that "Bethel" signifies the knowledges
of celestial things, may be seen from other passages in the Word where
Bethel is named; as in the next chapter, where it is said that Abram
went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where
his tent was in the beginning, between Bethel and Ai, unto the place of
the altar which he made there (Gen. 13:3-4); where "on his journeys from
the south to Bethel," signifies progression into the light of
knowledges, on which account it is not here said that Bethel was on the
west and Ai on the east. When Jacob saw the ladder, he said: This is
none other but the House of God, and this is the gate of heaven; and he
called the name of that place Bethel (Gen. 28:17, 19); where the
knowledge of celestial things is in like manner signified by "Bethel;"
for man is a Bethel, that is a House of God, and also a gate of heaven,
when he is in the celestial things of knowledges. When a man is being
regenerated, he is introduced by means of the knowledges of spiritual
and celestial things; but when he has been regenerated, he has then been
introduced, and is in the celestial and spiritual things of the
knowledges. Afterwards: God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and
dwell there; make there an altar to God who appeared unto thee (Gen.
35:1, 6-7); where in like manner "Bethel" signifies knowledges. \[3\]
That the ark of Jehovah was in Bethel, and that the sons of Israel came
thither and inquired of Jehovah (Judges 20:18, 26, 27; 1 Sam. 7:16,
10:3) signify similar things; also that the king of Assyria sent one of
the priests whom he had brought from Samaria, and he dwelt in Bethel,
and taught them how they should fear Jehovah (2 Kings 17:27, 28). In
Amos: Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go flee thee away into the
land of Judah, and there eat bread, and there shalt thou prophesy; but
prophesy not again any more at Bethel, for this is the king's sanctuary,
and this is the house of the kingdom (Amos 7:12-13). \[4\] After
Jeroboam had profaned Bethel (1 Kings 12:32; 13:1-8; 2 Kings 23:15) it
had an opposite representation (see Hosea 10:15; Amos 3:14-15; 4:5-7).
But that "Ai" signifies the knowledges of worldly things, may also be
confirmed from the historical and the prophetical parts of the Word (see
Josh. 7:2; 8:1-28; Jer. 49:3-4).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1454.">1454.</span></span>

And he built an altar to Jehovah. That this signifies the external
worship of His Father from that state, is evident from the signification
of "an altar," as being the principal representative of worship (n.
921).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1455.">1455.</span></span>

And called on the name of Jehovah. That this signifies the internal
worship of His Father from that state, is evident from the signification
of "calling on the name of Jehovah" (n. 440). Everybody can see that it
is external worship to build an altar to Jehovah, and internal to call
on the name of Jehovah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1456.">1456.</span></span>

Verse 9. And Abram journeyed, going and journeying toward the south.
"And Abram journeyed, going and journeying," signifies further
progression; "toward the south," signifies into goods and truths, and
thus into a state of light as to the interiors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1457.">1457.</span></span>

And Abram journeyed, going and journeying. That this signifies further
progression, is evident from the signification of "to go," and "to
journey." Among the ancients, travels, journeys, and sojournings,
signified nothing else; hence also in the internal sense they signify
nothing else in the Word. Here commence the Lord's advancements into
knowledges. That the Lord was also instructed as are other men, may be
seen in Luke: The child <span id="fr_37"></span>[1457-1](#fn_37) grew
and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of His
appearing to Israel (Luke 1:80). The Child grew and waxed strong in
spirit, and was filled with wisdom, and grace was upon Him (Luke 2:40).
Joseph and the mother of Jesus after three days found Him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them and asking them
questions; and all that heard Him were amazed at His understanding and
answers. Seeing Him they wondered; but He said unto them, How is it that
ye sought Me? Knew ye not that I must be in the things that are My
Father's? (Luke 2:46-49). That He was then twelve years old, is stated
in verse 42, of the same chapter. Again: Then Jesus advanced in wisdom
and in age, and in grace with God and men (Luke 2:52).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1458.">1458.</span></span>

That "toward the south" signifies into goods and truths, and thus into a
state of light as to the interiors, is evident from the signification of
"the south." That "the south" signifies a state of light, comes from the
fact that there are neither quarters nor times in the other life, but
states which are signified by quarters and times. The states of
intellectual things are as the states of the times of the day and of the
year, and also as the states of the quarters. The states of the day are
those of evening, night, morning, and noon; the states of the year are
those of autumn, winter, spring, and summer; and the states of the
quarters are those of the sun, in its relation to the west, the north,
the east, and the south. Similar to these are the states of intellectual
things. And, what is wonderful, in heaven those are in light who are in
a state of wisdom and intelligence, exactly according to their state;
those being in the greatest light who are in a state of the highest
wisdom and intelligence; but the wisdom there is that of love and
charity, and the intelligence is that of faith in the Lord. That in the
other life there is light to which the light of the world can scarcely
be compared, is to me a fact established by much experience (concerning
which, of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter), and because there is in
heaven such a correspondence between light and intellectual things,
therefore in the Word, in this and in other passages, nothing else is
signified in the internal sense by "the south." "The south" here
signifies the intelligence which is procured by means of knowledges.
These knowledges are celestial and spiritual truths, which in heaven are
so many radiations of light, and they are also presented visibly by
means of the light, as before stated. As the Lord was now to be imbued
with knowledges in order that as to the Human Essence also He might
become the very Light of heaven, it is here said that "Abram journeyed,
going and journeying toward the south." \[2\] That this is the
signification of "the south," may be seen from similar passages in the
Word, as in Isaiah: I will say to the north, Give; and to the south,
Keep not back; bring My sons from far, and My daughters from the end of
the earth (Isa. 43:6); "the north" denotes those who are in ignorance;
"the south" those who are in knowledges; "sons" truths; and "daughters"
goods. Again: If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in the darkness, and thy thick
darkness as the noonday \[or, south-meridies\] (Isa. 58:10); to "draw
out the soul to the hungry and to satisfy the afflicted soul," denotes
the goods of charity in general; the "light rising in the darkness,"
means that they shall have the intelligence of truth; and "the thick
darkness as the south," means that they shall have the wisdom of good;
"the south," from its heat, signifies good, and from its light, truth.
\[3\] In Ezekiel: In the visions of God brought He me into the land of
Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, whereon was as it were the
building of a city on the south (Ezek. 40:2); concerning the New
Jerusalem, or the Lord's kingdom, which, because it is in the light of
wisdom and intelligence, is "on the south." In David: Jehovah shall
bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the
noonday (Ps. 37:6). Again: Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror of
the night, for the arrow that flieth by day, for the pestilence that
walketh in the thick darkness, for the destruction that wasteth at
noonday \[or, in the south\] (Ps. 91:5-6); "not to fear for the
destruction that wasteth in the south," means not to be afraid because
of the damnation which comes upon those who are in knowledges and
pervert them. In Ezekiel: Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and
drop \[thy word\] to the south, and prophesy to the forest of the field
of the south, and say to the forest of the south, All faces from the
south to the north shall be burned in her (Ezek. 20:46-47); "the forest
of the south," denotes those who are in the light of truths, and who
extinguish it, and thus those of this character who are within the
church. \[4\] In Daniel: Out of one of them there went forth a little
horn, and it grew exceedingly toward the south, and toward the east, and
toward beauty \[decus\], and it grew even to the army of the heavens
(Dan. 8:9-10); meaning those who fight against goods and truths. In
Jeremiah: Give glory to Jehovah your God, before He maketh it grow dark,
and before your feet stumble upon the mountains of twilight; and ye look
for light, and He turn it into the shadow of death, He shall make it
thick darkness; the cities of the south shall be shut, and there is none
to open (Jer. 13:16, 19); "the cities of the south" denote the
knowledges of truth and good. In Obadiah: The captivity of Jerusalem
which is in Sepharad shall inherit the cities of the south (Obad. 20);
"the cities of the south" denote in like manner truths and goods; hence
the very truths and goods of which they are the heirs; the Lord's
kingdom is here treated of. \[5\] That Abram's journeying, going and
journeying toward the south, signifies, as before said, the Lord's
progression into goods and truths, and thus into a state of light as to
the interiors, is to be thus understood: knowledges are the things that
open the way for seeing celestial and spiritual things; by means of
knowledges the way is opened for the internal man to advance toward the
external, in which latter are the receiving vessels, which are as many
as are the knowledges of good and truth; into these knowledges, as into
their vessels, do celestial things inflow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1459.">1459.</span></span>

Verse 10. And there was a famine in the land. And Abram went down into
Egypt to sojourn there; because the famine was grievous in the land.
"There was a famine in the land," signifies a scarcity of knowledges as
yet with the Lord when a child; "and Abram went down into Egypt to
sojourn," signifies instruction in knowledges from the Word; "Egypt" is
the memory-knowledge of knowledges \[scientia cognitionum\]; "to
sojourn" is to be instructed; "because the famine was grievous in the
land," signifies much scarcity in His external man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1460.">1460.</span></span>

There was a famine in the land. That this signifies a scarcity of
knowledges as yet with the Lord when a child, is evident from what has
been already said. During childhood the knowledges in a man never come
from that which is interior, but from the objects of the senses,
especially from the hearing. For, as before said, there are in the
external man receiving vessels, called the things of the memory, and
these are formed by means of knowledges-as everybody may know-the
internal man flowing in and helping; consequently knowledges are learned
and are implanted in the memory in accordance with the influx of the
internal man. Thus also was it with the Lord when He was a child-for He
was born as are other men and was instructed as are other men-but with
Him the interiors were celestial, which adapted the vessels for the
reception of the knowledges, and in such a way that the knowledges
should afterwards become vessels to receive the Divine. The interiors
with Him were Divine, from Jehovah His Father; the exteriors were human,
from Mary His mother. Hence it may be seen that with the Lord, equally
as with other men, there was in His external man, during His childhood,
a scarcity of knowledges. \[2\] That "famine" signifies a scarcity of
knowledges, is evident from the Word in other places, as in Isaiah: They
do not look into the work of Jehovah, and see not the doing of His
hands. Therefore My people go into captivity because they have no
knowledge \[cognitio\], and their glory are mortals of famine, and their
multitude are parched with thirst (Isa. 5:12-13); "mortals of famine"
denote a scarcity of the knowledges of celestial things; a "multitude
parched with thirst," a scarcity of the knowledges of spiritual things.
In Jeremiah: They have lied against Jehovah, and have said, It is not
He; neither shall evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor
famine; and the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them
(Jer. 5:12-13); "sword and famine" denote the deprivation of the
knowledges of truth and of good; "the prophets" are those who teach, in
whom the word is not. That "to be consumed by the sword and famine," is
to be deprived of the knowledges of truth and of good; and that
vastation is denoted, by "the sword" as to spiritual things, and by
"famine" as to celestial things, is evident in various places in the
Word (as Jer. 14:13-16, 18; Lam. 4:9; and elsewhere). \[3\] So too in
Ezekiel: And I will increase famine upon you, and will break your staff
of bread; and I will send upon you famine, and the evil wild beast; and
they shall bereave thee, and I will bring the sword upon thee (Ezek.
5:16-17); "famine" denotes the deprivation of the knowledges of
celestial things, or of the knowledges of good, whence come falsities
and evils. In David: And He called for a famine upon the land, He broke
the whole staff of bread (Ps. 105:16); "to break the staff of bread,"
signifies to be deprived of heavenly food; for the life of good spirits
and angels is sustained by no other food than the knowledges of good and
truth, and the goods and truths themselves, whence comes the
signification of "famine" and of "bread," in the internal sense. Again:
He hath satisfied the longing soul, and hath filled the hungry soul with
good (Ps. 107:9); denoting those who desire knowledges. In Jeremiah:
Lift up thy hands for the soul of thy young children, who faint for
hunger at the head of all the streets (Lam. 2:19); "hunger" denotes the
lack of knowledges; "the streets," truths. In Ezekiel: They shall dwell
confidently, and none to make afraid. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1460-1](#fn_38) And I will raise up for them a plant
for a name, and they shall be no more consumed with famine in the land
(Ezek. 34:28-29), denoting that they shall no longer be made destitute
of the knowledges of good and truth. \[4\] In John: They shall hunger no
more, neither thirst anymore (Rev. 7:16); concerning the Lord's kingdom,
where there is an abundance of all celestial knowledges and goods, which
is "not to hunger;" and of spiritual knowledges and truths, which is
"not to thirst." In like manner spoke the Lord in John: I am the Bread
of life he that cometh to Me shall never hunger, and he that believeth
on Me shall never thirst (John 6:35). And in Luke: Blessed are ye that
hunger now, for ye shall be filled (Luke 6:21). And again: He hath
filled the hungry with good things (Luke 1:53); where celestial goods
and their knowledges are treated of. That "famine" signifies a scarcity
of knowledges, is plainly said in Amos: Behold, the days are coming,
that I will send a famine upon the land; not a famine of bread, nor a
thirst for waters, but of hearing the words of Jehovah (Amos 8:11-12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1461.">1461.</span></span>

And Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn. That this signifies
instruction in knowledges \[cognitiones\] from the Word is evident from
the signification of "Egypt," and from the signification of
"sojourning." That "Egypt" signifies the memory-knowledge of knowledges,
and that "to sojourn" signifies to be instructed, will be seen
presently. That in His childhood the Lord was instructed as are other
men, is evident from the passages in Luke that were adduced in the
explication of verse 9 (n. 1457); and also from what has been said just
above concerning the external man, which cannot be reduced to
correspondence and agreement with the internal except by means of
knowledges. The external man is corporeal and sensuous; nor does it
receive anything celestial and spiritual unless knowledges are implanted
in it, as in ground; for in these celestial things can have their
recipient vessels. But the knowledges must be from the Word. Knowledges
from the Word are such that they are open from the Lord Himself; for the
Word itself is from the Lord through heaven, and the Lord's life is in
all things of the Word, both in general and in particular, although it
does not so appear in the external form. Hence it may be seen that in
His childhood the Lord did not will to imbue Himself with any other
knowledges than those of the Word, which was open to Him, as before
said, from Jehovah Himself, His Father, with whom He was to be united
and become One; and this the more, because nothing is said in the Word
that does not in its inmosts have regard to Him, and that has not first
come from Him; for the Human Essence was only a something that was added
to His Divine Essence that was from eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1462.">1462.</span></span>

That relatively to the Lord, "Egypt" is the memory-knowledge of
knowledges, but relatively to all other men is memory-knowledge
\[scientia\] in general, is evident from its signification in the Word
(concerning which above in various places, especially in n. 1164, 1165).
For the Ancient Church was in Egypt as well as in many other places (n.
1238); and when this church was there, memory-knowledges \[scientiae\]
flourished there more than anything else; hence by Egypt has been
signified memory-knowledge. But after the people desired to enter by
means of memory-knowledges into the mysteries of faith, and thus from
their own power to investigate the truth of Divine arcana, Egypt became
addicted to magic, and signified things of memory-knowledge which
pervert, whence come falsities, and from these evils, as is evident in
Isaiah 19:11. \[2\] That useful memory-knowledges are signified by
"Egypt," thus in the present passage the memory-knowledge of knowledges,
which is able to serve as vessels for celestial and spiritual things, is
evident from the following passages in the Word. In Isaiah: They have
seduced Egypt, the cornerstone of the tribes (Isa. 19:13), where it is
called "the cornerstone of the tribes," as it should serve for a support
to the things that are of faith, which are signified by "the tribes."
Again: In that day there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt that
speak with the lip of Canaan, and swear to Jehovah Zebaoth; each shall
be called the city of the sun. In that day there shall be an altar to
Jehovah in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to Jehovah at
the border thereof. And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto
Jehovah Zebaoth in the land of Egypt; for they shall cry unto Jehovah
because of the oppressors, and He shall send them a Saviour and a
Prince, and He shall deliver them; and Jehovah shall become known to
Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know Jehovah in that day; and they shall
offer sacrifice and meat-offering, and shall vow a vow to Jehovah, and
shall perform it. And Jehovah shall smite Egypt in smiting and in
healing, and they shall return unto Jehovah, and He shall be entreated
of them, and shall heal them (Isa. 19:18-22). Here Egypt is spoken of in
a good sense, denoting those who are in memory-knowledges
\[scientifica\], that is, in natural truths, which are the vessels of
spiritual truths. \[3\] Again: In that day there shall be a path from
Egypt to Assyria, and Assyria shall come into Egypt, and Egypt into
Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve Assyria. In that day shall Israel
be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the
land, which Jehovah Zebaoth shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt My
people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel Mine inheritance
(Isa. 19:23-25). Here by "Egypt" is signified the memory-knowledge of
natural truths; by "Assyria," reason or rational things; by "Israel,"
spiritual things; all of which succeed one another; and therefore it is
said that "in that day there shall be a path from Egypt to Assyria," and
that "Israel shall be the third with Egypt and with Assyria." \[4\] In
Ezekiel: Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was thine expansion,
that it might be to thee for an ensign (Ezek. 27:7); concerning Tyre, by
which is signified the possession of knowledges; "fine linen with
broidered work" denotes the truths of memory-knowledges, that serve; for
memory-knowledges, being of the external man, ought to serve the
internal man. Again: Thus saith the Lord Jehovih, At the end of forty
years will I gather Egypt from the peoples whither they have been
scattered, and I will bring back the captivity of Egypt (Ezek.
29:13-14); denoting the same that is said in many places concerning
Judah and Israel, in that they should be gathered from the peoples and
brought back from captivity. In Zechariah: And it shall come to pass
that whoso of the families of the earth goeth not up unto Jerusalem to
worship the King Jehovah Zebaoth, upon them there shall be no rain; and
if the family of Egypt go not up and come not (Zech. 14:17-18); also
concerning Egypt in a good sense, and by which the like is meant. \[5\]
That memory-knowledge, or human wisdom, is signified by "Egypt," is
evident also in Daniel, where the memory-knowledges of celestial and
spiritual things are called "the hidden things of gold and silver," and
also "the desirable things of Egypt" (Dan. 11:43). And it is said of
Solomon that "his wisdom was multiplied above the wisdom of all the sons
of the east, and above all the wisdom of the Egyptians" (1 Kings 4:30).
The house built by Solomon for Pharaoh's daughter represented nothing
else (1 Kings 7:8, etc.). \[6\] That the Lord when an infant was brought
into Egypt, signified the same that is here signified by Abram; and it
took place for the additional reason that He might fulfill all the
things that had been represented concerning Him. In the inmost sense the
migration of Jacob and his sons into Egypt represented the first
instruction of the Lord in knowledges from the Word, as is also manifest
from the following passages. It is said of the Lord in Matthew: An angel
of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the
young child and His mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until
I tell thee. And he arose and took the young child and His mother by
night, and departed into Egypt, and was there until the death of Herod;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, Out
of Egypt have I called My son (Matt. 2:13-15, 19-21); concerning which
it is said in Hosea: When Israel was a child then I loved him, and
called My son out of Egypt (Hos. 11:1); from which it is evident that by
the "child Israel," is meant the Lord; and that His instruction when a
child is meant by the words, "I called My son out of Egypt." \[7\] Again
in Hosea: By a prophet the Lord made Israel to go up out of Egypt, and
by a prophet was he kept (Hos. 12:13-14); where in like manner by
"Israel" is meant the Lord; by "a prophet" is signified one who teaches,
and thus the doctrine of knowledges. In David: Turn us again, O God
Zebaoth, cause Thy face to shine, and we shall be saved. Thou didst
bring a vine out of Egypt, Thou didst drive out the nations, and planted
it (Ps. 80:7-8); where also the Lord is treated of, who is called "a
vine out of Egypt" in regard to the knowledges in which He was being
instructed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1463.">1463.</span></span>

That "to sojourn" means to be instructed, is evident from the
signification of "sojourning" in the Word, as being to be instructed;
and this for the reason that sojourning and migration, or proceeding
from place to place, is in heaven nothing but change of state, as before
shown (n. 1376, 1379); and therefore, whenever traveling, sojourning,
and passing from place to place, occur in the Word, nothing else is
suggested to the angels than such change of state as exists with them.
There are changes of state of both the thoughts and the affections;
changes of the state of the thoughts are knowledges, and in the world of
spirits these changes are presented by means of instructions; which also
was the reason why the men of the Most Ancient Church, having
communication with the angelic heaven, by sojourning perceived nothing
else. So in the passage before us, Abram's going down into Egypt to
sojourn, signifies nothing else than the instruction of the Lord. \[2\]
Similar, too, is the signification of Jacob and his sons' going down
into Egypt; as in Isaiah: Thus hath said the Lord Jehovih, My people
went down in the beginning into Egypt to sojourn there; and Assyria
oppressed them without cause (Isa. 52:4); where "Assyria" denotes
reasonings. Hence also in the Jewish Church, those who were being
instructed were called "sojourners, sojourning in the midst of them,"
concerning whom it was commanded that they should be treated as the
homeborn (Exod. 12:48-49; Lev. 24:22; Num. 15:13-16, 26, 29; 19:10). Of
them it is thus written in Ezekiel: Ye shall divide this land unto you
according to the tribes of Israel. And it shall come to pass that ye
shall divide it by lot, for an inheritance unto you and to the
sojourners that sojourn in the midst of you; and they shall be unto you
as the homeborn among the sons of Israel; with you shall they cast the
lot for an inheritance in the midst of the tribes of Israel; and it
shall come to pass that in what tribe the sojourner sojourneth, there
shall ye give him his inheritance (Ezek. 47:21-23). This is concerning
the New Jerusalem, or the Lord's kingdom; by "the sojourners sojourning"
are meant those who suffer themselves to be instructed, consequently the
Gentiles; that those are meant who are being instructed, is evident from
its being said that in the tribe with which he has sojourned, there his
inheritance should be given; "tribes" denote the things that are of
faith. \[3\] "Sojourning" has also nearly the same signification as
"journeying," and "dwelling." By "journeying" are signified the
arrangements and order of life, and by "dwelling" is signified to live
(see above, n. 1293); on which account the land of Canaan is also called
the land of the sojournings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Gen. 28:4;
36:7; 37:1; Exod. 6:4); and Jacob said unto Pharaoh: The days of the
years of my sojournings, few and evil have been the days of the years of
my life, and they have not attained unto the days of the years of the
life of my fathers, in the days of their sojournings (Gen. 47:9); where
"sojourning" denotes life and instructions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1464.">1464.</span></span>

Because the famine was grievous in the land. That this signifies much
scarcity in His external man, is evident from the signification of
"famine," as given above in this verse. The arcana here contained are
more than can be briefly told. The Lord had the power of learning above
every other man; but because, unlike other men, He was to be instructed
in celestial things before He was instructed in spiritual things, this
is here declared; and also for the further reason that there was
hereditary evil from the mother in His external man, against which He
was to fight, and which He was to overcome; and also for other reasons
innumerable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1465.">1465.</span></span>

Verse 11. And it came to pass, when he drew nigh to come into Egypt,
that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold I pray, I know that thou art a
woman beautiful to look upon. "And it came to pass, when he drew nigh to
come into Egypt," signifies when He began to learn; "Egypt," as before
said, means the memory-knowledge of knowledges \[scientia cognitionum\];
"he said unto Sarai his wife," signifies that He so thought concerning
the truths to which celestial things were adjoined; "Sarai" as a wife is
the truth adjoined to the celestial things that were in the Lord;
"Behold I pray, I know that thou art a woman beautiful to look upon,"
signifies that truth from a celestial origin is delightful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1466.">1466.</span></span>

And it came to pass, when he drew nigh to come into Egypt. That this
signifies when He began to learn, is evident from the signification of
"Egypt," as being the memory-knowledge of knowledges; and when the
expression "to draw nigh" is used with reference to this, it can mean
nothing else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1467.">1467.</span></span>

That "Egypt" is the memory-knowledge of knowledges, is evident from what
was said and shown concerning Egypt under the preceding verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1468.">1468.</span></span>

He said to Sarai his wife. That this signifies that He so thought
concerning the truths to which celestial things were adjoined, is
evident from the signification of Sarai when she is called a wife. A
"wife," in the internal sense of the Word, signifies nothing else than
truth conjoined with good; for the conjunction of truth with good is
circumstanced precisely as is a marriage. In the Word, when a "husband"
is mentioned, the husband signifies good, and the wife signifies truth;
but when he is not called the husband, but the "man," then he signifies
truth, and the wife signifies good: this is the constant usage in the
Word, as before said (n. 915). In the passage before us, as Abram is
named, Sarai his wife signifies truth. To say thus to Sarai his wife is,
in the internal sense, to think so concerning the truths with which
celestial things were conjoined. It is historically true that Abram so
said to his wife, when journeying into Egypt; but as before said, all
the historicals of the Word are representative, and all the words are
significative. No other historicals are recorded in the Word, and in no
other order, and no other words are used to express them, than such as
in the internal sense may express these arcana.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1469.">1469.</span></span>

That "Sarai," as a wife, is the truth that was adjoined to the celestial
things which were in the Lord, is evident from what has just been said
concerning the signification of Sarai his wife. It is said, "the truth
that was adjoined to celestial things," because the Lord possessed all
truth previous to His instruction. What is celestial has truth with it,
the one being inseparable from the other, as light is from flame; but
this truth was stored up in the Lord's internal man, which was Divine.
The knowledges \[scientifica et cognitiones\] that He learned are not
truths \[vera seu veritates\], but are only recipient vessels; just as
whatever is in man's memory is by no means truth, although it is so
called; but the truth is therein, as in vessels. These vessels were to
be formed, or rather to be opened, by the Lord, through instruction in
knowledges from the Word; not only that celestial things might be
insinuated into them, but also that the celestial things might in this
way be made Divine; for the Lord conjoined the Divine Essence with the
Human Essence in order that His Human things might likewise be made
Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1470.">1470.</span></span>

Behold I pray, I know that thou art a woman beautiful to look upon. That
this signifies that truth from a celestial origin is delightful, is
evident from the signification of "a woman beautiful to look upon." All
truth that is celestial, or that is produced from the celestial, is
happy in the internal man, and delightful in the external, and with the
celestial angels is so perceived; but it is altogether otherwise when it
is not from a celestial origin. There are two kinds of happiness in the
internal man, to which correspond two kinds of delight in the external
man; one is of good, the other is of truth; celestial happiness and
delight are of good, spiritual happiness and delight are of truth. It is
also known that truth itself is attended with happiness and delight, but
these are essentially such only when the truth is from what is
celestial, for then the truth itself also becomes celestial, and is
called celestial truth. To speak comparatively, truth is then like the
light of the sun in the springtime, which has heat in its bosom, from
which all things on the earth are made to vegetate, and are as it were
animated. This celestial truth is the beautiful itself, or beauty
itself. This is the truth which is here called "a woman beautiful to
look upon." What further arcana are involved in these words, will be
manifest from what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1471.">1471.</span></span>

Verse 12. And it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee,
that they will say, This is his wife, and they will kill me, and will
make thee to live. "And it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall
see thee," signifies the memory-knowledge of knowledges \[scientia
cognitionum\], which is described as to what it is when they see
celestial knowledges; "that they will say, This is his wife," signifies
that they will call the knowledges celestial; "and they will kill me,
and will make thee to live," signifies that they would not care for the
celestial things, but only for the mere knowledges, which they would
carry off.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1472.">1472.</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee. That this
signifies the memory-knowledge of knowledges, which is described as to
what it is when they see celestial knowledges, is evident from the
signification of "Egypt," which is the memory-knowledge of knowledges,
as before shown; and from this it is evident what is signified by the
words "when the Egyptians see," namely, that this memory-knowledge is
such as is described in this verse. The memory-knowledge of knowledges
is attended with this, and it is something natural in it, as is
manifested in children when they first begin to learn, namely, that the
higher things are, the more they desire them; and still more when they
hear that they are celestial and Divine. But this delight is natural,
and arises from a desire that is of the external man. With other men
this desire causes them to feel delight in the mere memory-knowledge of
knowledges, without any further end; when yet the memory-knowledge of
knowledges is nothing but an instrumental agency having for its end a
use, namely, that the knowledges may serve celestial and spiritual
things as vessels; and when they are thus serving, they are then for the
first time in their use, and receive from the use their delight. Anyone
can see, if he pays attention, that in itself the memory-knowledge of
knowledges is nothing but a means whereby a man may become rational, and
thence spiritual, and at last celestial; and that by means of the
knowledges his external man may be adjoined to his internal; and when
this is done, he is in the use itself. The internal man regards nothing
but the use. For the sake of this end also, the Lord insinuates the
delight that childhood and youth perceives in memory-knowledges. But
when a man begins to make his delight consist in memory-knowledge alone,
it is a bodily cupidity which carries him away, and in proportion as he
is thus carried away (that is, makes his delight consist in mere
memory-knowledge), in the same proportion he removes himself from what
is celestial, and in the same proportion do the memory-knowledges close
themselves toward the Lord, and become material. But in proportion as
the memory-knowledges are learned with the end of use,-as for the sake
of human society, for the sake of the Lord's church on earth, for the
sake of the Lord's kingdom in the heavens, and still more for the Lord's
own sake,-the more are they opened toward Him. On this account also the
angels, who are in the memory-knowledge of all knowledges, and indeed to
such a degree that scarcely one part in ten thousand can be presented to
the full apprehension of man, yet esteem such knowledge as nothing in
comparison with use. From what has been said it may be seen what is
signified by the words, "When the Egyptians shall see thee, they will
say, This is his wife; and they will kill me, and will make thee to
live." These things were said because the Lord when a child knew this
and thought in this way, namely, that if He should be carried away by a
mere desire for the memory-knowledge of knowledges, this
memory-knowledge is of such a character that it would care no more for
celestial things, but only for the knowledges \[cognitiones\] which the
desire for memory-knowledge would carry away. On these subjects more
follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1473.">1473.</span></span>

And they will say, This is his wife. That this signifies that they will
call the knowledges celestial, is evident from the signification of a
"wife," as being the truth that was adjoined to celestial things; hence
"this is his wife" signifies that which is celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1474.">1474.</span></span>

And they will kill me, and will make thee to live. That this signifies
that they would not care for celestial things, but only for mere
knowledges, is evident from what has just been said. Verse 13. Say, I
pray, thou art my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and
that my soul may live because of thee. "Say, I pray, thou art my
sister," signifies intellectual truth which is a "sister;" "that it may
be well with me for thy sake," signifies that so the celestial could
have no violence done to it; "and that my soul may live because of
thee," signifies that so the celestial could be saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1475.">1475.</span></span>

Say, I pray, thou art my sister. That this signifies intellectual truth,
which is a "sister," is evident from the signification of a "sister," as
being intellectual truth when celestial truth is a "wife," concerning
which hereafter. These things stand thus: it is the nature of
memory-knowledge to desire nothing more than to introduce itself into
celestial things and explore them; but this is contrary to order, for it
thus does violence to celestial things. Order itself is that the
celestial by means of the spiritual introduces itself into the rational,
and thus into the memory-knowledge \[in scientificum\], and adapts this
to itself; and unless this order is observed, there cannot possibly be
any wisdom. In the passage before us are also contained the arcana as to
how the Lord was instructed by His Father according to all order; and
thus how His external man was conjoined with His internal, that is, how
His external man was made Divine, like the internal; thus how He became
Jehovah as to each essence; which was done by means of knowledges, which
are the means. Without knowledges as means, the external man cannot even
become man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1476.">1476.</span></span>

That it may be well with me for thy sake. That this signifies that so
the celestial could have no violence done to it, is evident from what
has been said above; for as has been repeatedly said, the order is that
the celestial flows into the spiritual, the spiritual into the rational,
and this into the faculty of memory-knowledge. When there is this order,
then the spiritual is adapted by the celestial, the rational by the
spiritual, and the memory-knowledge by the rational. The
memory-knowledge in general then becomes the ultimate vessel; or what is
the same, memory-knowledges, specifically and particularly, become the
ultimate vessels which correspond to rational things, rational things to
spiritual things, and spiritual things to celestial things. When this is
the order, the celestial cannot suffer any violence; otherwise, it does
so suffer. As in the internal sense the Lord's instruction is here
treated of, the method of His progress therein is here described.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1477.">1477.</span></span>

That my soul may live because of thee. That this signifies that thus the
celestial could be saved, is evident from the signification of the
"soul," as being the celestial; for this is the soul itself, because the
very life itself. Hence it is evident what is signified by the words
"that my soul may live because of thee." It will be evident from what
follows, that celestial or Divine things were not so adjoined to the
Lord that they made one essence, until He endured temptations, and thus
expelled the evil heredity from the mother. Here and in the following
verses it is described how meanwhile the celestial itself suffered no
violence, but was saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1478.">1478.</span></span>

Verse 14. And it came to pass when Abram was come into Egypt, that the
Egyptians saw the woman, that she was very beautiful. "It came to pass
when Abram was come into Egypt," signifies when the Lord began to be
instructed; "and the Egyptians saw the woman, that she was very
beautiful," signifies that the memory-knowledge of knowledges is of such
a nature as to be highly pleasing to itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1479.">1479.</span></span>

It came to pass when Abram was come into Egypt. That this signifies when
the Lord began to be instructed, is evident from the representation of
Abram, which in the internal sense is the Lord when a child; and from
the signification of "Egypt," as being the memory-knowledge of
knowledges, as before shown, at verse 10. Hence it is evident that "to
come into Egypt" is to be instructed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1480.">1480.</span></span>

And the Egyptians saw the woman, that she was very beautiful. That this
signifies that the memory-knowledge of knowledges is of such a nature as
to be highly pleasing to itself, is evident from what was before said,
at verse 11, that such is the nature of memory-knowledge during
childhood; for this is as it were innate in memory-knowledge, because it
is innate in man, that at the very first it pleases for no other end
than for the sake of knowing. Such is every man; his spirit is greatly
delighted to know, so that there is scarcely anything it desires more;
this is its food, by which it is sustained and refreshed, as the
external man is by earthly food. This sustenance, which is that of his
spirit, is communicated to the external man, to the end that this may be
adapted to the internal man. But the various foods succeed one another
in the following order: celestial food is all the good of love and
charity from the Lord; spiritual food is all the truth of faith: on
these foods the angels live; and from them comes forth the food,
likewise celestial and spiritual, but of a lower angelic degree, on
which angelic spirits live; from this again there comes a still lower
celestial and spiritual food, which is that of reason and thence of
memory-knowledge, on which good spirits live; and lastly comes corporeal
food, which is proper to man while he lives in the body. These foods
correspond to one another in a wonderful manner. From this it is also
evident why and how memory-knowledge is very pleasing to itself; for the
case therewith is the same as it is with appetite and taste; and
therefore eating, with man, corresponds to memory-knowledges in the
world of spirits; and appetite and taste themselves correspond to the
desire for these knowledges; as is evident from experience, concerning
which, of the Lord's Divine mercy hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1481.">1481.</span></span>

Verse 15. And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, and praised her to
Pharaoh; and the woman was taken to Pharaoh's house. "The princes of
Pharaoh saw her," signifies the primary precepts, which are "the princes
of Pharaoh;" "and they praised her to Pharaoh," signifies that they were
pleasing; "and the woman was taken to Pharaoh's house," signifies that
they captivated the lower mind \[animus\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="1482.">1482.</span></span>

The princes of Pharaoh saw her. That this signifies the primary
precepts, which are "the princes of Pharaoh," is evident from the
signification of "princes," and of "Pharaoh." In both the historical and
prophetical parts of the Word, "princes" signify the things which are
primary; and "Pharaoh" signifies the same as "Egypt;" and here "Egypt,"
or "Pharaoh," is used in the best sense, because predicated of the
memory-knowledge of knowledges which the Lord first acquired in
childhood. That they were primary precepts from the Word, is evident
from the signification of these things in the internal sense. That,
speaking generally, by "Pharaoh" in the Word is signified the same as by
"Egypt," may be confirmed from many passages; as also that by the kings
of other kingdoms, who are named, the same is signified as by the names
of the kingdoms; but by "princes" are signified their primary things, as
in Isaiah: The princes of Zoan are foolish, the wise counselors of
Pharaoh; how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of
ancient kings? The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph
are deceived (Isa. 19:11, 13). Here "the princes of Zoan," and "the wise
counselors of Pharaoh," denote the primary memory-knowledges; and as
wisdom first flourished in Egypt, as before said, it is called "the son
of the wise," and "the son of ancient kings." So "princes" frequently
denote in the Word primary things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1483.">1483.</span></span>

And they praised her to Pharaoh. That this signifies that they were
pleasing, may be seen without explication.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1484.">1484.</span></span>

And the woman was taken to Pharaoh's house. That this signifies that
they captivated the lower mind, is evident from the signification of
"woman," and from the signification of "house." A "woman" signifies
truth, here the truth that was in the memory-knowledges with the
delights of which the Lord was captivated in childhood. The delights of
truth are those which come from the intellectual truth which is
signified by a "sister." A "house" signifies the things that are in man,
especially those which are of his will, as before shown (n. 710); here
therefore those which are of the lower mind, or of the affection of
knowing and learning. 1484a. Verse 16. And he did well unto Abram for
her sake; and he had flock and herd, and he-asses and menservants, and
maidservants and she-asses, and camels. "He did well unto Abram for her
sake," signifies that memory-knowledges were multiplied with the Lord;
"and he had flock and herd, and he-asses and menservants, and
maidservants and she-asses, and camels," signifies all the things in
general that belong to memory-knowledges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1485.">1485.</span></span>

And he did well unto Abram for her sake. That this signifies that
memory-knowledges were multiplied with the Lord, is evident from the
signification of "doing well unto," as being to enrich. This is said of
the memory-knowledge that is signified by "Pharaoh," that it did well
unto Abram, that is to the Lord when a child; and this for her sake,
that is, for the sake of the intellectual truth that He desired. It was
this desire for truth from which the enriching came.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1486.">1486.</span></span>

And he had flock and herd, and he-asses and menservants, and
maidservants and she-asses, and camels. That these words signify all
things in general that belong to memory knowledges, is evident from the
signification of all these things in the Word. But it would be too
tedious to show what is signified by each in particular, as what by the
"flock and herd," the "he-asses and menservants," the "maidservants and
she-asses," and the "camels." Each has its own peculiar signification.
In general they signify all things that belong to the memory-knowledge
of knowledges, and to memory-knowledges. Regarded in themselves,
memory-knowledges are "he-asses and menservants;" their pleasures are
"maidservants and she-asses;" "camels" are general things of service;
"flock and herd" are possessions; and so in the Word throughout. All
things whatever that are in the external man, are nothing but things of
service, that is, they are for the service of the internal man. So it is
with all memory-knowledges, which belong solely to the external man; for
they are procured from earthly and worldly things by means of sensuous
impressions, in order that they may serve the interior or rational man,
and this the spiritual man, this the celestial, and this the Lord. Thus
are they subordinated one to another, as are the more external things to
the more internal, in their order; and thus all things whatever, both in
general and in particular, are, in their order, subordinated to the
Lord. Memory-knowledges are therefore the lowest and outermost things,
in which are terminated in their order the things that are more
interior; and because they are the lowest and outermost things, they
must be pre-eminently things of service. Everyone may know for what such
knowledges may be serviceable, if he reflects or inquires in himself for
what use they are; and when he is thus reflecting upon their use, he can
also apprehend the quality of the use. Every memory-knowledge must be
for the sake of some use, and this is its service. Verse 17. And Jehovah
smote Pharaoh with great plagues, and his house, because of the word of
Sarai, Abram's wife. "Jehovah smote Pharaoh with great plagues,"
signifies that the memory-knowledges were destroyed; "and his house,"
signifies which He had collected; "because of the word of Sarai, Abram's
wife," signifies because of the truth that was to be adjoined to the
celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1487.">1487.</span></span>

And Jehovah smote Pharaoh with great plagues. That this signifies that
the memory-knowledges were destroyed, is evident from the signification
of "Pharaoh," as being memory-knowledge in general, consequently the
memory-knowledges that belong to such knowledge; and from the
signification of being "smitten with plagues," as being to be destroyed.
As regards memory-knowledges the case is this. In childhood they are
acquired for no other end than that of knowing; with the Lord, they were
acquired from the delights and affection of truth. The memory-knowledges
acquired in childhood are very numerous, but are disposed by the Lord
into order so as to serve for use; first, to give the ability to think;
then that they may be of use by means of thought; and lastly that this
may take effect, that is to say that the very life may consist in use,
and be a life of uses. These are the things performed by the
memory-knowledges that are acquired in childhood; and without them the
external man can never be conjoined with the internal, and at the same
time become use. When man becomes use, that is, when he thinks all
things from the end of use, and does all things for the end of use-if
not by manifest reflection, still by tacit reflection from a nature
acquired by so doing-then the memory-knowledges which have served the
first use-that the man may become rational-being no longer of service,
are destroyed; and so on. These are the things here meant by the words
"Jehovah smote Pharaoh with great plagues."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1488.">1488.</span></span>

And his house. That this signifies which He had collected, is evident
from the signification of a "house," as being, in this place, the
memory-knowledges that are collected. To collect memory-knowledges, and
by their means frame the external man, and build it up, is not unlike
building a house; and therefore such things are signified in many
passages of the Word by "building," and by "building houses," as in
Isaiah: I create new heavens and a new earth; they shall build houses,
and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
them; they shall not build and another inhabit (Isa. 65:17, 21-22); here
"houses" mean where there are wisdom and intelligence, thus where there
are the knowledges of good and truth; for the Lord's kingdom is here
treated of, namely, the new heavens and the new earth. In Jeremiah:
Build ye houses and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit
of them (Jer. 29:5); where the meaning is similar. In David: Blessed is
the man that feareth Jehovah, that delighteth greatly in His
commandments; wealth and riches are in his house, and his righteousness
endureth forever (Ps. 112:1, 3); where "wealth and riches" denote the
wealth and riches of wisdom and intelligence, thus knowledges; which are
"in his house," that is, are in him. \[2\] "House" is used in the
opposite sense in Zephaniah: I will visit upon them that say in their
heart, Jehovah hath not done good, and hath not done evil; and their
wealth shall be for a spoil, and their houses a desolation; and they
shall build houses and shall not inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards but shall not drink the wine thereof (Zeph. 1:12-13). In
Haggai: Go up into the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house. Ye
looked for much, and lo, it came to little; and ye brought it into the
house, and I did blow it away. Why? saith Jehovah. Because of My house,
which is deserted, while ye run everyone to his own house; therefore
upon you are the heavens shut from dew (Hag. 1:8-10); "houses" denote
memory-knowledges by which, through reasoning, come falsities. In
Isaiah: Woe unto them that join house to house, that cause field to draw
near to field, till there be no place, and ye dwell alone in the midst
of the land. Shall not many houses be for a desolation, great and good,
without an inhabitant? The vineyard of Jehovah is the house of Israel
(Isa. 5:7-9); also denoting memory-knowledges by means of which come
falsities. In Amos: Behold, Jehovah commandeth, and will smite the great
house with breaches, and the little house with clefts. Shall horses run
upon the rock? will one plow there with oxen? that ye have turned
judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood (Amos
6:11-12); where "houses" denote in like manner falsities and the
derivative evils; "horses," reasoning; "judgment," truths, which are
"turned into gall;" and "the fruit of righteousness," goods which are
"turned into wormwood." \[3\] Thus throughout the Word, "houses" denote
human minds, in which there should be intelligence and wisdom. In the
passage before us, "the house of Pharaoh" denotes memory-knowledges by
means of which comes intelligence, and thereby wisdom. The like is also
signified by the house which Solomon built for the daughter of Pharaoh
(1 Kings 7:8, etc.). Because "houses" denote minds, in which are
intelligence and wisdom, and in which are affections belonging to the
will, the word "house" in the Word is of a wide signification; but what
its specific signification is, may be seen from the things of which it
is predicated. Man himself is also called "a house."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1489.">1489.</span></span>

Because of Sarai, Abram's wife. That this signifies because of the truth
that was to be adjoined to what is celestial, is evident from the
signification of a "wife," and consequently of "Sarai the wife," as
being truth that is to be adjoined to the celestial, concerning which
above, at verse 12. The case is this: unless the knowledges which in
childhood have performed the use of making the man rational, are
destroyed, so that they are as nothing, truth can never be conjoined
with what is celestial. These first memory-knowledges are for the most
part earthly, corporeal, and worldly. However Divine may be the precepts
that a child learns, he still has no other idea concerning them than
that which is obtainable from such knowledges; and therefore, so long as
those lowest knowledges cling to him, from which are his ideas, his mind
cannot be elevated. With the Lord it was the same, because He was born
as are other men, and was to be instructed as are others, but according
to Divine order, which is such as has been stated. In these things which
are said concerning Abram in Egypt, there is described the Divine
order-how in the Lord the external man was conjoined with the internal,
so that the external also might become Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1490.">1490.</span></span>

Verse 18. And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou
hast done unto me? Why didst thou not tell me that she is thy wife? "And
Pharaoh called Abram," signifies that the Lord bethought Himself; "and
said, What is this that thou hast done unto me?" signifies that it
grieved Him; "Why didst thou not tell me that she is thy wife?"
signifies seeing that He knew that He ought not to have any other truth
than that which would be conjoined with what is celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1491.">1491.</span></span>

And Pharaoh called Abram. That this signifies that the Lord bethought
Himself, is evident from the signification of "Pharaoh," as being
memory-knowledge. The memory-knowledge itself \[scientia\], that is, the
matters of memory-knowledge \[scientifica\], which the Lord acquired
when a child, are here called "Pharaoh;" thus it is that knowledge
itself which thus addresses the Lord, that is, it is Jehovah who does so
by means of that knowledge. Hence it is evident that these things
signify that the Lord bethought Himself. Mental advertence comes by
means of memory-knowledge, thus by means of Pharaoh, by whom, as before
said, this knowledge is signified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1492.">1492.</span></span>

And said, What is this that thou hast done unto me? That this signifies
that it grieved Him, is also evident from the very indignation in which
this is said: the grief itself is thus expressed. The internal sense is
such that the affection itself that lies hidden in the words is what
constitutes it; the words of the letter are not attended to, but are as
if they had no existence. The affection in these words is the
indignation as it were of the memory-knowledge, and the Lord's grief;
and in fact grief from this, that the memory-knowledges which He had
learned with pleasure and delight should be thus destroyed. The case
herein is like that of little children who when they love something
their parents see to be hurtful to them, and it is taken away from them,
are thereby grieved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1493.">1493.</span></span>

That she was thy wife. That this signifies that He ought to have no
other truth than that which was to be conjoined with what is celestial,
is evident from the signification of a "wife," as being the truth that
was to be conjoined with what is celestial (concerning which above, at
verse 12). There is here described the order in which the Lord advanced
to intelligence, and thus to wisdom; so that, as He was wisdom itself as
to His Divine Essence, so He should become wisdom itself as to His Human
Essence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1494.">1494.</span></span>

Verse 19. Why saidst thou, She is my sister? and I might have taken her
to me for a woman. And now behold thy wife; take her and go. "Why saidst
thou, She is my sister?" signifies that He then knew no otherwise than
that He had intellectual truth; "and I might have taken her to me for a
woman," signifies that so He might have done violence to the truth that
was to be conjoined with what is celestial; "and now behold thy wife;
take her and go," signifies that truth was to be conjoined with what is
celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1495.">1495.</span></span>

Why saidst thou, She is my sister? That this signifies that He then knew
no otherwise than that He had intellectual truth, is evident from the
signification of a "sister," as being intellectual truth; and also from
the fact that Abram had said so (as is evident from verse 13), which was
done to the end that the celestial might not suffer any violence, but
might be saved. From all this it is evident that when the Lord as a
child learned memory knowledges, He first of all knew no otherwise than
that those knowledges were solely for the sake of the intellectual man,
that is, in order that He might get to know truths from them; but it was
afterwards disclosed that they had existed in order that He might attain
to celestial things; and this took place to prevent celestial things
from suffering violence, and in order that they might be saved. When man
is being instructed, there is a progression from memory-knowledges to
rational truths; further, to intellectual truths; and finally, to
celestial truths, which are here signified by the "wife." If the
progression is made from memory knowledges and rational truths to
celestial truths without intellectual truths as media, the celestial
suffers violence, because there can be no connection of rational
truths-which are obtained by means of memory-knowledges-with celestial
truths, except by means of intellectual truths, which are the media.
What celestial truths are, and what intellectual truths are, will be
seen presently. \[2\] That it may be known how these things stand,
something shall be said respecting order. The order is for the celestial
to inflow into the spiritual and adapt it to itself; for the spiritual
thus to inflow into the rational and adapt it to itself; and for the
rational thus to inflow into the memory-knowledge and adapt it to
itself. But when a man is being instructed in his earliest childhood,
the order is indeed the same, but it appears otherwise, namely, that he
advances from memory-knowledges to rational things, from these to
spiritual things, and so at last to celestial things. The reason it so
appears is that a way must thus be opened to celestial things, which are
the inmost. All instruction is simply an opening of the way; and as the
way is opened, or what is the same, as the vessels are opened, there
thus flow in, as before said, in their order, rational things that are
from celestial spiritual things; into these flow the celestial spiritual
things; and into these, celestial things. These celestial and spiritual
things are continually presenting themselves, and are also preparing and
forming for themselves the vessels which are being opened; which may
also be seen from the fact that in themselves the memory-knowledge and
rational are dead, and that it is from the inflowing interior life that
they seem to be alive. This can become manifest to anyone from the
thought, and the faculty of judgment. \[3\] In these lie hidden all the
arcana of analytical art and science, which are so many that they can
never explored even as to the ten-thousandth part; and this not with the
adult man only, but also with children, whose every thought and
derivative expression of speech is most full of them (although man, even
the most learned, is not aware of this), and this could not possibly be
the case unless the celestial and spiritual things within were coming
forth, flowing in, and producing all these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1496.">1496.</span></span>

I might have taken her to me for a woman. That this signifies that so
the truth that was to be conjoined with what is celestial might have
suffered violence, is evident from what has just been said; and also
from what was said above at verse 13. As regards truth being conjoined
with what is celestial, the case is this. Regarded in itself, the truth
learned from childhood is nothing but a vessel adapted to the reception
of what is celestial. Truth has no life from itself, but only from the
celestial that flows in. The celestial is love and charity; all truth is
thence, and because all truth is thence it is nothing but a kind of
vessel; and so are truths themselves plainly presented in the other
life; truths there are never regarded from truths, but from the life
which is in them; that is, from the celestial things which are of love
and charity in the truths; from these it is that truths become
celestial, and are called celestial truths. We can now see what
intellectual truth is, as also that with the Lord intellectual truth
opened the way to celestial things. Truth in the memory \[verum
scientificum\] is one thing; rational truth is another; and intellectual
truth is another; they succeed one another. Truth in the memory is a
matter of memory-knowledge; rational truth is this truth confirmed by
reason; intellectual truth is conjoined with an internal perception that
it is so. This intellectual truth existed with the Lord in His
childhood, and with Him opened the way to celestial things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1497.">1497.</span></span>

And now behold thy wife; take her and go. That this signifies that truth
was to be conjoined with what is celestial, is evident from the
signification of a "wife," as being truth that is to be conjoined with
what is celestial (as before shown, at verses 11 and 12, and also from
what has just been said).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1498.">1498.</span></span>

Verse 20. And Pharaoh commanded the men concerning him; and they sent
him away, and his wife, and all that he had. "And Pharaoh commanded the
men concerning Him, \[and they sent him away\]," signifies that
memory-knowledges left the Lord; "and his wife," signifies that they
also left the truths that were conjoined with celestial things; "and all
that he had," signifies that they left all things that belonged to
celestial truths.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1499.">1499.</span></span>

And Pharaoh commanded the men concerning Him, \[and they sent him
away\]. That this signifies that memory-knowledges left the Lord, is
evident from the signification of "Pharaoh," as being memory-knowledge;
and also from the signification of "men," as being intellectual things
(as before shown, n. 158). "The men" here, because attributed to
Pharaoh, or to memory-knowledge, signify intellectual things adapted
thereto. As regards memory-knowledges leaving the Lord, the case is
this. When celestial things are being conjoined with intellectual
truths, and these are becoming celestial, then all things that are empty
are dissipated of themselves; this is in the nature of the celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1500.">1500.</span></span>

And his wife. That this signifies that they left the truths that were
conjoined with celestial things, that is to say, that memory-knowledges
left them, is evident from the signification of "wife," as being truth
conjoined with what is celestial (spoken of above), and also from what
has just been said. Empty memory-knowledges leave celestial things, as
vain things are wont to leave wisdom; they are as crusts and scales that
separate themselves of their own accord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[1457-1](ac030.htm#fr_37) This was John the
Baptist, the Lord's forerunner. \[Reviser.\]

<span id="fn_38"></span>[1460-1](ac030.htm#fr_38) The Latin says, "None
doing good," but benefaciens is evidently a misprint for terrefaciens,
as it reads correctly in Apocalypse Explained, 388:8, 650:51.
\[Reviser.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1501-1550](ac031)
